TITLE 2A      	ADMINISTRATION OF CIVIL AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE

2A:3-14.  Appointment to judgeships;   "political parties"  defined
    In every county in which there are or may be 2 or more judges of the county  court, all appointments to such judgeships shall be made in such manner that  the appointees shall be, as nearly as possible, in equal numbers, members of  different political parties, so as to constitute the county court in any such  county bipartisan in character.

    The words  "political parties"  mean such political parties as shall have cast the largest and the next to the largest number of votes, respectively, for  members of the general assembly at the last preceding general election held for  the election of all the members of the general assembly, prior to the making of  any such appointments.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:4-30.124  Short title.
 	1.	This act may be cited as the "Uniform Interstate Family Support Act."

	L.2016, c.1, s.1.

2A:4-30.125 Definitions.
  	2.	Definitions. 

	As used in this act:
 
	a.	"Child" means an individual, whether over or under the age of majority, who is or is alleged to be owed a duty of support by the individual's parent or who is or is alleged to be the beneficiary of a support order directed to the parent.
 
	b.	"Child support order" means a support order for a child, including a child who has attained the age of majority under the law of the issuing state or foreign country.
 
	c.	"Convention" means the Convention on the International Recovery of Child Support and Other Forms of Family Maintenance, concluded at The Hague on November 23, 2007.
 
	d.	"Duty of support" means an obligation imposed or imposable by law to provide support for a child, spouse, or former spouse, including an unsatisfied obligation to provide support.
 
	e.	"Foreign country" means a country, including a political subdivision thereof, other than the United States, that authorizes the issuance of support orders and: (1) which has been declared under the law of the United States to be a foreign reciprocating country; (2) which has established a reciprocal arrangement for child support with this State as provided in section 24 of this act; (3) which has enacted a law or established procedures for the issuance and enforcement of support orders which are substantially similar to the procedures under this act; or (4) in which the Convention is in force with respect to the United States.
 
	f.	"Foreign support order" means a support order of a foreign tribunal.
 
	g.	"Foreign tribunal" means a court, administrative agency, or quasi-judicial entity of a foreign country which is authorized to establish, enforce, or modify support orders or to determine parentage of a child. The term includes a competent authority under the Convention.
 
	h.	"Home state" means the state or foreign country in which a child lived with a parent or a person acting as parent for at least six consecutive months immediately preceding the time of filing of a complaint or comparable pleading for support and, if a child is less than six months old, the state or foreign country in which the child lived from birth with any of them. A period of temporary absence of any of them is counted as part of the six-month or other period.
 
	i.	"Income" includes earnings or other periodic entitlements to money from any source and any other property subject to withholding for support under the law of this State.
 
	j.	"Income-withholding order" means an order or other legal process directed to an obligor's employer, as defined by the "New Jersey Child Support Program Improvement Act," P.L.1998, c.1 (C.2A:17-56.7a et al.), to withhold support from the income of the obligor.
 
	k.	"Initiating tribunal" means the tribunal of a state or foreign country from which a petition or comparable pleading is forwarded or in which a petition or comparable pleading is filed for forwarding to another state or foreign country.
 
	l.	"Issuing foreign country" means the foreign country in which a tribunal issues a support order or a judgment determining parentage of a child.
 
	m.	"Issuing state" means the state in which a tribunal issues a support order or a judgment determining parentage of a child.
 
	n.	"Issuing tribunal" means the tribunal of a state or foreign country that issues a support order or a judgment determining parentage of a child.
 
	o.	"Law" includes decisional and statutory law and rules and regulations having the force of law.
 
	 p.	"Obligee" means: (1) an individual to whom a duty of support is or is alleged to be owed or in whose favor a support order or a judgment determining parentage of a child has been issued; (2) a foreign country, state, or political subdivision of a state to which the rights under a duty of support or support order have been assigned or which has independent claims based on financial assistance provided to an individual obligee in place of child support; (3) an individual seeking a judgment determining parentage of the individual's child; or (4) a person that is a creditor under Article 7 of this act (the Convention).
 
	q.	"Obligor" means an individual, or the estate of a decedent that: (1) owes or is alleged to owe a duty of support; (2) is alleged but has not been adjudicated to be a parent of a child; (3) is liable under a support order; or (4) is a debtor in a proceeding under Article 7 of this act (the Convention). 
 
	r.	"Outside this State" means a location in another state or a country other than the United States, whether or not the country is a foreign country.
 
	s.	"Person" means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint venture, public corporation, government or governmental subdivision, agency, or instrumentality, or any other legal or commercial entity.
 
	t.	"Record" means information that is inscribed on a tangible medium or that is stored in an electronic or other medium and is retrievable in perceivable form.
 
	u.	"Register" means to file in a tribunal of this State a support order or judgment determining parentage of a child issued in another state or a foreign country.
 
	v.	"Registering tribunal" means a tribunal in which a support order or judgment determining parentage of a child is registered.
 
	w.	"Responding state" means a state in which a petition or comparable pleading for support or to determine parentage of a child is filed or to which a petition or comparable pleading is forwarded for filing from another state or a foreign country.
 
	x.	"Responding tribunal" means the authorized tribunal in a responding state or foreign country.
 
	y.	"Spousal support order" means a support order for a spouse or former spouse of the obligor.
 
	z.	"State" means a state of the United States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, or any territory or insular possession under the jurisdiction of the United States. The term includes an Indian nation or tribe.
 
	aa.	"State IV-D Agency" means the Department of Human Services.
 
	bb.	"Support enforcement agency" means a public official, governmental entity, or private agency authorized to: (1) seek enforcement of support orders or laws relating to the duty of support; (2) seek establishment or modification of child support; (3) request determination of parentage of a child; (4) attempt to locate obligors or their assets; or (5) request determination of the controlling child support order.
 
	cc.	"Support order" means a judgment, decree, order, decision, or directive, whether temporary, final, or subject to modification, issued in a state or foreign country for the benefit of a child, a spouse, or a former spouse, which provides for monetary support, health care, arrearages, retroactive support, or reimbursement for financial assistance provided to an individual obligee in place of child support.  The term may include related costs and fees, interest, income withholding, automatic adjustment, reasonable attorney's fees, and other relief.
 
	dd.	"Tribunal" means a court, administrative agency, or quasi-judicial entity authorized to establish, enforce, or modify support orders or to determine parentage of a child.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.2.

2A:4-30.126  State tribunal and support enforcement agency.
 	3.	State tribunal and support enforcement agency.

	a.	The Superior Court, Chancery Division, Family Part is the tribunal of this State.
 
	b.	The Probation Division of the Superior Court and the State IV-D Agency are the support enforcement agencies of this State.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.3.

2A:4-30.127  Remedies cumulative.
	4.	Remedies cumulative.

	a.	Remedies provided by this act are cumulative and do not affect the availability of remedies under other law or the recognition of a foreign support order on the basis of comity.
 
	b.	This act does not:
 
	(1)	provide the exclusive method of establishing or enforcing a support order under the law of this State; or
 
	(2)	grant a tribunal of this State jurisdiction to render judgment or issue an order relating to child custody or visitation in a proceeding under this act.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.4.

2A:4-30.128  Application of act to resident of foreign country and foreign support proceeding.
	5.	Application of act to resident of foreign country and foreign support proceeding.

	a.	A tribunal of this State shall apply Articles 1 through 6 of this act and, as applicable, Article 7 of this act, to a support proceeding involving:
 
	(1)	a foreign support order;
 
	(2)	a foreign tribunal; or
 
	(3)	an obligee, obligor, or child residing in a foreign country.
 
	b.	A tribunal of this State that is requested to recognize and enforce a support order on the basis of comity may apply the procedural and substantive provisions of Articles 1 through 6 of this act.
 
	c.	Article 7 applies only to a support proceeding under the Convention. In such a proceeding, if a provision of Article 7 of this act is inconsistent with Articles 1 through 6 of this act, Article 7 of this act controls.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.5.

2A:4-30.129  Bases for jurisdiction over nonresident.
 	6.	Bases for jurisdiction over nonresident.

	a.  In a proceeding to establish or enforce a support order or to determine parentage of a child, a tribunal of this State may exercise personal jurisdiction over a nonresident individual or the individual's guardian or conservator if:
 
	(1)	the individual is personally served with a summons or notice within this State;
 
	(2)	the individual submits to the jurisdiction of this State by consent in a record, by entering a general appearance, or by filing a responsive document having the effect of waiving any contest to personal jurisdiction;
 
	(3)	the individual resided with the child in this State;
 
	(4)	the individual resided in this State and provided prenatal expenses or support for the child;
 
	(5)	the child resides in this State as a result of the acts or directives of the individual;
 
	(6)	the individual engaged in sexual intercourse in this State and the child may have been conceived by that act of intercourse;
 
	(7)	there is any other basis consistent with the constitutions of this State and the United States for the exercise of personal jurisdiction.
 
	b.	The bases of personal jurisdiction set forth in subsection a. or in any other law of this State may not be used to acquire personal jurisdiction for a tribunal of this State to modify a child support order of another state unless the requirements of section 55 are met, or, in the case of a foreign support order, unless the requirements of section 59 are met.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.6.

2A:4-30.130  Duration of personal jurisdiction.
 
	7.	Duration of personal jurisdiction.

	Personal jurisdiction acquired by a tribunal of this State in a proceeding under this act or other law of this State relating to a support order continues as long as a tribunal of this State has continuing, exclusive jurisdiction to modify its order or continuing jurisdiction to enforce its order as provided by sections 10, 11 and 16 of this act.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.7.

2A:4-30.131  Initiating and responding tribunal of state.
 	8.	Initiating and responding tribunal of state.

	Under this act, a tribunal of this State may serve as an initiating tribunal to forward proceedings to a tribunal of another state, and as a responding tribunal for proceedings initiated in another state or a foreign country.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.8.

2A:4-30.132  Simultaneous proceedings.
 	9.	Simultaneous proceedings.

	a.	A tribunal of this State may exercise jurisdiction to establish a support order if the petition or comparable pleading is filed after a pleading is filed in another state or a foreign country only if:
 
	(1)	the petition or comparable pleading in this State is filed before the expiration of the time allowed in the other state or the foreign country for filing a responsive pleading challenging the exercise of jurisdiction by the other state or the foreign country;
 
	(2)	the contesting party timely challenges the exercise of jurisdiction in the other state or the foreign country; and
 
	(3)	if relevant, this State is the home state of the child.
 
	b.	A tribunal of this State may not exercise jurisdiction to establish a support order if the petition or comparable pleading is filed before a petition or comparable pleading is filed in another state or a foreign country if:
 
	(1)	the petition or comparable pleading in the other state or foreign country is filed before the expiration of the time allowed in this State for filing a responsive pleading challenging the exercise of jurisdiction by this State;
 
	(2)	the contesting party timely challenges the exercise of jurisdiction in this State; and
 
	(3)	if relevant, the other state or foreign country is the home state of the child.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.9.

2A:4-30.133  Continuing, exclusive jurisdiction to modify child support order.
	10.	Continuing, exclusive jurisdiction to modify child support order.

	a.	A tribunal of this State that has issued a child support order consistent with the law of this State has and shall exercise continuing, exclusive jurisdiction to modify its child support order if the order is the controlling order and:
 
	(1)	at the time of the filing of a request for modification this State is the residence of the obligor, the individual obligee, or the child for whose benefit the support order is issued; or
 
	(2)	even if this State is not the residence of the obligor, the individual obligee, or the child for whose benefit the support order is issued, the parties consent in a record or in open court that the tribunal of this State may continue to exercise jurisdiction to modify its order.
 
	b.	A tribunal of this State that has issued a child support order consistent with the law of this State may not exercise continuing, exclusive jurisdiction to modify the order if:
 
	(1)	all of the parties who are individuals file consent in a record with the tribunal of this State that a tribunal of another state that has jurisdiction over at least one of the parties who is an individual or that is located in the state of residence of the child may modify the order and assume continuing, exclusive jurisdiction; or
 
	(2)	its order is not the controlling order.
 
	c.	If a tribunal of another state has issued a child support order pursuant to the "Uniform Interstate Family Support Act," P.L.2016, c.1 (C.2A:4-30.124 et al.) or a law substantially similar to that act which modifies a child support order of a tribunal of this State, tribunals of this State shall recognize the continuing, exclusive jurisdiction of the tribunal of the other state.
 
	d.	A tribunal of this State that lacks continuing, exclusive jurisdiction to modify a child support order may serve as an initiating tribunal to request a tribunal of another state to modify a support order issued in that state.
 
	e.	A temporary support order issued ex parte or pending resolution of a jurisdictional conflict does not create continuing, exclusive jurisdiction in the issuing tribunal.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.10.

2A:4-30.134  Continuing jurisdiction to enforce child support order.
 	11.	Continuing jurisdiction to enforce child support order.

	a.	A tribunal of this State that has issued a child support order consistent with the law of this State may serve as an initiating tribunal to request a tribunal of another state to enforce:
 
	(1)	the order if the order is the controlling order and has not been modified by a tribunal of another state that assumed jurisdiction pursuant to the "Uniform Interstate Family Support Act," P.L.2016, c.1 (C.2A:14-30.124 et al.); or
 
	(2)	a money judgment for arrears of support and interest on the order accrued before a determination that an order of a tribunal of another state is the controlling order.
 
	b.	A tribunal of this State having continuing jurisdiction over a support order may act as a responding tribunal to enforce the order.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.11.

2A:4-30.135  Determination of controlling child support order. 
	12.	Determination of controlling child support order.
 
	a.	If a proceeding is brought under this act and only one tribunal has issued a child support order, the order of that tribunal controls and shall be recognized.
 
	b.	If a proceeding is brought under this act, and two or more child support orders have been issued by tribunals of this State, another state, or a foreign country with regard to the same obligor and same child, a tribunal of this State having personal jurisdiction over both the obligor and individual obligee shall apply the following rules and by order shall determine which order controls and shall be recognized:
 
	(1)	If only one of the tribunals would have continuing, exclusive jurisdiction under this act, the order of that tribunal controls.
 
	(2)	If more than one of the tribunals would have continuing, exclusive jurisdiction under this act:
 
	(a)	an order issued by a tribunal in the current home state of the child controls; or
 
	(b)	if an order has not been issued in the current home state of the child, the order most recently issued controls.
 
	(3)	If none of the tribunals would have continuing, exclusive jurisdiction under this act, the tribunal of this State shall issue a child support order, which controls.
 
	c.	If two or more child support orders have been issued for the same obligor and same child, upon request of a party who is an individual or that is a support enforcement agency, a tribunal of this State having personal jurisdiction over both the obligor and the obligee who is an individual shall determine which order controls under subsection b. The request may be filed with a registration for enforcement or registration for modification pursuant to Article 6 of this act, or may be filed as a separate proceeding.
 
	d.	A request to determine which is the controlling order shall be accompanied by a copy of every child support order in effect and the applicable record of payments. The requesting party shall give notice of the request to each party whose rights may be affected by the determination.
 
	e.	The tribunal that issued the controlling order under subsection a., b., or c. of this section has continuing jurisdiction to the extent provided in section 10 or 11 of this act.
 
	f.	A tribunal of this State that determines by order which is the controlling order under paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection b. or subsection c. of this section, or that issues a new controlling order under paragraph (3) of subsection b. of this section, shall state in that order:
 
	(1)	the basis upon which the tribunal made its determination;
 
	(2)	the amount of prospective support, if any; and
 
	(3)	the total amount of consolidated arrears and accrued interest, if any, under all of the orders after all payments made are credited as provided by section 14 of this act.
 
	g.	Within 30 days after issuance of an order determining which is the controlling order, the party obtaining the order shall file a certified copy of it in each tribunal that issued or registered an earlier order of child support. A party or support enforcement agency obtaining the order that fails to file a certified copy is subject to appropriate sanctions by a tribunal in which the issue of failure to file arises. The failure to file does not affect the validity or enforceability of the controlling order.
 
	h.	An order that has been determined to be the controlling order, or a judgment for consolidated arrears of support and interest, if any, made pursuant to this section shall be recognized in proceedings under this act.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.12.

2A:4-30.136  Child support orders for two or more obligees.
 	13.	Child support orders for two or more obligees.

	In responding to registrations or petitions for enforcement of two or more child support orders in effect at the same time with regard to the same obligor and different individual obligees, at least one of which was issued by a tribunal of another state or a foreign country, a tribunal of this State shall enforce those orders in the same manner as if the orders had been issued by a tribunal of this State.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.13.

2A:4-30.137  Credit for payments.
 	14.	Credit for payments.

	A tribunal of this State shall credit amounts collected for a particular period pursuant to any child support order against the amounts owed for the same period under any other child support order for support of the same child issued by a tribunal of this State, another state, or a foreign country.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.14.

2A:4-30.138  Application of act to nonresident subject to personal jurisdiction.
 	15.	Application of act to nonresident subject to personal jurisdiction.

	A tribunal of this State exercising personal jurisdiction over a nonresident in a proceeding under this act, under other law of this State relating to a support order, or recognizing a foreign support order may receive evidence from outside this State pursuant to section 32 of this act, communicate with a tribunal outside this State pursuant to section 33 of this act, and obtain discovery through a tribunal outside this State pursuant to section 34 of this act. In all other respects, Articles 3 through 6 do not apply, and the tribunal shall apply the procedural and substantive law of this State.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.15.

2A:4-30.139  Continuing, exclusive jurisdiction to modify spousal support order.
 	16.	Continuing, exclusive jurisdiction to modify spousal support order.

	a.	A tribunal of this State issuing a spousal support order consistent with the law of this State has continuing, exclusive jurisdiction to modify the spousal support order throughout the existence of the support obligation.
 
	b.	A tribunal of this State may not modify a spousal support order issued by a tribunal of another state or a foreign country having continuing, exclusive jurisdiction over that order under the law of that state or foreign country.
 
	c.	A tribunal of this State that has continuing, exclusive jurisdiction over a spousal support order may serve as: 
 
	(1)	an initiating tribunal to request a tribunal of another state to enforce the spousal support order issued in this State; or
 
	(2)	a responding tribunal to enforce or modify its own spousal support order.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.16.

2A:4-30.140  Proceedings under act.
	17.	Proceedings under act.

	a.	Except as otherwise provided in this act, this article applies to all proceedings under this act.
 
	b.	An individual petitioner or a support enforcement agency may initiate a proceeding authorized under this act by filing a petition in an initiating tribunal for forwarding to a responding tribunal or by filing a petition or a comparable pleading directly in a tribunal of another state or a foreign country which has or can obtain personal jurisdiction over the respondent.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.17.

2A:4-30.141  Proceeding by minor parent.
 	18.	Proceeding by minor parent.

	A minor parent, or a guardian or other legal representative of a minor parent, may maintain a proceeding on behalf of or for the benefit of the minor's child.

2A:4-30.142  Application of law of State.
 	19.	Application of law of State.

	Except as otherwise provided in this act, a responding tribunal of this State shall:
 
	a.	apply the procedural and substantive law generally applicable to similar proceedings originating in this State and may exercise all powers and provide all remedies available in those proceedings; and
 
	b.	determine the duty of support and the amount payable in accordance with the law and support guidelines of this State.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.19.

2A:4-30.143  Duties of initiating tribunal.
  	20.	Duties of initiating tribunal.

	a.	Upon the filing of a petition authorized by this act, an initiating tribunal of this State shall forward the petition and its accompanying documents:
 
	(1)	to the responding tribunal or appropriate support enforcement agency in the responding state; or
 
	(2)	if the identity of the responding tribunal is unknown, to the state information agency of the responding state with a request that they be forwarded to the appropriate tribunal and that receipt be acknowledged.
 
	b.	If requested by the responding tribunal, a tribunal of this State shall issue a certificate or other document and make findings required by the law of the responding state. If the responding tribunal is in a foreign country, upon request the tribunal of this State shall specify the amount of support sought, convert that amount into the equivalent amount in the foreign currency under applicable official or market exchange rate as publicly reported, and provide any other documents necessary to satisfy the requirements of the responding foreign tribunal.
	L.2016, c.1, s.20. 

2A:4-30.144  Duties and powers of responding tribunal.
 	21.	Duties and powers of responding tribunal.

	a.	When a responding tribunal of this State receives a petition or comparable pleading from an initiating tribunal or directly pursuant to subsection b. of section 17 of this act, it shall cause the petition or pleading to be filed and notify the petitioner where and when it was filed.
 
	b.	A responding tribunal of this State, to the extent not prohibited by other law, may do one or more of the following:
 
	(1)	establish or enforce a support order, modify a child support order, determine the controlling child support order, or determine parentage of a child;
 
	(2)	order an obligor to comply with a support order, specifying the amount and the manner of compliance;
 
	(3)	order income withholding;
 
	(4)	determine the amount of any arrearages, and specify a method of payment;
 
	(5)	enforce orders by civil or criminal contempt, or both;
 
	(6)	set aside property for satisfaction of the support order;
 
	(7)	place liens and order execution on the obligor's property;
 
	(8)	order an obligor to keep the tribunal informed of the obligor's current residential address, electronic-mail address, telephone number, employer, address of employment, and telephone number at the place of employment;
 
	(9)	issue a bench warrant for an obligor who has failed after proper notice to appear at a hearing ordered by the tribunal and enter the bench warrant in any local and state computer systems for criminal warrants;
 
	(10) order the obligor to seek appropriate employment by specified methods;
 
	(11) award reasonable attorney's fees and other fees and costs; and
 
	(12) grant any other available remedy.
 
	c.	A responding tribunal of this State shall include in a support order issued under this act, or in the documents accompanying the order, the calculations on which the support order is based.
 
	d.	A responding tribunal of this State may not condition the payment of a support order issued under this act upon compliance by a party with provisions for visitation.
 
	e.	If a responding tribunal of this State issues an order under this act, the tribunal shall send a copy of the order to the petitioner and the respondent and to the initiating tribunal, if any.
 
	f.	If requested to enforce a support order, arrears, or judgment or modify a support order stated in a foreign currency, a responding tribunal of this State shall convert the amount stated in the foreign currency to the equivalent amount in dollars under the applicable official or market exchange rate as publicly reported.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.21.

2A:4-30.145  Inappropriate tribunal.
  	22.	Inappropriate tribunal.

	If a petition or comparable pleading is received by an inappropriate tribunal of this State, the tribunal shall forward the pleading and accompanying documents to an appropriate tribunal of this State or another state and notify the petitioner where and when the pleading was sent.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.22.

2A:4-30.146  Duties of support enforcement agency.
 	23.	Duties of support enforcement agency.

	a.	In a proceeding under this act, a support enforcement agency of this State, upon request:
 
	(1)	shall provide services to a petitioner residing in a state; 
 
	(2)	shall provide services to a petitioner requesting services through a central authority of a foreign country as described in paragraph (1) or (4) of subsection e. of section 2 of this act; and
 
	(3)	may provide services to a petitioner who is an individual not residing in a state.
 
	b.	A support enforcement agency of this State that is providing services to the petitioner shall:
 
	(1)	take all steps necessary to enable an appropriate tribunal of this State, another state, or a foreign country to obtain jurisdiction over the respondent;
 
	(2)	request an appropriate tribunal to set a date, time, and place for a hearing;
 
	(3)	make a reasonable effort to obtain all relevant information, including information as to income and property of the parties;
 
	(4)	within two days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, after receipt of notice in a record from an initiating, responding, or registering tribunal, send a copy of the notice to the petitioner;
 
	(5)	within two days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, after receipt of communication in a record from the respondent or the respondent's attorney, send a copy of the communication to the petitioner; and
 
	(6)	notify the petitioner if jurisdiction over the respondent cannot be obtained.
 
	c.	A support enforcement agency of this State that requests registration of a child support order in this State for enforcement or for modification shall make reasonable efforts:
 
	(1)	to ensure that the order to be registered is the controlling order; or
 
	(2)	if two or more child support orders exist and the identity of the controlling order has not been determined, to ensure that a request for such a determination is made in a tribunal having jurisdiction to do so.
 
	d.	A support enforcement agency of this State that requests registration and enforcement of a support order, arrears, or judgment stated in a foreign currency shall convert the amounts stated in the foreign currency into the equivalent amounts in dollars under the applicable official or market exchange rate as publicly reported.
 
	e.	A support enforcement agency of this State shall request a tribunal of this State to issue a child support order and an income-withholding order that redirect payment of current support, arrears, and interest if requested to do so by a support enforcement agency of another state pursuant to section 35 of this act.
 
	f.	This act does not create or negate a relationship of attorney and client or other fiduciary relationship between a support enforcement agency or the attorney for the agency and the individual being assisted by the agency.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.23.

2A:4-30.147  Duty of the Attorney General.
 	24.	Duty of the Attorney General. 

	a.	If the Attorney General determines that the support enforcement agency is neglecting or refusing to provide services to an individual, the Attorney General may:
 
	 (1)	when the support enforcement agency is the Probation Division of the Superior Court, apply to the Superior Court for an order directing the Probation Division to perform its duties under this act; or
 
	(2)	when the support enforcement agency is the State IV-D agency, order the State IV-D agency to perform its duties under this act; or
 
	(3)	provide those services directly to the individual.
 
	b.	The Attorney General may determine that a foreign country has established a reciprocal arrangement for child support with this State and take appropriate action for notification of the determination.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.24.

2A:4-30.148  Private counsel.
 	25.	Private Counsel.

	An individual may employ private counsel to represent the individual in proceedings authorized by this act.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.25.

2A:4-30.149  Duties of State information agency.
	26.	Duties of State Information Agency. 

	a.	The Administrative Office of the Courts and the State IV-D Agency are the State information agencies under this act.
 
	b.	The State information agency shall:
 
	(1)	compile and maintain a current list, including addresses, of the tribunals in this State which have jurisdiction under this act and any support enforcement agencies in this State and transmit a copy to the state information agency of every other state;
 
	(2)	maintain a register of names and addresses of tribunals and support enforcement agencies received from other states; 
 
	(3)	forward to the appropriate tribunal in the county in this State in which the obligee who is an individual or the obligor resides, or in which the obligor's property is believed to be located, all documents concerning a proceeding under this act received from another state or a foreign country; and 
 
	(4)	obtain information concerning the location of the obligor and the obligor's property within this State not exempt from execution, by such means as postal verification and federal or state locator services, examination of telephone directories, requests for the obligor's address from employers, and examination of governmental records, including, to the extent not prohibited by other law, those relating to real property, vital statistics, law enforcement, taxation, motor vehicles, driver's licenses, and social security.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.26.

2A:4-30.150  Pleadings and accompanying documents.
 	27.	Pleadings and accompanying documents.

	a.	In a proceeding under this act, a petitioner seeking to establish a support order, to determine parentage of a child, or to register and modify a support order of a tribunal of another state or a foreign country shall file a petition. Unless otherwise ordered under section 28 of this act, the petition or accompanying documents shall provide, so far as known, the name, residential address, and social security numbers of the obligor and the obligee or the parent and alleged parent, and the name, sex, residential address, social security number, and date of birth of each child for whose benefit support is sought or whose parentage is to be determined. Unless filed at the time of registration, the petition shall be accompanied by a copy of any support order known to have been issued by another tribunal. The petition may include any other information that may assist in locating or identifying the respondent.
 
	b.	The petition shall specify the relief sought. The petition and accompanying documents shall conform substantially with the requirements imposed by the forms mandated by federal law for use in cases filed by a support enforcement agency.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.27.

2A:4-30.151  Nondisclosure of information in exceptional circumstances.
 	28.	Nondisclosure of information in exceptional circumstances.

	If a party alleges in an affidavit or a pleading under oath that the health, safety, or liberty of a party or child would be jeopardized by disclosure of specific identifying information, that information shall be sealed and may not be disclosed to the other party or the public. After a hearing in which a tribunal takes into consideration the health, safety, or liberty of the party or child, the tribunal may order disclosure of information that the tribunal determines to be in the interest of justice.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.28.

2A:4-30.152  Costs and fees.
 	29.	Costs and fees.

	a.	The petitioner shall not be required to pay a filing fee or other costs.
 
	b.	If an obligee prevails, a responding tribunal of this State may assess against an obligor filing fees, reasonable attorney's fees, other costs, and necessary travel and other reasonable expenses incurred by the obligee and the obligee's witnesses. The tribunal may not assess fees, costs, or expenses against the obligee or the support enforcement agency of either the initiating or responding state or foreign country, except as provided by other law. Attorney's fees may be taxed as costs, and may be ordered paid directly to the attorney, who may enforce the order in the attorney's own name. Payment of support owed to the obligee has priority over fees, costs, and expenses.
 
	c.	The tribunal shall order the payment of costs and reasonable attorney's fees if it determines that a hearing was requested primarily for delay. In a proceeding under Article 6, a hearing is presumed to have been requested primarily for delay if a registered support order is confirmed or enforced without change.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.29.

2A:4-30.153  Limited immunity of petitioner.
 	30.	Limited immunity of petitioner.

	a.	Participation by a petitioner in a proceeding under this act before a responding tribunal, whether in person, by private attorney, or through services provided by the support enforcement agency, does not confer personal jurisdiction over the petitioner in another proceeding.
 
	b.	A petitioner is not amenable to service of civil process while physically present in this State to participate in a proceeding under this act.
 
	c.	The immunity granted by this section does not extend to civil litigation based on acts unrelated to a proceeding under this act committed by a party while physically present in this State to participate in the proceeding.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.30.

2A:4-30.154  Nonparentage as defense.
 	31.	Nonparentage as defense.

	A party whose parentage of a child has been previously determined by or pursuant to law may not plead nonparentage as a defense to a proceeding under this act.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.31.

2A:4-30.155  Special rules of evidence and procedure.
 	32.	Special rules of evidence and procedure.

	a.	The physical presence of a nonresident party who is an individual in a tribunal of this State is not required for the establishment, enforcement, or modification of a support order or the rendition of a judgment determining parentage of a child.
 
	b.	An affidavit, a document substantially complying with federally mandated forms, or a document incorporated by reference in any of them, which would not be excluded under the hearsay rule if given in person, is admissible in evidence if given under penalty of perjury by a party or witness residing outside this State.
 
	c.	A copy of the record of child support payments certified as a true copy of the original by the custodian of the record may be forwarded to a responding tribunal. The copy is evidence of facts asserted in it, and is admissible to show whether payments were made.
 
	d.	Copies of bills for testing for parentage of a child, and for prenatal and postnatal health care of the mother and child, furnished to the adverse party at least 10 days before trial, are admissible in evidence to prove the amount of the charges billed and that the charges were reasonable, necessary, and customary.
 
	e.	Documentary evidence transmitted from outside this State to a tribunal of this State by telephone, telecopier, or other electronic means that do not provide an original record may not be excluded from evidence on an objection based on the means of transmission.
 
	f.	In a proceeding under this act, a tribunal of this State shall permit a party or witness residing outside this State to be deposed or to testify under penalty of perjury by telephone, audiovisual means, or other electronic means at a designated tribunal or other location. A tribunal of this State shall cooperate with other tribunals in designating an appropriate location for the deposition or testimony.
 
	g.	If a party called to testify at a civil hearing refuses to answer on the ground that the testimony may be self-incriminating, the trier of fact may draw an adverse inference from the refusal.
 
	h.	A privilege against disclosure of communications between spouses does not apply in a proceeding under this act.
 
	i.	The defense of immunity based on the relationship of husband and wife or parent and child does not apply in a proceeding under this act.
 
	j.	A voluntary acknowledgment of paternity, certified as a true copy, is admissible to establish parentage of the child.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.32.

2A:4-30.156  Communications between tribunals.
 	33.	Communications between tribunals

	A tribunal of this State may communicate with a tribunal outside this State in a record or by telephone, electronic mail, or other means, to obtain information concerning the laws, the legal effect of a judgment, decree, or order of that tribunal, and the status of a proceeding. A tribunal of this State may furnish similar information by similar means to a tribunal outside this State.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.33.

2A:4-30.157  Assistance with discovery.
 	34.	Assistance with discovery.

	A tribunal of this State may:
 
	a.	request a tribunal outside this State to assist in obtaining discovery; and
 
	b.	upon request, compel a person over which it has jurisdiction to respond to a discovery order issued by a tribunal outside this State.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.34.

2A:4-30.158  Receipt and disbursement of payments.
 	35.	Receipt and disbursement of payments.

	a.	A support enforcement agency or tribunal of this State shall disburse promptly any amounts received pursuant to a support order, as directed by the order. The agency or tribunal shall furnish to a requesting party or tribunal of another state or a foreign country a certified statement by the custodian of the record of the amounts and dates of all payments received.
 
	b.	If neither the obligor, nor the obligee who is an individual, nor the child resides in this State, upon request from the support enforcement agency of this State or another state or a tribunal of this State shall:
 
	(1)	direct that the support payment be made to the support enforcement agency in the State in which the obligee is receiving services; and
 
	(2)	issue and send to the obligor's employer a conforming income-withholding order or an administrative notice of change of payee, reflecting the redirected payments.
 
	c.	The support enforcement agency of this State receiving redirected payments from another state pursuant to a law similar to subsection b. of this section shall furnish to a requesting party or tribunal of the other state a certified statement by the custodian of the record of the amount and dates of all payments received.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.35.

2A:4-30.159  Establishment of support order.
 	36.	Establishment of support order.

	a.	If a support order entitled to recognition under this act has not been issued, a responding tribunal of this State with personal jurisdiction over the parties may issue a support order if:
 
	(1)	the individual seeking the order resides outside this State; or
 
	(2)	the support enforcement agency seeking the order is located outside this State.
 
	b.	The tribunal may issue a temporary child support order if the tribunal determines that such an order is appropriate and the individual ordered to pay is:
 
	(1)	a presumed father of the child;
 
	(2)	petitioning to have his paternity adjudicated;
 
	(3)	identified as the father of the child through genetic testing;
 
	(4)	an alleged father who has declined to submit to genetic testing;
 
	(5)	shown by clear and convincing evidence to be the father of the child;
 
	(6)	an acknowledged father as provided by law;
 
	(7)	the mother of the child; or
 
	(8)	an individual who has been ordered to pay child support in a previous proceeding and the order has not been reversed or vacated.
 
	c.	Upon finding, after notice and opportunity to be heard, that an obligor owes a duty of support, the tribunal shall issue a support order directed to the obligor and may issue other orders pursuant to section 21 of this act.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.36.

2A:4-30.160  Proceeding to determine parentage.
 	37.	Proceeding to determine parentage.

	A tribunal of this State authorized to determine parentage of a child may serve as a responding tribunal in a proceeding to determine parentage of a child brought under this act or a law or procedure substantially similar to this act.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.37.

2A:4-30.161  Employer's receipt of income withholding order of another state.
 	38.	Employer's receipt of income withholding order of another state.

	An income-withholding order issued in another state may be sent by or on behalf of the obligee, or by the support enforcement agency, to the person defined as the obligor's employer under P.L.1998, c.1 (C.2A:17-56.7a et al.) without first filing a petition or comparable pleading or registering the order with a tribunal of this State.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.38.

2A:4-30.162  Employer's compliance with income withholding order of another state.
 	39.	Employer's compliance with income withholding order of another state.

	a.	Upon receipt of an income-withholding order, the obligor's employer shall immediately provide a copy of the order to the obligor.
 
	b.	The employer shall treat an income-withholding order issued in another state which appears regular on its face as if it had been issued by a tribunal of this State.
 
	c.	Except as otherwise provided in subsection d. of this section and section 40 of this act, the employer shall withhold and distribute the funds as directed in the withholding order by complying with terms of the order which specify:
 
	(1)	the duration and amount of periodic payments of current child support, stated as a sum certain;
 
	(2)	the person designated to receive payments and the address to which the payments are to be forwarded;
 
	(3)	medical support, whether in the form of periodic cash payment, stated as a sum certain, or ordering the obligor to provide health insurance coverage for the child under a policy available through the obligor's employment;
 
	(4)	the amount of periodic payments of fees and costs for a support enforcement agency, the issuing tribunal, and the obligee's attorney, stated as sums certain; and
 
	(5)	the amount of periodic payments of arrearages and interest on arrearages, stated as sums certain.
 
	d.	An employer shall comply with the law of the state of the obligor's principal place of employment for withholding from income with respect to:
 
	(1)	the employer's fee for processing an income-withholding order;
 
	(2)	the maximum amount permitted to be withheld from the obligor's income; and
 
	(3)	the times within which the employer shall implement the withholding order and forward the child support payment.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.39.

2A:4-30.163  Employer's compliance with two or more income withholding orders.
 	40.	Employer's compliance with two or more income withholding orders.

	If an obligor's employer receives two or more income-withholding orders with respect to the earnings of the same obligor, the employer satisfies the terms of the orders if the employer complies with the law of the state of the obligor's principal place of employment to establish the priorities for withholding and allocating income withheld for two or more child support obligees.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.40.

2A:4-30.164  Immunity from civil liability.
 	41.	Immunity from civil liability.

	An employer that complies with an income-withholding order issued in another state in accordance with this article is not subject to civil liability to an individual or agency with regard to the employer's withholding of child support from the obligor's income.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.41.

2A:4-30.165  Penalties for noncompliance.
 	42.	Penalties for noncompliance.

	An employer who willfully fails to comply with an income-withholding order issued in another state and received for enforcement is subject to the same penalties that may be imposed for noncompliance with an order issued by a tribunal of this State.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.42.

2A:4-30.166  Contest by obligor.
 	43.	Contest by obligor.

	a.	An obligor may contest the validity or enforcement of an income-withholding order issued in another state and received directly by an employer in this State by registering the order in a tribunal of this State and filing a contest to that order as provided in Article 6 of this act, or otherwise contesting the order in the same manner as if the order had been issued by a tribunal of this State.
 
	b.	The obligor shall give notice of the contest to:
 
	(1)	a support enforcement agency providing services to the obligee;
 
	(2)	each employer that has directly received an income-withholding order relating to the obligor; and
 
	(3)	the person designated to receive payments in the income-withholding order or, if no person is designated, to the obligee.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.43.

2A:4-30.167  Administrative enforcement of orders.
  	44.	Administrative enforcement of orders.

	a.	A party or support enforcement agency seeking to enforce a support order or an income-withholding order, or both, issued in another state or a foreign support order may send the documents required for registering the order to a support enforcement agency of this State.
 
	b.	Upon receipt of the documents, the support enforcement agency, without initially seeking to register the order, shall consider and, if appropriate, use any administrative procedure authorized by the law of this State to enforce a support order or an income-withholding order, or both. If the obligor does not contest administrative enforcement, the order need not be registered. If the obligor contests the validity or administrative enforcement of the order, the support enforcement agency shall register the order pursuant to this act.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.44.

2A:4-30.168  Registration of order for enforcement.
 	45.	Registration of order for enforcement.

	A support order or income-withholding order issued in another state or a foreign support order may be registered in this State for enforcement.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.45.

2A:4-30.169  Procedure to register order for enforcement.
	46.	Procedure to register order for enforcement.

	a.	Except as otherwise provided in section 66 of this act, a support order or income-withholding order of another state or a foreign support order may be registered in this State by sending the following records to the appropriate tribunal in this State:
 
	(1)	a letter of transmittal to the tribunal requesting registration and enforcement;
 
	(2)	two copies, including one certified copy, of the order to be registered, including any modification of the order;
 
	(3)	a sworn statement by the person requesting registration or a certified statement by the custodian of the records showing the amount of any arrearage;
 
	(4)	the name of the obligor and, if known:
 
	(a)	the obligor's address and social security number;
 
	(b)	the name and address of the obligor's employer and any other source of income of the obligor; and
 
	(c)	a description and the location of property of the obligor in this State not exempt from execution; and
 
	(5)	except as otherwise provided in section 28 of this act, the name and address of the obligee and, if applicable, the person to whom support payments are to be remitted.
 
	b.	On receipt of a request for registration, the registering tribunal shall cause the order to be filed as an order of a tribunal of another state or a foreign support order, together with one copy of the documents and information, regardless of their form.
 
	c.	A petition or comparable pleading seeking a remedy that shall be affirmatively sought under other law of this State may be filed at the same time as the request for registration or later. The pleading shall specify the grounds for the remedy sought.
 
	d.	If two or more orders are in effect, the person requesting registration shall:
 
	(1)	furnish to the tribunal a copy of every support order asserted to be in effect in addition to the documents specified in this section;
 
	(2)	specify the order alleged to be the controlling order, if any; and
 
	(3)	specify the amount of consolidated arrears, if any.
 
	e.	A request for a determination of which is the controlling order may be filed separately or with a request for registration and enforcement or for registration and modification. The person requesting registration shall give notice of the request to each party whose rights may be affected by the determination.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.46.

2A:4-30.170  Effect of registration for enforcement.
 	47.	Effect of registration for enforcement.

	a.	A support order or income-withholding order issued in another state or a foreign support order is registered when the order is filed in the registering tribunal of this State.
 
	b.	A registered support order issued in another state or a foreign country is enforceable in the same manner and is subject to the same procedures as an order issued by a tribunal of this State.
 
	c.	Except as otherwise provided in this act, a tribunal of this State shall recognize and enforce, but may not modify, a registered support order if the issuing tribunal had jurisdiction.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.47.

2A:4-30.171  Choice of law.
	48.	Choice of law.

	a.	Except as otherwise provided in subsection d. of this section, the law of the issuing state or foreign country governs:
 
	(1)	the nature, extent, amount, and duration of current payments under a registered support order;
 
	(2)	the computation and payment of arrearages and accrual of interest on the arrearages under the support order; and
 
	(3)	the existence and satisfaction of other obligations under the support order.
 
	b.	In a proceeding for arrears under a registered support order, the statute of limitations of this State, or of the issuing state or foreign country, whichever is longer, applies.
 
	c.	A responding tribunal of this State shall apply the procedures and remedies of this State to enforce current support and collect arrears and interest due on a support order of another state or a foreign country registered in this State.
 
	d.	After a tribunal of this State or another state determines which is the controlling order and issues an order consolidating arrears, if any, a tribunal of this State shall prospectively apply the law of the state or foreign country issuing the controlling order, including its law on interest on arrears, on current and future support, and on consolidated arrears.
	L.2016, c.1, s.48. 

2A:4-30.172  Notice of registration of order.
  	49.	Notice of registration of order.

	a.	When a support order or income-withholding order issued in another state or a foreign support order is registered, the registering tribunal of this State shall notify the nonregistering party. The notice shall be accompanied by a copy of the registered order and the documents and relevant information accompanying the order.
 
	b.	A notice shall inform the nonregistering party:
 
	(1)	that a registered support order is enforceable as of the date of registration in the same manner as an order issued by a tribunal of this State;
 
	(2)	that a hearing to contest the validity or enforcement of the registered order shall be requested within 20 days after notice unless the registered order is under section 67 of this act;
 
	(3)	that failure to contest the validity or enforcement of the registered order in a timely manner will result in confirmation of the order and enforcement of the order and the alleged arrearages; and
 
	(4)	of the amount of any alleged arrearages.
 
	c.	If the registering party asserts that two or more orders are in effect, a notice shall also:
 
	(1)	identify the two or more orders and the order alleged by the registering party to be the controlling order and the consolidated arrears, if any;
 
	(2)	notify the nonregistering party of the right to a determination of which is the controlling order;
 
	(3)	state that the procedures provided in subsection b. apply to the determination of which is the controlling order; and
 
	(4)	state that failure to contest the validity or enforcement of the order alleged to be the controlling order in a timely manner may result in confirmation that the order is the controlling order.
 
	d.	Upon registration of an income-withholding order for enforcement, the support enforcement agency or the registering tribunal shall notify the obligor's employer pursuant to the "New Jersey Child Support Program Improvement Act," P.L.1998, c.1 (C.2A:17-56.7a et al.).
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.49.

2A:4-30.173  procedure to contest validity or enforcement of registered support order.
 	50.	Procedure to contest validity or enforcement of registered support order.

	a.	A nonregistering party seeking to contest the validity or enforcement of a registered support order in this State shall request a hearing within the time required by section 49 of this act. The nonregistering party may seek to vacate the registration, to assert any defense to an allegation of noncompliance with the registered order, or to contest the remedies being sought or the amount of any alleged arrearages pursuant to section 51 of this act.
 
	b.	If the nonregistering party fails to contest the validity or enforcement of the registered support order in a timely manner, the order is confirmed by operation of law.
 
	c.	If a nonregistering party requests a hearing to contest the validity or enforcement of the registered support order, the registering tribunal shall schedule the matter for hearing and give notice to the parties of the date, time, and place of the hearing.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.50.

2A:4-30.174  Contest of registration or enforcement.
 	51.	Contest of registration or enforcement.

	a.	A party contesting the validity or enforcement of a registered support order or seeking to vacate the registration has the burden of proving one or more of the following defenses:
 
	(1)	the issuing tribunal lacked personal jurisdiction over the contesting party;
 
	(2)	the order was obtained by fraud;
 
	(3)	the order has been vacated, suspended, or modified by a later order;
 
	(4)	the issuing tribunal has stayed the order pending appeal;
 
	(5)	there is a defense under the law of this State to the remedy sought;
 
	(6)	full or partial payment has been made;
 
	(7)	the statute of limitation under section 48 of this act precludes enforcement of some or all of the alleged arrearages; or
 
	(8)	the alleged controlling order is not the controlling order.
 
	b.	If a party presents evidence establishing a full or partial defense under subsection a., a tribunal may stay enforcement of a registered support order, continue the proceeding to permit production of additional relevant evidence, and issue other appropriate orders. An uncontested portion of the registered support order may be enforced by all remedies available under the law of this State.
 
	c.	If the contesting party does not establish a defense under subsection a. to the validity or enforcement of a registered support order, the registering tribunal shall issue an order confirming the order.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.51.

2A:4-30.175  Confirmed order.
	52.	Confirmed order.

	Confirmation of a registered support order, whether by operation of law or after notice and hearing, precludes further contest of the order with respect to any matter that could have been asserted at the time of registration.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.52.

2A:4-30.176  Procedure to register child support order of another state for modification.
	53.	Procedure to register child support order of another state for modification.

	A party or support enforcement agency seeking to modify, or to modify and enforce, a child support order issued in another state shall register that order in this State in the same manner provided in sections 45 through 52 of this act if the order has not been registered. A petition for modification may be filed at the same time as a request for registration, or later. The pleading shall specify the grounds for modification.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.53.

2A:4-30.177  Effect of registration for modification.
 	54.	Effect of registration for modification.

	A tribunal of this State may enforce a child support order of another state registered for purposes of modification, in the same manner as if the order had been issued by a tribunal of this State, but the registered support order may be modified only if the requirements of section 55 or 57 of this act have been met.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.54.

2A:4-30.178  Modification of child support order of another state.
	55.	Modification of child support order of another state.

	a.	If section 57 of this act does not apply, upon petition a tribunal of this State may modify a child support order issued in another state which is registered in this State if, after notice and hearing, the tribunal finds that:
 
	(1)	the following requirements are met:
 
	(a)	neither the child, nor the obligee who is an individual, nor the obligor resides in the issuing state;
 
	(b)	a petitioner who is a nonresident of this State seeks modification; and
 
	(c)	the respondent is subject to the personal jurisdiction of the tribunal of this State; or
 
	(2)	this State is the residence of the child, or a party who is an individual is subject to the personal jurisdiction of the tribunal of this State, and all of the parties who are individuals have filed consents in a record in the issuing tribunal for a tribunal of this State to modify the support order and assume continuing, exclusive jurisdiction.
 
	b.	Modification of a registered child support order is subject to the same requirements, procedures, and defenses that apply to the modification of an order issued by a tribunal of this State and the order may be enforced and satisfied in the same manner.
 
	c.	A tribunal of this State may not modify any aspect of a child support order that may not be modified under the law of the issuing state, including the duration of the obligation of support. If two or more tribunals have issued child support orders for the same obligor and same child, the order that controls and shall be so recognized under section 12 of this act establishes the aspects of the support order which are nonmodifiable.
 
	d.	In a proceeding to modify a child support order, the law of the state that is determined to have issued the initial controlling order governs the duration of the obligation of support. The obligor's fulfillment of the duty of support established by that order precludes imposition of a further obligation of support by a tribunal of this State.
 
	e.	On the issuance of an order by a tribunal of this State modifying a child support order issued in another state, the tribunal of this State becomes the tribunal having continuing, exclusive jurisdiction.
 
	f.	Notwithstanding subsections a. through e. of this section and subsection b. of section 6 of this act, a tribunal of this State retains jurisdiction to modify an order issued by a tribunal of this State if:
 
	(1)	one party resides in another state; and
 
	(2)	the other party resides outside the United States.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.55.

2A:4-30.179  Recognition of order modified in another state.
 	56.	Recognition of order modified in another state.

	If a child support order issued by a tribunal of this State is modified by a tribunal of another state which assumed jurisdiction pursuant to the "Uniform Interstate Family Support Act," P.L.2016, c.1 (C.2A:4-30.124 et al.), a tribunal of this State:
 
	a.	may enforce its order that was modified only as to arrears and interest accruing before the modification;
 
	b.	may provide appropriate relief for violations of its order which occurred before the effective date of the modification; and
 
	c.	shall recognize the modifying order of the other state, upon registration, for the purpose of enforcement.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.56.

2A:4-30.180  Jurisdiction to modify child support order of another state when parties reside in this State.
 	57.	Jurisdiction to modify child support order of another state when parties reside in this State.
 
	a.	If all of the parties who are individuals reside in this State and the child does not reside in the issuing state, a tribunal of this State has jurisdiction to enforce and to modify the issuing state's child support order in a proceeding to register that order.
 
	b.	A tribunal of this State exercising jurisdiction under this section shall apply the provisions of Articles 1 and 2, this article, and the procedural and substantive law of this State to the proceeding for enforcement or modification. Articles 3, 4, 5, 7, and 8 of this act do not apply.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.57.

2A:4-30.181  Notice to issuing tribunal of modification.
 	58.	Notice to issuing tribunal of modification.

	Within 30 days after issuance of a modified child support order, the party obtaining the modification shall file a certified copy of the order with the issuing tribunal that had continuing, exclusive jurisdiction over the earlier order, and in each tribunal in which the party knows the earlier order has been registered. A party who obtains the order and fails to file a certified copy is subject to appropriate sanctions by a tribunal in which the issue of failure to file arises. The failure to file does not affect the validity or enforceability of the modified order of the new tribunal having continuing, exclusive jurisdiction.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.58.

2A:4-30.182  Jurisdiction to modify child support order of foreign country.
	59.	Jurisdiction to modify child support order of foreign country.

	a.	Except as otherwise provided in section 71 of this act, if a foreign country lacks or refuses to exercise jurisdiction to modify its child support order pursuant to its laws, a tribunal of this State may assume jurisdiction to modify the child support order and bind all individuals subject to the personal jurisdiction of the tribunal whether the consent to modification of a child support order otherwise required of the individual pursuant to section 55 of this act has been given or whether the individual seeking modification is a resident of this State or of the foreign country.
 
	b.	An order issued by a tribunal of this State modifying a foreign child support order pursuant to this section is the controlling order.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.59.

2A:4-30.183  Procedure to register child support order of foreign country for modification.
	60.	Procedure to register child support order of foreign country for modification.

	A party or support enforcement agency seeking to modify, or to modify and enforce, a foreign child support order not under the Convention may register that order in this State under sections 45 through 52 of this act if the order has not been registered. A petition for modification may be filed at the same time as a request for registration, or at another time. The petition shall specify the grounds for modification.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.60.

2A:4-30.184  Definitions.
 	61.	Definitions.

	As used in this article:
 
	"Application" means a request under the Convention by an obligee or obligor, or on behalf of a child, made through a central authority for assistance from another central authority.
 
	"Central authority" means the entity designated by the United States or a foreign country described in paragraph (4) of subsection e. of section 2 of this act to perform the functions specified in the Convention.
 
	"Convention support order" means a support order of a tribunal of a foreign country described in paragraph (4) of subsection e. of section 2 of this act.
 
	"Direct request" means an application filed by an individual in a tribunal of this State in a proceeding involving an obligee, obligor, or child residing outside the United States.
 
	"Foreign central authority" means the entity designated by a foreign country described in paragraph (4) of subsection e. of section 2 of this act to perform the functions specified in the Convention.
 
	"Foreign support agreement": means an agreement for support in a record that: (1) is enforceable as a support order in the country of origin; (2) has been: (a) formally drawn up or registered as an authentic instrument by a foreign tribunal; or (b) authenticated by, or concluded, registered, or filed with a foreign tribunal; and (c) may be reviewed and modified by a foreign tribunal; and (3) includes a maintenance arrangement or authentic instrument under the Convention.
 
	"United States central authority" means the Secretary of the United States Department of Health and Human Services. 
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.61.

2A:4-30.185  Applicability.
 	62.	Applicability.

	This article applies only to a support proceeding under the Convention. In such a proceeding, if a provision of this article is inconsistent with Articles 1 through 6 of this act, this article controls.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.62.

2A:4-30.186  Relationship of the State IV-D agency to United States central authority.
	63.	Relationship of the State IV-D agency to United States central authority.

	The State IV-D Agency or its designee is recognized as the agency designated by the United States central authority to perform specific functions under the Convention.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.63.

2A:4-30.187  Initiation by the State IV-D agency of support proceeding under convention.
 	64.	Initiation by the State IV-D Agency of support proceeding under Convention. 

	a.	In a support proceeding under this article, the State IV-D Agency or its designee shall:
 
	(1)	transmit and receive applications; and
 
	(2)	initiate or facilitate the institution of a proceeding regarding an application in a tribunal of this State.
 
	b.	The following support proceedings are available to an obligee under the Convention:
 
	(1)	recognition or recognition and enforcement of a foreign support order;
 
	(2)	enforcement of a support order issued or recognized in this State;
 
	(3)	establishment of a support order if there is no existing order, including, if necessary, determination of parentage of a child;
 
	(4)	establishment of a support order if recognition of a foreign support order is refused under paragraph (2), (4), or (9) of subsection b. of section 68 of this act;
 
	(5)	modification of a support order of a tribunal of this State; and
 
	(6)	modification of a support order of a tribunal of another state or a foreign country.
 
	c.	The following support proceedings are available under the Convention to an obligor against which there is an existing support order:
 
	(1)	recognition of an order suspending or limiting enforcement of an existing support order of a tribunal of this State;
 
	(2)	modification of a support order of a tribunal of this State; and
 
	(3)	modification of a support order of a tribunal of another state or a foreign country.
 
	d.	A tribunal of this State may not require security, bond, or deposit, however described, to guarantee the payment of costs and expenses in proceedings under the Convention.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.64.

2A:4-30.188  Direct request.
 	65.	Direct request.

	a.	A petitioner may file a direct request seeking establishment or modification of a support order or determination of parentage of a child. In the proceeding, the law of this State applies.
 
	b.	A petitioner may file a direct request seeking recognition and enforcement of a support order or support agreement. In the proceeding, sections 66 through 73 of this act apply.
 
	c.	In a direct request for recognition and enforcement of a Convention support order or foreign support agreement:
 
	(1)	a security, bond, or deposit is not required to guarantee the payment of costs and expenses; and
 
	(2)	an obligee or obligor that in the issuing country has benefited from free legal assistance is entitled to benefit, at least to the same extent, from any free legal assistance provided for by the law of this State under the same circumstances.
 
	d.	A petitioner filing a direct request is not entitled to assistance from the State IV-D Agency or its designee.
 
	e.	This article does not prevent the application of laws of this State that provide simplified, more expeditious rules regarding a direct request for recognition and enforcement of a foreign support order or foreign support agreement.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.65.

2A:4-30.189  Registration of convention support order.
  	66.	Registration of Convention support order.

	a.	Except as otherwise provided in this article, a party who is an individual or a support enforcement agency seeking recognition of a Convention support order shall register the order in this State as provided in Article 6.
 
	b.	Notwithstanding section 27 and subsection a. of section 46 of this act, a request for registration of a Convention support order shall be accompanied by:
 
	(1)	a complete text of the support order or an abstract or extract of the support order drawn up by the issuing foreign tribunal, which may be in the form recommended by the Hague Conference on Private International Law;
 
	(2)	a record stating that the support order is enforceable in the issuing country;
 
	(3)	if the respondent did not appear and was not represented in the proceedings in the issuing country, a record attesting, as appropriate, either that the respondent had proper notice of the proceedings and an opportunity to be heard or that the respondent had proper notice of the support order and an opportunity to be heard in a challenge or appeal on fact or law before a tribunal;
 
	(4)	a record showing the amount of arrears, if any, and the date the amount was calculated;
 
	(5)	a record showing a requirement for automatic adjustment of the amount of support, if any, and the information necessary to make the appropriate calculations; and
 
	(6)	if necessary, a record showing the extent to which the applicant received free legal assistance in the issuing country.
 
	c.	A request for registration of a Convention support order may seek recognition and partial enforcement of the order.
 
	d.	A tribunal of this State may vacate the registration of a Convention support order without the filing of a contest under section 67 of this act only if, acting on its own motion, the tribunal finds that recognition and enforcement of the order would be manifestly incompatible with public policy.
 
	e.	The tribunal shall promptly notify the parties of the registration or the order vacating the registration of a Convention support order.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.66.

2A:4-30.190  Contest of registered convention support order.
 	67.	Contest of registered Convention support order.

	a.	Except as otherwise provided in this article, sections 49 through 52 of this act apply to a contest of a registered Convention support order.
 
	b.	A party contesting a registered Convention support order shall file a contest not later than 30 days after notice of the registration, but if the contesting party does not reside in the United States, the contest shall be filed not later than 60 days after notice of the registration.
 
	c.	If the nonregistering party fails to contest the registered Convention support order by the time specified in subsection b., the order is enforceable.
 
	d.	A contest of a registered Convention support order may be based only on grounds set forth in section 68 of this act. The contesting party bears the burden of proof.
 
	e.	In a contest of a registered Convention support order, a tribunal of this State:
 
	(1)	is bound by the findings of fact on which the foreign tribunal based its jurisdiction; and
 
	(2)	may not review the merits of the order.
 
	f.	A tribunal of this State deciding a contest of a registered Convention support order shall promptly notify the parties of its decision.
 
	g.	A challenge or appeal, if any, does not stay the enforcement of a Convention support order unless there are exceptional circumstances.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.67.

2A:4-30.191  Recognition and enforcement of registered convention support order.
	68.	Recognition and enforcement of registered Convention support order.

	a.	Except as otherwise provided in subsection b., a tribunal of this State shall recognize and enforce a registered Convention support order.
 
	b.	The following grounds are the only grounds on which a tribunal of this State may refuse recognition and enforcement of a registered Convention support order:
 
	(1)	recognition and enforcement of the order is manifestly incompatible with public policy, including the failure of the issuing tribunal to observe minimum standards of due process, which include notice and an opportunity to be heard;
 
	(2)	the issuing tribunal lacked personal jurisdiction consistent with section 6 of this act;
 
	(3)	the order is not enforceable in the issuing country;
 
	(4)	the order was obtained by fraud in connection with a matter of procedure;
 
	(5)	a record transmitted in accordance with section 66 of this act lacks authenticity or integrity;
 
	(6)	a proceeding between the same parties and having the same purpose is pending before a tribunal of this State and that proceeding was the first to be filed;
 
	(7)	the order is incompatible with a more recent support order involving the same parties and having the same purpose if the more recent support order is entitled to recognition and enforcement under this act in this State;
 
	(8)	payment, to the extent alleged arrears have been paid in whole or in part;
 
	(9)	in a case in which the respondent neither appeared nor was represented in the proceeding in the issuing foreign country:
 
	(a)	if the law of that country provides for prior notice of proceedings, the respondent did not have proper notice of the proceedings and an opportunity to be heard; or
 
	(b)	if the law of that country does not provide for prior notice of the proceedings, the respondent did not have proper notice of the order and an opportunity to be heard in a challenge or appeal on fact or law before a tribunal; or
 
	(10)  the order was made in violation of section 71 of this act.
 
	c.	If a tribunal of this State does not recognize a Convention support order under paragraph (2), (4) or (9) of subsection b. of this section:
 
	(1)	the tribunal may not dismiss the proceeding without allowing a reasonable time for a party to request the establishment of a new Convention support order; and
 
	(2)	the State IV-D Agency or its designee shall take all appropriate measures to request a child support order for the obligee if the application for recognition and enforcement was received under section 64 of this act. 
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.68.

2A:4-30.192  Partial enforcement.
 	69.	Partial enforcement.

	If a tribunal of this State does not recognize and enforce a Convention support order in its entirety, it shall enforce any severable part of the order. An application or direct request may seek recognition and partial enforcement of a Convention support order.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.69.

2A:4-30.193  Foreign support agreement.
 	70.	Foreign support agreement.

	a.	Except as otherwise provided in subsections c. and d., a tribunal of this State shall recognize and enforce a foreign support agreement registered in this State.
 
	b.	An application or direct request for recognition and enforcement of a foreign support agreement shall be accompanied by:
 
	(1)	a complete text of the foreign support agreement; and
 
	(2)	a record stating that the foreign support agreement is enforceable as an order of support in the issuing country.
 
	c.	A tribunal of this State may vacate the registration of a foreign support agreement only if, acting on its own motion, the tribunal finds that recognition and enforcement would be manifestly incompatible with public policy.
 
	d.	In a contest of a foreign support agreement, a tribunal of this State may refuse recognition and enforcement of the agreement if it finds:
 
	(1)	recognition and enforcement of the agreement is manifestly incompatible with public policy;
 
	(2)	the agreement was obtained by fraud or falsification;
 
	(3)	the agreement is incompatible with a support order involving the same parties and having the same purpose in this State, another state, or a foreign country if the support order is entitled to recognition and enforcement under this act in this State; or
 
	(4)	the record submitted under subsection b. lacks authenticity or integrity.
 
	e.	A proceeding for recognition and enforcement of a foreign support agreement shall be suspended during the pendency of a challenge to or appeal of the agreement before a tribunal of another state or a foreign country.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.70.

2A:4-30.194  Modification of convention child support order.

	71.	Modification of Convention child support order.
 
	a.	A tribunal of this State may not modify a Convention child support order if the obligee remains a resident of the foreign country where the support order was issued unless:
 
	(1)	the obligee submits to the jurisdiction of a tribunal of this State, either expressly or by defending on the merits of the case without objecting to the jurisdiction at the first available opportunity; or
 
	(2)	the foreign tribunal lacks or refuses to exercise jurisdiction to modify its support order or issue a new support order.
 
	b.	If a tribunal of this State does not modify a Convention child support order because the order is not recognized in this State, subsection c. of section 68 of this act applies.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.71.

2A:4-30.195  Personal information, limit on use.
 	72.	Personal information; limit on use.

	Personal information gathered or transmitted under this article may be used only for the purposes for which it was gathered or transmitted.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.72.

2A:4-30.196  Record in original language; English translation.
	73.	Record in original language; English translation.

	A record filed with a tribunal of this State under this article shall be in the original language and, if not in English, shall be accompanied by an English translation.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.73.

2A:4-30.197  Grounds for rendition.
 	74.	Grounds for rendition.

	a.	For purposes of this article, "governor" includes an individual performing the functions of governor or the executive authority of a state covered by this act.
 
	b.	The Governor of this State may:
 
	(1)	demand that the governor of another state surrender an individual found in the other state who is charged criminally in this State with having failed to provide for the support of an obligee; or
 
	(2)	on the demand of the governor of another state, surrender an individual found in this State who is charged criminally in the other state with having failed to provide for the support of an obligee.
 
	c.	A provision for extradition of individuals not inconsistent with this act applies to the demand even if the individual whose surrender is demanded was not in the demanding state when the crime was allegedly committed and has not fled therefrom.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.74.

2A:4-30.198  Conditions of rendition.
 	75.	Conditions of rendition.

	a.	Before making a demand that the governor of another state surrender an individual charged criminally in this State with having failed to provide for the support of an obligee, the Governor of this State may require a prosecutor of this State to demonstrate that at least 60 days previously the obligee had initiated proceedings for support pursuant to this act or that the proceeding would be of no avail.
 
	b.	If, under this act or a law substantially similar to this act, the governor of another state makes a demand that the Governor of this State surrender an individual charged criminally in that state with having failed to provide for the support of a child or other individual to whom a duty of support is owed, the governor may require a prosecutor to investigate the demand and report whether a proceeding for support has been initiated or would be effective. If it appears that a proceeding would be effective but has not been initiated, the governor may delay honoring the demand for a reasonable time to permit the initiation of a proceeding.
 
	c.	If a proceeding for support has been initiated and the individual whose rendition is demanded prevails, the governor may decline to honor the demand. If the petitioner prevails and the individual whose rendition is demanded is subject to a support order, the governor may decline to honor the demand if the individual is complying with the support order.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.75.

2A:4-30.199  Uniformity of application and construction.
 	76.	Uniformity of application and construction.

	In applying and construing this uniform act, consideration shall be given to the need to promote uniformity of the law with respect to its subject matter among states that enact it.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.76.

2A:4-30.200  Transitional provision.
 	77.	Transitional provision.

	a.	This act applies to proceedings begun on or after the effective date of this act to establish a support order or determine parentage of a child or to register, recognize, enforce, or modify a prior support order, determination, or agreement, whenever issued or entered.
 
	b.	The repeal of P.L.1981, c.243 (C.2A:4-30.24 et seq.) and sections 15 and 16 of P.L.1985, c.278 (C.2A:17-56.18 and 2A:17-56.19) and the repeal of the former "Uniform Interstate Family Support Act," P.L.1998, c.2 (C.2A:4-30.65 through 2A:4-30.123) and its replacement with this act does not affect pending actions, rights, duties or liabilities based on those repealed laws, nor does it alter, discharge, release or extinguish any penalty, forfeiture, or liability incurred under those laws.  After the effective date of this act, all laws repealed shall be treated as remaining in full force and effect for the purpose of sustaining any pending actions or rights filed prior to the effective date of this act and the enforcement of any rights, duties, penalties, forfeitures, or liabilities under the repealed laws.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.77.

2A:4-30.201  Severability.
  	78.	Severability.

	If any provision of this act or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this act which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this act are severable.
 
	L.2016, c.1, s.78.

2A:4-41.  Expenses
    Except as otherwise provided by law, all expenses incurred in complying with  the provisions of this chapter shall be a county charge.

     	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1982, c. 77, s. 31, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4-68.  Repeals
    The following sections are hereby repealed:

    N.J.S. 2A:4-14 to 2A:4-17, inclusive, 2A:4-20, 2A:4-21, 2A:4-32, 2A:4-33, 2A:4-35, 2A:4-37, 2A:4-39;  R.S. 30:4-157.3 and P.L. 67, c. 308 (C. 2A:4-39.1).

     L.1973, c. 306, s. 27, eff. March 1, 1974.

2A:4A-20.  Short title.
    	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Code of Youth Justice."

     L.1982, c. 77, s. 1, eff. Dec. 31, 1983; amended 2025, c.35, s.1.

2A:4A-21  Purposes.
	2.	Purposes.  This act shall be construed so as to effectuate the following purposes:

	a.	To preserve the unity of the family whenever possible and to provide for the care, protection, and wholesome mental and physical development of juveniles coming within the provisions of this act;
 
	b.	Consistent with the protection of the public interest, to remove from children committing delinquent acts certain statutory consequences of criminal behavior, and to substitute therefor an adequate program of supervision, care and rehabilitation, and a range of sanctions designed to promote accountability and protect the public;
 
	c.	To separate juveniles from the family environment only when necessary for their health, safety, or welfare or in the interests of public safety;
 
	d.	To secure for each child coming under the jurisdiction of the court the care, guidance, and control, preferably in his own home, as will conduce to the child's welfare and the best interests of the State; and when the child is removed from his own family, to secure for him custody, care, and discipline as nearly as possible equivalent to that which should have been given by his parents;
 
	e.	To insure that children under the jurisdiction of the court are wards of the State, subject to the discipline and entitled to the protection of the State, which may intervene to safeguard them from neglect or injury and to enforce the legal obligations due to them and from them; 
 
	f.	Consistent with the protection of the public interest, to insure that any services and sanctions for juveniles provide balanced attention to the protection of the community, the imposition of accountability for offenses committed, fostering interaction and dialogue between the offender, victim, and community, and the development of competencies to enable children to become responsible and productive members of the community; 
 
	g.	To insure protection and a safe environment for those sexually exploited juveniles who are charged with prostitution or who are alleged to be victims of human trafficking; and to provide these juveniles with the appropriate shelter, care, counseling, and crisis intervention services from the time they are taken into custody and for the duration of any legal proceedings; 
 
	h.	To insure that in any action undertaken within the provisions of this act, the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration; and
 
	i.	To ensure a fairer and more efficient and effective juvenile justice system by incorporating the following principles and strategies into every stage of the delinquency action:
 
	(1)	promoting collaboration between juvenile court officials, probation agencies, prosecutors, defense attorneys, schools, community organizations, and advocates;
 
	(2)	using rigorous data collection and analysis to guide decision making;
 
	(3)	utilizing objective criteria, processes, and tools, such as risk-assessment instruments, to replace subjective decision-making processes to determine:
 
	(a)	whether a juvenile should be incarcerated; and 
 
	(b)	the length of time a juvenile should remain in custody; 
 
	(4)	implementing new or expanded community-based alternatives that can be used in lieu of incarceration;
 
	(5)	reducing delays in processing and corresponding length of stay in all stages of a delinquency action, including parole and revocation proceedings, to ensure that juveniles do not remain in out-of-home placements longer than necessary or are unnecessarily returned to custody;
 
	(6)	reserving the use of incarceration for only those cases in which it is necessary to eliminate a substantial threat to public safety or as required by the Interstate Compact for Juveniles; 
 
	(7)	combatting racial and ethnic disparities by collecting and examining data to identify policies and practices that may disadvantage minority juveniles at various stages of the process and pursuing strategies to eliminate those disparities; and
 
	(8)	monitoring and improving conditions of confinement in secure facilities. 
 
	L.1982, c.77, s.2; amended 1995, c.280, s.1; 2001, c.408, s.1; 2011, c.195, s.1; 2015, c.255, s.1; 2019, c.363, s.1.

2A:4A-22  General definitions.
	3.	General definitions. As used in this act:
 
	a.	"Juvenile" means an individual who is under the age of 18 years.
 
	b.	"Adult" means an individual 18 years of age or older.
 
	c.	"Detention" means the temporary care of juveniles in physically restricting facilities pending court disposition.
 
	d.	"Shelter care" means the temporary care of juveniles in facilities without physical restriction pending court disposition.
 
	e.	"Commit" means to transfer legal custody to an institution.
 
	f.	"Guardian" means a person, other than a parent, to whom legal custody of the child has been given by court order or who is acting in the place of the parent or is responsible for the care and welfare of the juvenile.
 
	g.	"Juvenile-family crisis" means behavior, conduct or a condition of a juvenile, parent or guardian or other family member which presents or results in (1) a serious threat to the well-being and physical safety of a juvenile, or (2) a serious conflict between a parent or guardian and a juvenile regarding rules of conduct which has been manifested by repeated disregard for lawful parental authority by a juvenile or misuse of lawful parental authority by a parent or guardian, or (3) unauthorized absence by a juvenile for more than 24 hours from his home, or (4) a pattern of repeated unauthorized absences from school by a juvenile subject to the compulsory education provision of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes, or (5) an act which if committed by an adult would constitute prostitution in violation of N.J.S.2C:34-1 or any offense which the juvenile alleges is related to the juvenile being a victim of human trafficking.
 
	h.	"Repetitive disorderly persons offense" means the second or more disorderly persons offense committed by a juvenile on at least two separate occasions and at different times.
 
	i.	"Court" means the Superior Court, Chancery Division, Family Part unless a different meaning is plainly required.
 
	j.	"Commission" means the Youth Justice Commission established pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1995, c.284 (C.52:17B-170).
 
	L.1982, c.77, s.3; amended 1991, c.91, s.4; 1995, c.280, s.2; 2011, c.195, s.2; 2025, c.35, s.2.

2A:4A-23  Definition of delinquency.
	4.	Definition of delinquency.  As used in this act, "delinquency" means the commission of an act by a juvenile which if committed by an adult would constitute:  
 
	a.	A crime;
 
	b.	A disorderly persons offense or petty disorderly persons offense; or
 
	c.	A violation of any other penal statute, ordinance or regulation.
 
	But, the commission of (1) an act which constitutes a violation of chapter 3, 4, 6 or 8 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes by a juvenile of any age; (2) an act relating to the ownership or operation of a motorized bicycle which constitutes a violation of chapter 3 or 4 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes by a juvenile of any age; (3) an act which constitutes a violation of article 3 or 6 of chapter 4 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes pertaining to pedestrians and bicycles, by a juvenile of any age; (4) the commission of an act which constitutes a violation of P.L.1981, c.318 (C.26:3D-1 et seq.), P.L.1981, c.319 (C.26:3D-7 et seq.), P.L.1981, c.320 (C.26:3D-15 et seq.), P.L.1985, c.185 (C.26:3E-7 et seq.), P.L.1985, c.186 (C.26:3D-32 et seq.), N.J.S.2C:33-13, P.L.1985, c.318 (C.26:3D-38 et seq.), P.L.1985, c.381 (C.26:3D-46 et seq.), or of any amendment or supplement thereof, by a juvenile of any age;(5) an act which constitutes a violation of chapter 7 of Title 12 of the Revised Statutes relating to the regulation and registration of power vessels, by a juvenile of any age or section 2 of P.L.1987, c.453 (C.12:7-61); or (6) an act which constitutes a violation of a municipal ordinance enacted pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1992, c.132 (C.40:48-2.52) pertaining to curfew ordinances shall not constitute delinquency as defined in this act.  The municipal court having jurisdiction over a case involving a violation by a juvenile of a section of Title 26 listed in this subsection, Title 40 listed in this subsection or N.J.S.2C:33-13, shall forward a copy of the record of conviction in that case to the Family Part intake service of the county where the municipal court is located.
 
	If a municipal court orders detention or imposes a term of imprisonment on a juvenile in connection with a violation of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes, chapter 7 of Title 12 of the Revised Statutes, Title 40 of the Revised Statutes or N.J.S.2C:33-13, that detention or term of imprisonment shall be served at a suitable juvenile institution and not at a county jail or county workhouse.

	L.1982,c.77,s.4; amended 1983, c.404; 1986, c.16; 1986, c.39, s.5; 1987, c.401; 1987, c.453, s.3; 1989, c.125, s.1; 1991, c.96; 1997, c.383; 2023, c.335, s.3.

2A:4A-24.  Exclusive jurisdiction of the court and nature of jurisdiction
    a.  Except as otherwise provided by law, the court shall have exclusive jurisdiction in all cases where it is charged that a juvenile has committed an act of delinquency and over all matters relating to a juvenile-family crisis. Upon the determination that a juvenile has committed an act of delinquency or that a juvenile-family crisis exists, the court may impose such disposition or dispositions over those persons subject to its jurisdiction consistent with the  purposes of this act.

    Such jurisdiction shall extend in these matters over a juvenile and his parent, guardian or any family member found by the court to be contributing to a juvenile-family crisis.  The court shall, in accordance with the Rules of Court, clearly specify the responsibilities of those subject to its jurisdiction with respect to the plan of rehabilitation for the juvenile.

    b.  The court shall have jurisdiction in respect to the custody of any juvenile who may be held as a material witness in any case pending in the court.  Whenever a juvenile is a material witness in any other court, the procedures established by this act shall be followed.

    c.  Juveniles who appear before the court in any capacity shall be deemed to  be wards of the court and protected accordingly.

    d.  Nothing in this act shall affect the jurisdiction of other courts over offenses committed after a juvenile under the jurisdiction of the court reaches  the age of 18 years.

     L.1982, c. 77, s. 5, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4A-25.  Transfer from other courts
	6. 	Transfer from other courts.  Except as provided in section 4 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-23), and unless jurisdiction has been waived under section 7 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-26), if during the pendency in any other court of a case charging a person with a crime, offense or violation, it is ascertained that such person was a juvenile at the time of the crime, offense or violation charged, such court shall immediately transfer such case to the Superior Court, Chancery Division, Family Part. The Family Part shall thereupon proceed in the same manner as if the case had been instituted under this chapter in the first instance.

	L.1982,c.77,s.6; amended 1991,c.91,s.5; 1995,c.280,s.3.

2A:4A-26.1  Filing motion seeking waiver of jurisdiction; hearing.
	1. a. A prosecutor seeking waiver of jurisdiction of a juvenile delinquency case by the Superior Court, Chancery Division, Family Part to an appropriate court and prosecuting authority without the consent of the juvenile shall file a motion within 60 days after the receipt of the complaint, which time may be extended for good cause shown.  The motion shall be accompanied by a written statement of reasons clearly setting forth the facts used in assessing all factors contained in paragraph (3) of subsection c. of this section, together with an explanation as to how evaluation of those facts support waiver for each particular juvenile.
 
	b.	At a hearing, the court shall receive the evidence offered by the State and by the juvenile.  The State shall provide proof to satisfy the requirements set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection c. of this section. The court also shall review whether the State considered the factors set forth in paragraph (3) of subsection c. of this section. 
 
	c.	Except as provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection, the court shall waive jurisdiction of a juvenile delinquency case without the juvenile's consent and shall refer the case to the appropriate court and prosecuting authority having jurisdiction if:  
 
	(1)	The juvenile was 15 years of age or older at the time of the alleged delinquent act; and
 
	(2)	There is probable cause to believe that the juvenile committed a delinquent act which if committed by an adult would constitute:
 
	(a)	criminal homicide, other than death by auto; 
 
	(b)	strict liability for drug-induced deaths; 
 
	(c)	first degree robbery; 
 
	(d)	carjacking; 
 
	(e)	aggravated sexual assault; 
 
	(f)	sexual assault; 
 
	(g)	second degree aggravated assault; 
 
	(h)	kidnapping; 
 
	(i)	aggravated arson; 
 
	(j)	possession of a firearm with a purpose to use it unlawfully against the person of another under subsection a. of N.J.S.2C:39-4, or possession of a firearm while committing or attempting to commit, including the immediate flight therefrom, aggravated assault, aggravated criminal sexual contact, burglary, home invasion burglary, residential burglary, or escape;
 
	(k)	a violation of N.J.S.2C:35-3 (Leader of a Narcotics Trafficking Network);
 
	(l)	a violation of N.J.S.2C:35-4 (Maintaining and Operating a CDS Production Facility);
 
	(m)	a violation of section 1 of P.L.1998, c.26 (C.2C:39-4.1) (Weapons Possession while Committing certain CDS Offenses);
 
	(n)	an attempt or conspiracy to commit any of the crimes enumerated in subparagraphs (a) through (m) of this paragraph; or 
 
	(o)	a crime committed at a time when the juvenile previously had been sentenced and confined in an adult correctional facility. 
 
	(3)	The court may deny a motion by the prosecutor to waive jurisdiction of a juvenile delinquency case if it is clearly convinced that the prosecutor abused his discretion in considering the following factors in deciding whether to seek a waiver: 
 
	(a)	The nature and circumstances of the offense charged; 
 
	(b)	Whether the offense was against a person or property, allocating more weight for crimes against the person; 
 
	(c)	Degree of the juvenile's culpability;
 
	(d)	Age and maturity of the juvenile; 
 
	(e)	Any classification that the juvenile is eligible for special education to the extent this information is provided to the prosecution by the juvenile or by the court; 
 
	(f)	Degree of criminal sophistication exhibited by the juvenile; 
 
	(g)	Nature and extent of any prior history of delinquency of the juvenile and dispositions imposed for those adjudications; 
 
	(h)	If the juvenile previously served a custodial disposition in a State juvenile facility operated by the Youth Justice Commission, and the response of the juvenile to the programs provided at the facility to the extent this information is provided to the prosecution by the Youth Justice Commission;
 
	(i)	Current or prior involvement of the juvenile with child welfare agencies;
 
	(j)	Evidence of mental health concerns, substance use disorder, or emotional instability of the juvenile to the extent this information is provided to the prosecution by the juvenile or by the court; and
 
	(k)	If there is an identifiable victim, the input of the victim or victim's family.  
 
	The Attorney General may develop for dissemination to the county prosecutors those guidelines or directives deemed necessary or appropriate to ensure the uniform application of this section throughout the State.
 
	d.	An order waiving jurisdiction over a case and referring the case to the appropriate court and prosecuting authority shall specify the alleged act upon which the referral is based and all other delinquent acts charged against the juvenile arising out of or related to the same transaction. 
 
	e.	Testimony of a juvenile at a hearing to determine referral under this section shall not be admissible for any purpose in any subsequent hearing to determine delinquency or guilt of any offense. 
 
	f.	Upon waiver of jurisdiction and referral to the appropriate court and prosecuting authority having jurisdiction:
 
	(1)	The case shall proceed as if it originated in that court and shall be subject to the sentencing provisions available to that court; provided, however, upon conviction for any offense which is subject to waiver pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection c. of this section, there shall be a presumption that the juvenile shall serve any custodial sentence imposed in a State juvenile facility operated by the Youth Justice Commission until the juvenile reaches the age of 21, except that: 
 
	(a)	a juvenile who has not reached the age of 21 may, in the discretion of the Youth Justice Commission, be transferred to the Department of Corrections in accordance with the plan established pursuant to subsection e. of section 7 of P.L.1995, c.284 (C.52:17B-175) and regulations adopted pursuant to that section; and 
 
	(b)	a juvenile who has reached or exceeds the age of 21 may continue to serve a sentence in a State juvenile facility operated by the Youth Justice Commission in the discretion of the Youth Justice Commission and if the juvenile so consents; otherwise the juvenile shall serve the remainder of the custodial sentence in a State correctional facility; 
 
	(2)	If a juvenile is not convicted of an offense set forth in paragraph (2) of subsection c. of this section, a conviction for any other offense shall be deemed a juvenile adjudication and be remanded to the Superior Court, Chancery Division, Family Part for disposition, in accordance with the dispositional options available to that court and all records related to the act of delinquency shall be subject to the provisions of section 1 of P.L.1982, c.79 (C.2A:4A-60); 
 
	(3)	With the consent of the defense and the prosecutor, at any point in the proceedings subsequent to the decision ordering waiver the court may remand to the Superior Court, Chancery Division, Family Part if it appears that: 
 
	(a)	the interests of the public and the best interests of the juvenile require access to programs or procedures uniquely available to that court; and
 
	(b)	the interests of the public are no longer served by waiver. 
 
	g. (1) The Youth Justice Commission, in consultation with the Attorney General, shall establish a program to collect, record, and analyze data regarding waiver of jurisdiction of a juvenile delinquency case by the Superior Court, Chancery Division, Family Part to an appropriate court and prosecuting authority.  In furtherance of this program, the Youth Justice Commission shall, in cooperation with the Administrative Office of the Courts, Attorney General, and county prosecutors, collect data related to the decision to seek waiver of jurisdiction of a juvenile delinquency case, which shall include but not be limited to data concerning:  
 
	(a)	youth demographics, including age, gender, race, and ethnicity;
 
	(b)	case characteristics, including the degree of the offense waived, the degree of the offense convicted, and the final court resolution;
 
	(c)	case processing times; and 
 
	(d)	waiver rates by race and ethnicity.
 
	(2)	The commission shall prepare and publish on its Internet website biennial reports summarizing the data collected, recorded, and analyzed pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection.  
 
	(3)	The commission shall, pursuant to section 2 of P.L. 1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), biennially prepare and transmit to the Governor and the Legislature the reports required in paragraph (2) of this subsection, along with any recommendations the commission may have for legislation concerning waiver of jurisdiction of juvenile delinquency cases.
 
	L.2015, c.89, s.1; amended 2023, c.177, s.1; 2024, c.83, s.3; 2025, c.35, s.3.

2A:4A-27.  Referral to other court at election of juvenile.
	8. a. Any juvenile 14 years of age or older charged with delinquency may elect, subject to court approval, to have the case transferred to the appropriate court having jurisdiction.  Any juvenile under 14 years of age charged with an offense which, if committed by an adult, would constitute murder under N.J.S.2C:11-3 may elect, subject to court approval, to have the case transferred to the appropriate court having jurisdiction.
 
	b.	In all cases where such election is sought, the court shall conduct a hearing pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection b. of section 20 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-39) to:
 
	(1)	inform the juvenile of the differences in the maximum sentence or disposition, and the differences in the consequences of magnitude, between the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice and the New Jersey Code of Juvenile Justice, for the crimes, offenses, and delinquencies charged; and
 
	(2)	determine that an election under this section is made knowingly, willingly, and voluntarily.
 
	c.	Upon the granting of an election made under this section and transfer to the appropriate court having jurisdiction:
 
	(1)	the case shall proceed as if it originated in that court and shall be subject to the sentencing provisions available to that court, provided, however, there shall be a presumption that the juvenile shall serve any custodial sentence imposed in a State juvenile facility operated by the Juvenile Justice Commission until the juvenile reaches the age of 21, except that:
 
	(a)	a juvenile who has not reached the age of 21 may, in the discretion of the Juvenile Justice Commission, be transferred to the Department of Corrections in accordance with the plan established pursuant to subsection e. of section 7 of P.L.1995, c.284 (C.52:17B-175) and regulations adopted pursuant to that section; and
 
	(b)	a juvenile who has reached or exceeds the age of 21 may continue to serve a sentence in a State juvenile facility operated by the Juvenile Justice Commission in the discretion of the Juvenile Justice Commission and if the juvenile so consents, otherwise the juvenile shall serve the remainder of the custodial sentence in a State correctional facility;
 
	(2)	with the consent of the juvenile and the prosecutor, at any point in the proceedings subsequent to the election made pursuant to this section, the court may remand the case to the Superior Court, Chancery Division, Family Part if it appears that:
 
	(a)	the interests of the public and the best interests of the juvenile require access to programs or procedures uniquely available to that court; and
 
	(b)	the interests of the public are no longer served by the election.

     L.1982, c. 77, s. 8, eff. Dec. 31, 1983; amended 2025, c.368.

2A:4A-28.  Effect of referral to other court
	9. 	Effect of referral to other court.  Whenever a case is referred to another court as provided by section 7 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-26) or section 8 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-27), that case shall thereafter proceed in the same manner as if the case had been instituted in that court in the first instance.

	L.1982,c.77,s.9; amended 1995,c.280,s.4.

2A:4A-29.  Use of juvenile's testimony at referral hearing 
	10. 	Use of juvenile's testimony at referral hearing.  No testimony of a juvenile at a hearing pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-26) or section 8 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-27) shall be admissible for any purpose in any hearing to determine delinquency or guilt of any offense.

	L.1982,c.77,s.10; amended 1995,c.280,s.5.

2A:4A-30.  Complaints and petitions
    a.  Complaints charging delinquency may be signed by any person who has knowledge of the facts alleged to constitute delinquency or is informed of such  facts and believes that they are true.  The complaint shall be filed with the  clerk of the court and shall set forth:

    (1) The name, address, and date of birth of the juvenile;

     (2) The name and address of the juvenile's parents or guardian and, if the juvenile is in custody of some other person, the name and address of the custodian;

    (3) The date, time, manner, and place of the acts alleged as the basis of the complaint;

    (4) A citation of the law or ordinance allegedly violated by the juvenile; and

    (5) The signature of the complainant.

     b.  Petitions alleging that a juvenile-family crisis exists shall be signed  by court intake services pursuant to section 8 of P.L.1982, c. 80 (C. 2A:4A-83).  The petition shall be filed with the clerk of the court and shall set forth:

    (1) The name, address, and date of birth of the juvenile;

     (2) The name and address of the juvenile's parents or guardian and, if the juvenile is in custody of some other person, the name and address of the custodian;

    (3) The date, time, manner, and place of the behavior, conduct, or condition  alleged as the basis of the petition;  and

    (4) The signature of the petitioner.

     c.  Complaints and petitions shall be in such form as prescribed by the Rules of Court.

     L.1982, c. 77, s. 11, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4A-31.  Taking into custody
    a.  A juvenile may be taken into custody:

    (1) Pursuant to an order or warrant of any court having jurisdiction; or

     (2) For delinquency, when there has been no process issued by a court, by a  law enforcement officer, pursuant to the laws of arrest and the Rules of Court.

    b.  Except where delinquent conduct is alleged, a juvenile may be taken into  short-term custody by a law enforcement officer without order of the court  when:

    (1) The officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the health and safety  of the juvenile is seriously in danger and taking into immediate custody is  necessary for his protection;

    (2) The officer has reasonable grounds to believe the juvenile has left the  home and care of his parents or guardian without the consent of such persons;   or

    (3) An agency legally charged with the supervision of a child has notified the law enforcement agency that the child has run away from out of home placement, provided, however, that in any case where the law enforcement officer believes that the juvenile is an  "abused or neglected child"  as defined in section 1 of P.L.1974, c. 119 (C. 9:6-8.21), the officer shall handle the case pursuant to the procedure set forth in that act.

    c.  The taking of a juvenile into custody shall not be construed as an arrest, but shall be deemed a measure to protect the health, morals and well being of the juvenile.

     L.1982, c. 77, s. 12, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4A-32.  Short-term custody
	13.  Short-term custody.  a.  Under no circumstances shall any juvenile taken into short-term custody under section 12 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-31) be held more than six hours.  A juvenile taken into short-term custody shall not be retained in a detention facility or jail.  As used in this section, the juvenile-family crisis intervention unit means that unit established pursuant to P.L.1982, c.80 (C.2A:4A-76 et seq.).

	b. 	An officer taking a juvenile into short-term custody shall inform the juvenile of the reason for custody and shall where possible transport, or arrange to have the juvenile transported to his home.  The officer releasing a juvenile from such custody shall inform the juvenile's parents or guardian and the juvenile-family crisis intervention unit of the reason for taking the juvenile into custody and may, if he believes further services are needed, inform the juvenile and his parents of the nature and location of appropriate services.

	c. 	A law enforcement officer taking a juvenile into short-term custody may transport the juvenile to the home of a relative of the juvenile or to the home of another responsible adult or make arrangement for such transportation where the officer reasonably believes that the child will be provided with adequate care and supervision and that the child will remain in custody of the adult until such time as the juvenile-family crisis intervention unit can bring about the child's return home or an alternative living arrangement or out of home placement.  A law enforcement officer placing a juvenile with a relative or responsible adult shall immediately notify the juvenile-family crisis intervention unit of this fact and the reason for taking the juvenile into custody.

	d. 	A law enforcement officer acting reasonably and in good faith pursuant to this section in releasing a juvenile to a person other than a parent of a juvenile is immune from civil or criminal liability for his action.  A person other than a parent of the juvenile who receives a child pursuant to this section and who acts reasonably and in good faith in doing so is immune from civil or criminal liability for the act of receiving the child.  Immunity shall not release a person from liability under any other laws, including the laws regulating licensed child care or prohibiting child abuse and neglect.

	L.1982,c.77,s.13; amended 1995,c.280,s.6.

2A:4A-33.  Taking into custody;  notice to parents
    a.  Any person taking a juvenile into custody shall immediately notify the parents, or the juvenile's guardian, if any, that the juvenile has been taken into custody.

     L.1982, c. 77, s. 14, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4A-34  Criteria for placing juvenile in detention.
	15.  Criteria for placing juvenile in detention.

	a.	Except as otherwise provided in this section, a juvenile charged with an act of delinquency shall be released pending the disposition of a case, if any, to any person or agency provided for in this section upon assurance being received that such person or persons accept responsibility for the juvenile and will bring him before the court as ordered.

	b.	No juvenile shall be placed in detention without the permission of a judge or the court intake service.

	c.	A juvenile charged with delinquency may not be placed or retained in detention under this act prior to disposition, except as otherwise provided by law, unless:

	(1)	Detention is necessary to secure the presence of the juvenile at the next hearing as evidenced by a demonstrable record of recent willful failure to appear at juvenile court proceedings or to remain where placed by the court or the court intake service or the juvenile is subject to a current warrant for failure to appear at court proceedings which is active at the time of arrest; or

	(2)	The physical safety of persons or property of the community would be seriously threatened if the juvenile were not detained and the juvenile is charged with an offense which, if committed by an adult, would constitute a crime of the first, second or third degree or one of the following crimes of the fourth degree:  aggravated assault; stalking; criminal sexual contact; bias intimidation; failure to control or report a dangerous fire; possession of a prohibited weapon or device in violation of N.J.S.2C:39-3; or unlawful possession of a weapon in violation of N.J.S.2C:39-5; or

	(3)	With respect to a juvenile charged with an offense which, if committed by an adult, would constitute a crime of the fourth degree other than those enumerated in paragraph (2) of this subsection, or a disorderly persons or petty disorderly persons offense, and with respect to a juvenile charged with an offense enumerated in subsection c. when the criteria for detention are not met, the juvenile may be temporarily placed in a shelter or other non-secure placement if a parent or guardian cannot be located or will not accept custody of the juvenile.  Police and court intake personnel shall make all reasonable efforts to locate a parent or guardian to accept custody of the juvenile prior to requesting or approving the juvenile's placement in a shelter or other non-secure placement.  If, after the initial detention hearing, continued placement is necessary, the juvenile shall be returned to a shelter or other non-secure placement.

	d.	The judge or court intake officer prior to making a decision of detention shall consider and, where appropriate, employ any of the following alternatives:

	(1)	Release to parents;

	(2)	Release on juvenile's promise to appear at next hearing;

	(3)	Release to parents, guardian or custodian upon written assurance to secure the juvenile's presence at the next hearing;

	(4)	Release into care of a custodian or public or private agency reasonably capable of assisting the juvenile to appear at the next hearing;

	(5)	Release with imposition of restrictions on activities, associations, movements and residence reasonably related to securing the appearance of the juvenile at the next hearing;

	(6)	Release with required participation in a home detention program;

	(7)	Placement in a shelter care facility; or 

	(8)	Imposition of any other restrictions other than detention or shelter care reasonably related to securing the appearance of the juvenile.

	e.	In determining whether detention is appropriate for the juvenile, the following factors shall be considered:

	(1)	The nature and circumstances of the offense charged;

	(2)	The age of the juvenile;

	(3)	The juvenile's ties to the community;

	(4)	The juvenile's record of prior adjudications, if any; and

	(5)	The juvenile's record of appearance or nonappearance at previous court proceedings.

	f.	No juvenile 11 years of age or under shall be placed in detention unless he is charged with an offense which, if committed by an adult, would be a crime of the first or second degree or arson.

	g.	If the court places a juvenile in detention, the court shall state on the record its reasons for that detention.

	h.	For purposes of this section, a failure to appear at juvenile court proceedings or to remain where placed by the court or the court intake service shall be deemed recent if it occurred within the 12 months immediately preceding the detention hearing, or if it occurred within the period of 12 to 24 months preceding the detention hearing and the juvenile is unable to demonstrate a record of voluntary compliance with any subsequent court appearance and placement requirements.

	L.1982,c.77,s.15; amended 1989, c.306, s.1; 2005, c.361.

2A:4A-35.  Release of juvenile on own recognizance
    A juvenile charged with delinquency may be released at either the police or  court level on his own recognizance if all of the following circumstances have  been met:

    a.  The nature of the offense charged is not such that a danger to the community would exist if the juvenile were released;

    b.  There is no parent, guardian or other appropriate adult custodian to whom the juvenile could be released and all reasonable measures have been exhausted by either police or court personnel to locate and contact any such person;

    c.  The juvenile is at least 14 years of age;

     d.  The identity and address of the juvenile are verified through a positive  form of identification;  and

     e.  Reasonable certainty exists on the part of the releasing authority that  upon release, the juvenile will return to school or home safely and will appear  at his hearing.

     L.1982, c. 77, s. 16, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4A-36  Detention of waiver cases.
 
 	17. a. If the court waives jurisdiction over a case and refers that case to the appropriate court and prosecuting authority, there shall be a hearing before the court waiving jurisdiction to decide whether to detain the juvenile pending resolution of the case.  If detention is deemed necessary, there shall be a presumption that the juvenile shall be detained in a county juvenile detention facility, unless good cause is shown that it is necessary to detain the juvenile in a county jail or other county correctional facility in which adults are incarcerated.
 
	b.	Upon conviction in the appropriate court and where detention pending sentencing is deemed necessary, there shall be a presumption that the juvenile shall be detained in a county juvenile detention facility, unless good cause is shown that it is necessary to detain the juvenile in a county jail or other county correctional facility in which adults are incarcerated.  
 
	c.	Good cause under this section shall be based on the best interests of the juvenile and protection of the public, and shall take into account such factors, including but not limited to, the juvenile's age and maturity, the nature and circumstances of the offense charged or for which the juvenile was convicted, the juvenile's prior offense history, the programs available at juvenile detention facilities, and any other relevant factors.  
 
	d.	A juvenile who has been waived to an appropriate adult court shall not be remanded to a county jail or other county correctional facility in which adults are incarcerated prior to the hearing provided for in subsection a. of this section.
 
	L.1982, c.77, s.17; amended 2015, c.89, s.2.

2A:4A-37  Place of detention or shelter.
	18.	Place of detention or shelter. a. The Youth Justice Commission established pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1995, c.284 (C.52:17B-170) shall specify the place where a juvenile may be detained; and the Department of Children and Families shall specify where a juvenile may be placed in shelter.
 
	b.	No juvenile shall be placed in detention or shelter care in any place other than that specified by the Youth Justice Commission or Department of Children and Families as provided in subsection a.
 
	c.	A juvenile being held for a charge under this act or for a violation of or contempt in connection with a violation of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes, chapter 7 of Title 12 of the Revised Statutes or N.J.S.2C:33-13, including a juvenile who has reached the age of 18 years after being charged, shall not be placed in any prison, jail or lockup nor detained in any police station, except that if no other facility is reasonably available a juvenile may be held in a police station in a place other than one designed for the detention of prisoners and apart from any adult charged with or convicted of a crime for a brief period if such holding is necessary to allow release to his parent, guardian, other suitable person, or approved facility.  No juvenile shall be placed in a detention facility which has reached its maximum population capacity, as designated by the Youth Justice Commission.
 
	d.	No juvenile charged with delinquency shall be transferred to an adult county jail solely by reason of having reached age 18.  The following standards shall apply to any juvenile who has been placed on probation pursuant to section 24 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-43) and who violates the conditions of that probation after reaching the age of 18; who has been placed on parole pursuant to the provisions of the "Parole Act of 1979," P.L.1979, c.441 (C.30:4-123.45 et seq.) and who violates the conditions of that parole after reaching the age of 18; or who is arrested after reaching the age of 18 on a warrant emanating from the commission of an act of juvenile delinquency:
 
	(1)	In the case of a person 18 years of age but less than 20 years of age, the court, upon application by any interested party, shall determine the place of detention, taking into consideration the age and maturity of the person, whether the placement of the person in a juvenile detention facility would present a risk to the safety of juveniles residing at the facility, the likelihood that the person would influence in a negative manner juveniles incarcerated at the facility, whether the facility has sufficient space available for juveniles and any other factor the court deems appropriate.  Upon application at any time by the juvenile detention facility administrator or any other interested party, the court may order that the person be relocated to the county jail.  The denial of an application shall not preclude subsequent applications based on a change in circumstances or information that was not previously made available to the court.  The determination of the place of detention shall be made in a summary manner;
 
	(2)	In the case of a person 20 years of age or older, the person shall be incarcerated in the county jail unless good cause is shown.
 
	e. (1) The Youth Justice Commission and the Department of Children and Families shall promulgate such rules and regulations from time to time as deemed necessary to establish minimum physical facility and program standards for juvenile detention facilities or shelters under their respective supervision.
 
	(2)	The Youth Justice Commission and the Department of   Children and Families, in consultation with the appropriate county administrator of the county facility or shelter, shall assign a maximum population capacity for each juvenile detention facility or shelter based on minimum standards for these facilities.
 
	f. (1) Where either the Youth Justice Commission or the Department of Children and Families determines that a juvenile detention facility or shelter under its control or authority is regularly over the maximum population capacity or is in willful and continuous disregard of the minimum standards for these facilities or shelters, the commission or department may restrict new admissions to the facility or shelter.
 
	(2)	Upon making such determination, the commission or department shall notify the governing body of the appropriate county of its decision to impose such a restriction, which notification shall include a written statement specifying the reasons therefor and corrections to be made. If the commission or department shall determine that no appropriate action has been initiated by the administrator of the facility or shelter within 60 days following such notification to correct the violations specified in the notification, it shall order that such juvenile detention facility or shelter shall immediately cease to admit juveniles.  The county shall be entitled to a hearing where such a restriction is imposed by the commission or department.
 
	(3)	Any juvenile detention facility or shelter so restricted shall continue under such order until such time as the commission or department determines that the violation specified in the notice has been corrected or that the facility or shelter has initiated actions which will ensure the correction of said violations.
 
	(4)	Upon the issuance of an order to cease admissions to a juvenile detention facility or shelter, the commission or department shall determine whether other juvenile detention facilities or shelters have adequate room for admitting juveniles and shall assign the juveniles to the facilities or shelters on the basis of available space; provided that the department shall not assign the juvenile to a facility or shelter where such facility or shelter is at the maximum population.  A juvenile detention facility or shelter ordered to accept a juvenile shall do so within five days following the receipt of an order to accept admission of such juvenile.
 
	(5)	A juvenile detention facility or shelter restricted by an order to cease admissions shall assume responsibility for the transportation of a juvenile sent to another juvenile detention facility or shelter so long as the order shall remain in effect.
 
	(6)	A facility or shelter receiving juveniles pursuant to paragraph (4) of this subsection shall receive from the sending county a reasonable and appropriate per diem allowance for each juvenile sent to the facility, such allowance to be used for the custody, care, maintenance, and any other services normally provided by the county to juveniles in the facility or shelter and which reflects all county expenditures in maintaining such juvenile, including a proportionate share of all buildings and grounds costs, personnel costs, including fringe benefits, administrative costs and all other direct and indirect costs.
 
	(7)	The governing body of a county whose juvenile detention facility or shelter has been prohibited from accepting new admissions, and whose juveniles have been assigned to other juvenile detention facilities or shelters, shall appropriate an amount to pay the county receiving such juveniles for all expenses incurred pursuant to paragraph (6) of this subsection.
 
	L.1982, c.77, s.18; amended 1989, c.125, s.2; 1995, c.280, s.7; 2003, c.287; 2006, c.47, s.16; 2025, c.35, s.4.

2A:4A-38.  Detention hearing
	19. 	Detention hearing.  a.  When a juvenile is taken into custody and detained a complaint shall be filed forthwith as provided by the Rules of Court. The court shall determine whether detention is required pursuant to the criteria provided for in section 15 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-34).

	b. 	Notice of the detention hearing, either oral or written, stating the time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be given to the juvenile and to the juvenile's parent or parents, or guardian, if any, if they can be contacted.

	c. 	The detention hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the Rules of Court and shall be attended by the juvenile and one or both parents, or guardian, but may take place in the absence of parent or guardian if such notice or process fails to produce their attendance.

	d. 	When the judge finds that detention is not necessary or required, the court shall order the juvenile's release and may place such conditions, if any, upon release as are consistent with the purposes of this act, the Rules of Court, and as are provided for in section 15 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-34).

	e. 	The initial detention hearing shall be held no later than the morning following the juvenile's placement in detention including weekends and holidays.  

	f. 	If a delinquency complaint has not been filed by the time the initial detention hearing has been held, the juvenile shall be released from custody immediately.  

	g. 	When the court determines that detention is necessary pursuant to section 15 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-34), the court order continuing the juvenile's detention shall be supported by reasons and findings of fact on the record.

	h. 	If the juvenile is not represented by counsel at the initial detention hearing and if the court continues the juvenile's detention after the hearing, the court shall forthwith schedule a second detention hearing to be held within two court days thereafter at which time the juvenile shall be represented by counsel as provided by the Rules of Court.

	i. 	There shall be a probable cause determination where a juvenile has been charged with delinquency and has been placed in detention, within two court days after the initial hearing or, where a second detention hearing is necessary pursuant to subsection h. of this section, at that hearing.

	j. 	A detention review hearing with counsel shall be held within 14 court days of the prior detention hearing and if detention is continued, detention review hearings shall be held thereafter at intervals not to exceed 21 court days.

 	k. 	When a juvenile is detained, an adjudicatory hearing shall be held no later than 30 days from the date of detention.  If no adjudicatory hearing is held within 30 days, the court shall, within 72 hours of a motion by the juvenile, fix a date certain for the adjudicatory hearing unless an extension is granted by the court for good cause shown.  Written notice of any application for a postponement shall be sent to the juvenile's counsel who shall have the right to be heard on the application.

	l. 	When a juvenile has been adjudicated delinquent and is awaiting transfer to a dispositional alternative that does not involve a secure residential or out-of-home placement and continued detention is necessary, the juvenile shall be transferred to a non-secure facility.

	L.1982,c.77,s.19; amended 1989,c.306,s.2; 1995,c.280,s.8.

2A:4A-39  Right to counsel.
	20. a. A juvenile shall have the right, as provided by the Rules of Court, to be represented by counsel at every critical stage of a court proceeding.  For the purposes of this act "critical stage of a court proceeding" shall include, but not be limited to: every court appearance by the juvenile, including all post dispositional appearances; and any interrogation, identification procedure, or other investigative activity involving the juvenile undertaken by law enforcement or prosecutorial personnel subsequent to the filing of the complaint. 
 
	b.	During every critical stage of a court proceeding in a delinquency case provided under subsection a. of this section, the waiving of any right afforded to a juvenile shall be accomplished in the following manner:
 
	(1) A juvenile who is found to have mental capacity may not waive any rights except in the presence of and after consultation with counsel, and unless a parent has first been afforded a reasonable opportunity to consult with the juvenile and the juvenile's counsel regarding this decision.  The parent or guardian may not waive the rights of a juvenile found to have mental capacity.
 
	(2) Any such waiver shall be executed in writing or recorded.  Before the court may accept a waiver, the court shall question the juvenile and the juvenile's counsel to determine if the juvenile is knowingly, willingly, and voluntarily waiving any right.  If the court finds after questioning the juvenile that the waiver is not being made voluntarily and intelligently, the waiver shall be denied.
 
	(3) A juvenile who is found to lack mental capacity may not waive any right.  A guardian ad litem shall be appointed for the juvenile who may waive rights after consultation with the juvenile and the juvenile's counsel.
 
	(4) Waivers shall be executed in the language regularly spoken by the juvenile.
 
	L.1982, c.77, s.20; amended 1995, c.280, s.6; 2013, c.103, s.1; 2023, c.257.

2A:4A-40.  Rights of juveniles
    All defenses available to an adult charged with a crime, offense or violation shall be available to a juvenile charged with committing an act of delinquency.

    All rights guaranteed to criminal defendants by the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of this State, except the right to indictment, the right to trial by jury and the right to bail, shall be applicable to cases arising under this act.

     L.1982, c. 77, s. 21, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4A-41.  Dispositional hearing
    Where a juvenile is adjudicated delinquent, the disposition of the case shall be entered within 30 days of such adjudication if the juvenile has been placed in a detention center or shelter-care facility.  If the juvenile is so placed and no disposition of the case is made after 30 days, the court shall, upon motion of the juvenile, fix a date certain for the dispositional hearing which shall be within 10 days of the motion, unless an extension is granted by the court for good cause shown.  Disposition shall be made in all other cases within 60 days unless an extension is granted by the court where good cause is shown.  The court shall provide written notice to the proper parties as to the date, time and place of such hearing and do so sufficiently in advance of the hearing to allow adequate time for preparation.

     L.1982, c. 77, s. 22, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4A-42  Predispositional evaluation.
	23.	Predispositional evaluation. a. Before making a disposition, the court may refer the juvenile to an appropriate individual, agency or institution for examination and evaluation.
 
	b.	In arriving at a disposition, the court may also consult with such individuals and agencies as may be appropriate to the juvenile's situation, including the county probation division, the Department of Children and Families, the Youth Justice Commission established pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1995, c.284 (C.52:17B-170), the county youth services commission, school personnel, clergy, law enforcement authorities, family members and other interested and knowledgeable parties.  In so doing, the court may convene a predispositional conference to discuss and recommend disposition.
 
	c. (1) The predisposition report ordered pursuant to the Rules of Court may include a statement by the victim of the offense for which the juvenile has been adjudicated delinquent or by the nearest relative of a homicide victim. The statement may include the nature and extent of any physical harm or psychological or emotional harm or trauma suffered by the victim, the extent of any loss to include loss of earnings or ability to work suffered by the victim and the effect of the crime upon the victim's family.  The probation division shall notify the victim or nearest relative of a homicide victim of his right to make a statement for inclusion in the predisposition report if the victim or relative so desires.  Any statement shall be made within 20 days of notification by the probation division. The report shall further include information on the financial resources of the juvenile.  This information shall be made available on request to the Victims of Crime Compensation  Office established pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1971, c.317 (C.52:4B-3) or to any officer authorized under section 3 of P.L.1979, c.396 (C.2C:46-4) to collect payment of an assessment, restitution or fine.  
 
	(2)	Any predisposition report prepared pursuant to this section shall include: 
 
	(a)	an analysis of the circumstances attending the commission of the act;
 
	(b)	the impact of the offense on the community;
 
	(c)	the offender's history of delinquency or criminality;
 
	(d)	the offender's family situation;
 
	(e)	the offender's financial resources;
 
	(f)	the financial resources of the juvenile's parent or guardian;
 
	(g)	the information concerning the parent or guardian's exercise of supervision and control relevant to commission of the act; and
 
	(h)	in any case where the juvenile is charged with an act which if committed by an adult would constitute prostitution in violation of N.J.S.2C:34-1 or any offense which the juvenile alleges is related to the juvenile being a victim of human trafficking, the predisposition report may include any information relevant to the commission of the act.
 
	Information concerning financial resources included in the report shall be made available to any officer authorized to collect payment on any assessment, restitution or fine.
 
	L.1982, c.77, s.23; amended 1986, c.85, s.2; 1995, c.135, s.7; 1995, c.280, s.9; 2001, c.408, s.2; 2004, c.130, s.5; 2006, c.47, s.17; 2011, c.195, s.4; 2025, c.35, s.5.

2A:4A-43  Disposition of delinquency cases.
	24.	Disposition of delinquency cases. a. In determining the appropriate disposition for a juvenile adjudicated delinquent the court shall weigh the following factors:
 
	(1)	The nature and circumstances of the offense;
 
	(2)	The degree of injury to persons or damage to property caused by the juvenile's offense;
 
	(3)	The juvenile's age, previous record, prior social service received, and out-of-home placement history;
 
	(4)	Whether the disposition supports family strength, responsibility, and unity and the well-being and physical safety of the juvenile;
 
	(5)	Whether the disposition provides for reasonable participation by the child's parent, guardian, or custodian, provided, however, that the failure of a parent or parents to cooperate in the disposition shall not be weighed against the juvenile in arriving at an appropriate disposition;
 
	(6)	Whether the disposition recognizes and treats the unique physical, psychological, and social characteristics and needs of the child;
 
	(7)	Whether the disposition contributes to the developmental needs of the child, including the academic and social needs of the child where the child has intellectual disabilities or learning disabilities;
 
	(8)	Any other circumstances related to the offense and the juvenile's social history as deemed appropriate by the court;
 
	(9)	The impact of the offense on the victim or victims;
 
	(10) The impact of the offense on the community; and
 
	(11) The threat to the safety of the public or any individual posed by the child.
 
	b.	If a juvenile is adjudged delinquent, and except to the extent that an additional specific disposition is required pursuant to this section, the court, in accordance with subsection i. of section 2 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-21), may order incarceration pursuant to section 25 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-44) or the court may order any one or more of the following dispositions:
 
	(1)	Adjourn formal entry of disposition of the case for a period not to exceed 12 months for the purpose of determining whether the juvenile makes a satisfactory adjustment, and if during the period of continuance the juvenile makes such an adjustment, dismiss the complaint;
 
	(2)	Release the juvenile to the supervision of the juvenile's parent or guardian;
 
	(3)	Place the juvenile on probation to the chief probation officer of the county or to any other suitable person who agrees to accept the duty of probation supervision for a period not to exceed three years upon such written conditions as the court deems will aid rehabilitation of the juvenile;
 
	(4)	Transfer custody of the juvenile to any relative or other person determined by the court to be qualified to care for the juvenile;
 
	(5)	Place the juvenile under the care and responsibility of the Department of Children and Families so that the commissioner may designate a division or organizational unit in the department pursuant to P.L.1951, c.138 (C.30:4C-1 et seq.) for the purpose of providing services in or out of the home.  Within 14 days, unless for good cause shown, but not later than 30 days, the Department of Children and Families shall submit to the court a service plan, which shall be presumed valid, detailing the specifics of any disposition order.  The plan shall be developed within the limits of fiscal and other resources available to the department.  If the court determines that the service plan is inappropriate, given existing resources, the department may request a hearing on that determination;
 
	(6)	Place the juvenile under the care and custody of the Commissioner of Children and Families for the purpose of receiving the services of the Division of Children's System of Care of that department, provided that the juvenile has been determined to be eligible for those services under P.L.1965, c.59, s.16 (C.30:4-25.4);
 
	(7)	Commit the juvenile, pursuant to applicable laws and the Rules of Court governing civil commitment, to the Department of Children and Families under the responsibility of the Division of Children's System of Care for the purpose of placement in a suitable public or private hospital or other residential facility for the treatment of persons who are mentally ill, on the ground that the juvenile is in need of involuntary commitment;
 
	(8)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2019, c.363)
 
	(9)	Order the juvenile to make restitution to a person or entity who has suffered loss resulting from personal injuries or damage to property as a result of the offense for which the juvenile has been adjudicated delinquent.  The court may determine the reasonable amount, terms, and conditions of restitution.  If the juvenile participated in the offense with other persons, the participants shall be jointly and severally responsible for the payment of restitution. The court shall not require a juvenile to make full or partial restitution if the juvenile reasonably satisfies the court that the juvenile does not have the means to make restitution and could not reasonably acquire the means to pay restitution;
 
	(10)  Order that the juvenile perform community services under the supervision of a probation division or other agency or individual deemed appropriate by the court.  Such services shall be compulsory and reasonable in terms of nature and duration.  Such services may be performed without compensation, provided that any money earned by the juvenile from the performance of community services may be applied towards any payment of restitution or fine which the court has ordered the juvenile to pay;
 
	(11)  Order that the juvenile participate in work programs which are designed to provide job skills and specific employment training to enhance the employability of job participants.  Such programs may be without compensation, provided that any money earned by the juvenile from participation in a work program may be applied towards any payment of restitution or fine which the court has ordered the juvenile to pay;
 
	(12)  Order that the juvenile participate in programs emphasizing self-reliance, such as intensive outdoor programs teaching survival skills, including but not limited to camping, hiking, and other appropriate activities;
 
	(13)  Order that the juvenile participate in a program of academic or vocational education or counseling, such as a youth service bureau, requiring attendance at sessions designed to afford access to opportunities for normal growth and development.  This may require attendance after school, evenings, and weekends;
 
	(14)  Place the juvenile in a suitable residential or nonresidential program for the treatment of alcohol or narcotic abuse, provided that the juvenile has been determined to be in need of such services;
 
	(15)  Order the parent or guardian of the juvenile to participate in appropriate programs or services when the court has found either that such person's omission or conduct was a significant contributing factor towards the commission of the delinquent act, or, under its authority to enforce litigant's rights, that such person's omission or conduct has been a significant contributing factor towards the ineffective implementation of a court order previously entered in relation to the juvenile;
 
	(16) (a) Place the juvenile in a nonresidential program operated by a public or private agency, providing intensive services to juveniles for specified hours, which may include education, counseling to the juvenile and the juvenile's family if appropriate, vocational training, employment counseling, work, or other services;
 
	(b)	Place the juvenile under the custody of the Youth Justice Commission established pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1995, c.284 (C.52:17B-170) for placement with any private group home or private residential facility with which the commission has entered into a purchase of service contract;
 
	(17)  Instead of or in addition to any disposition made according to this section, the court may postpone, suspend, or revoke for a period not to exceed two years the driver's license, registration certificate, or both of any juvenile who used a motor vehicle in the course of committing an act for which the juvenile was adjudicated delinquent. In imposing this disposition and in deciding the duration of the postponement, suspension, or revocation, the court shall consider the circumstances of the act for which the juvenile was adjudicated delinquent and the potential effect of the loss of driving privileges on the juvenile's ability to be rehabilitated.  Any postponement, suspension, or revocation shall be imposed consecutively with any custodial commitment;
 
	(18) Order that the juvenile satisfy any other conditions reasonably related to the rehabilitation of the juvenile;
 
	(19) Order a parent or guardian who has failed or neglected to exercise reasonable supervision or control of a juvenile who has been adjudicated delinquent to make restitution to any person or entity who has suffered a loss as a result of that offense.  The court may determine the reasonable amount, terms, and conditions of restitution; or
 
	(20)  Place the juvenile, if eligible, in an appropriate juvenile offender program established pursuant to P.L.1997, c.81 (C.30:8-61 et al.).
 
	c. (1) If the county in which the juvenile has been adjudicated delinquent has a juvenile detention facility meeting the physical and program standards established pursuant to this subsection by the Youth Justice Commission, the court may, in addition to any of the dispositions not involving placement out of the home enumerated in this section, incarcerate the juvenile in the youth detention facility in that county for a term not to exceed 60 consecutive days.  The decision by the court to incarcerate a juvenile shall be made in accordance with subsection i. of section 2 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-21).  Counties which do not operate their own juvenile detention facilities may contract for the use of approved commitment programs with counties with which they have established agreements for the use of pre-disposition juvenile detention facilities.  The Youth Justice Commission shall promulgate such rules and regulations from time to time as deemed necessary to establish minimum physical facility and program standards for the use of juvenile detention facilities pursuant to this subsection.
 
	(2)	A juvenile shall not be incarcerated in any county detention facility unless the county has entered into an agreement with the Youth Justice Commission concerning the use of the facility for sentenced juveniles. Upon agreement with the county, the Youth Justice Commission shall certify detention facilities which may receive juveniles sentenced pursuant to this subsection and shall specify the capacity of the facility that may be made available to receive such juveniles; provided, however, that in no event shall the number of juveniles incarcerated pursuant to this subsection exceed 50 percent of the maximum capacity of the facility.
 
	(3)	The court may fix a term of incarceration under this subsection that is in accordance with subsection i. of section 2 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-21) and: 
 
	(a)	The act for which the juvenile was adjudicated delinquent, if committed by an adult, would have constituted a crime or repetitive disorderly persons offense;
 
	(b)	Incarceration of the juvenile is consistent with the goals of public safety, accountability, and rehabilitation and the court is clearly convinced that the aggravating factors substantially outweigh the mitigating factors as set forth in section 25 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-44); and
 
	(c)	The detention facility has been certified for admission of adjudicated juveniles pursuant to paragraph (2).
 
	(4)	If as a result of incarceration of adjudicated juveniles pursuant to this subsection, a county is required to transport a predisposition juvenile to a juvenile detention facility in another county, the costs of such transportation shall be borne by the Youth Justice Commission.
 
	d.	Whenever the court imposes a disposition upon an adjudicated delinquent which requires the juvenile to perform a community service, restitution, or to participate in any other program provided for in this section other than subsection c., the duration of the juvenile's mandatory participation in such alternative programs shall extend for a period consistent with the program goal for the juvenile and shall in no event exceed one year beyond the maximum duration permissible for the delinquent if the juvenile had been committed to a term of incarceration.
 
	e.	In addition to any disposition the court may impose pursuant to this section or section 25 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-44), the following orders shall be included in dispositions of the adjudications set forth below:
 
	(1)	An order to perform community service pursuant to paragraph (10) of subsection b. of this section for a period of at least 60 days, if the juvenile has been adjudicated delinquent for an act which, if committed by an adult, would constitute the crime of theft of a motor vehicle, or the crime of unlawful taking of a motor vehicle in violation of subsection c. of N.J.S.2C:20-10, or the third degree crime of eluding in violation of subsection b. of N.J.S.2C:29-2; and
 
	(2)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2019, c.363)
 
	(3)	An order to perform community service pursuant to paragraph (10) of subsection b. of this section for a period of at least 30 days, if the juvenile has been adjudicated delinquent for an act which, if committed by an adult, would constitute the fourth degree crime of unlawful taking of a motor vehicle in violation of subsection b. of N.J.S.2C:20-10.
 
	(4)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2019, c.363)
 
	f.  (1) (Deleted by amendment, P.L.2019, c.363)
 
	(2)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2019, c.363)
 
	(3)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2019, c.363)
 
	g.	Whenever the court imposes a disposition upon an adjudicated delinquent which requires the juvenile to perform a community service, restitution, or to participate in any other program provided for in this section, the order shall include provisions which provide balanced attention to the protection of the community, accountability for offenses committed, fostering interaction and dialogue between the offender, victim, and community and the development of competencies to enable the child to become a responsible and productive member of the community.
 
	L.1982, c.77, s.24; amended 1988, c.44, s.16; 1988, c.72, s.1; 1993, c.133, s.1; 1995, c.280, s.10; 1997, c.81, s.11; 2001, c.408, s.3; 2004, c.130, s.6; 2006, c.47, s.18; 2012, c.16, s.1; 2019, c.276, s.1; 2019, c.363, s.2; 2021, c.342, s.1; 2025, c.35, s.6.

2A:4A-43.1.  Certain juveniles to submit to serological tests  
    3.   In accordance with section 4 of P.L.1993, c.364 (C.2C:43-2.2) and in addition to any other disposition authorized pursuant to N.J.S.2A:4A-43, a court shall order a juvenile charged with delinquency or adjudicated delinquent for an act which if committed by an adult would constitute aggravated sexual assault or sexual assault as defined in subsection a. or c. of N.J.S.2C:14-2 to submit to an approved serological test for acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) or infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or any other related virus identified as a probable causative agent of AIDS.  

   L.1993,c.364,s.3.  

2A:4A-43.2.	Additional penalty for juvenile adjudicated delinquent  
	5.	In addition to any other penalty imposed by the court, any juvenile adjudicated delinquent for an offense which, if committed by an adult, would constitute criminal mischief pursuant to N.J.S.2C:17-3, attempting to put another in fear of bodily violence pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1981, c.282 (C.2C:33-10), or defacement of private property pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1981, c.282 (C.2C:33-11), involving an act of graffiti, may be required either to pay to the owner of the damaged property monetary restitution in the amount of pecuniary damage caused by the act of graffiti or to perform community service, which shall include removing the graffiti from the property, if appropriate.  If community service is ordered, it shall be for either not less than 20 days or not less than the number of days necessary to remove the graffiti from the property.

	L.1995,c.251,s.5.

2A:4A-43.4.	Orders for certain serological testing of juveniles required under certain circumstances.
	8. a. In addition to any other disposition made pursuant to law, a court shall order a juvenile charged with delinquency or adjudicated delinquent for an act which, if committed by an adult would constitute a crime, a disorderly persons offense or a petty disorderly persons offense, to submit to an approved serological test for acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) or infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or any other related virus identified as a probable causative agent of AIDS if:
 
	(1)  in the course of the commission of the act, including the immediate flight thereafter or during any investigation or arrest related to that act, a law enforcement officer, the victim or other person suffered a prick from a hypodermic needle, provided there is probable cause to believe that the juvenile is an intravenous user of controlled dangerous substances; or
 
	(2)  in the course of the commission of the act, including the immediate flight thereafter or during any investigation or arrest related to that act, a law enforcement officer, the victim or other person had contact with the juvenile which involved or was likely to involve the transmission of bodily fluids.
 
	The court may order a juvenile to submit to an approved serological test for AIDS or infection with the HIV or any other related virus identified as a probable causative agent of AIDS if in the course of the performance of any other law enforcement duties, a law enforcement officer suffers a prick from a hypodermic needle, provided that there is probable cause to believe that the defendant is an intravenous user of controlled dangerous substances, or had contact with the defendant which involved or was likely to involve the transmission of bodily fluids.  The court shall issue such an order only upon the request of the law enforcement officer, victim of the offense or other affected person made at the time of indictment, charge or conviction.  If a county prosecutor declines to make such an application within 72 hours of being requested to do so by the law enforcement officer, the law enforcement officer may appeal to the Division of Criminal Justice in the Department of Law and Public Safety for that officer to bring the application.  The juvenile shall be ordered by the court to submit to such repeat or confirmatory tests as may be medically necessary.
 
	b.	A court order issued pursuant to subsection a. of this section shall require testing to be performed as soon as practicable by the Executive Director of the Youth Justice Commission pursuant to authority granted to the executive director by sections 6 and 10 of P.L.1976, c.98 (C.30:1B-6 and 30:1B-10) or by a provider of health care or at a health care facility licensed pursuant to section 12 of P.L.1971, c.136 (C.26:2H-12).  The order shall also require that the results of the test be reported to the offender, the appropriate Office of Victim-Witness Advocacy if a victim of an offense is tested, and the affected law enforcement officer.  Upon receipt of the result of a test ordered pursuant to subsection a. of this section, the Office of Victim-Witness Advocacy shall provide the victim with appropriate counseling, referral for counseling and if appropriate, referral for health care.  The office shall notify the victim or make appropriate arrangements for the victim to be notified of the test result.
 
	c.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2021, c.342)
 
	d.	The result of a test ordered pursuant to subsection a. of this section shall be confidential and health care providers and employees of the Youth Justice Commission, the Office of Victim-Witness Advocacy, a health care facility or counseling service shall not disclose the result of a test performed pursuant to this section except as authorized herein or as otherwise authorized by law or court order.  The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit disclosure of a test result to the person tested.
 
	e.	Persons who perform tests ordered pursuant to subsection a. of this section in accordance with accepted medical standards for the performance of such tests shall be immune from civil and criminal liability arising from their conduct.
 
	f.	This section shall not be construed to preclude or limit any other testing for AIDS or infection with the HIV or any other related virus identified as a probable causative agent of AIDS which is otherwise permitted by statute, court rule or common law.

	L.1996,c.115,s.8; amended 2021, c.342, s.2; 2025, c.35, s.7.

2A:4A-44  Incarceration - Aggravating and mitigating factors.
	25.  Incarceration--Aggravating and mitigating factors  
 
	a. (1) In determining whether incarceration is an appropriate disposition and in addition to the considerations set forth in subsection i. of section 2 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-21), the court shall consider the following aggravating circumstances:  
 
	(a)	The fact that the nature and circumstances of the act, and the role of the juvenile therein, was committed in an especially heinous, cruel, or depraved manner; 
 
	(b)	The fact that there was grave and serious harm inflicted on the victim and that based upon the juvenile's age or mental capacity the juvenile knew or reasonably should have known that the victim was particularly vulnerable or incapable of resistance due to advanced age, disability, ill-health, or extreme youth, or was for any other reason substantially incapable; 
 
	(c)	The character and attitude of the juvenile indicate that the juvenile is likely to commit another delinquent or criminal act; 
 
	(d)	The juvenile's prior record and the seriousness of any acts for which the juvenile has been adjudicated delinquent; 
 
	(e)	The fact that the juvenile committed the act pursuant to an agreement that the juvenile either pay or be paid for the commission of the act and that the pecuniary incentive was beyond that inherent in the act itself;  
 
	(f)	The fact that the juvenile committed the act against a policeman or other law enforcement officer, correctional employee or fireman, acting in the performance of his duties while in uniform or exhibiting evidence of his authority, or the juvenile committed the act because of the status of the victim as a public servant; 
 
	(g)	The need for deterring the juvenile and others from violating the law; 
 
	(h)	The fact that the juvenile knowingly conspired with others as an organizer, supervisor, or manager to commit continuing criminal activity in concert with two or more persons and the circumstances of the crime show that he has knowingly devoted himself to criminal activity as part of an ongoing business activity; 
 
	(i)	The fact that the juvenile on two separate occasions was adjudged a delinquent on the basis of acts which if committed by an adult would constitute crimes; 
 
	(j)	The impact of the offense on the victim or victims; 
 
	(k)	The impact of the offense on the community; and
 
	(l)	The threat to the safety of the public or any individual posed by the child.  
 
	(2)	In determining whether incarceration is an appropriate disposition the court shall consider the following mitigating circumstances:  
 
	(a)	The child is under the age of 14; 
 
	(b)	The juvenile's conduct neither caused nor threatened serious harm; 
 
	(c)	The juvenile did not contemplate that the juvenile's conduct would cause or threaten serious harm; 
 
	(d)	The juvenile acted under a strong provocation; 
 
	(e)	There were substantial grounds tending to excuse or justify the juvenile's conduct, though failing to establish a defense;
 
	(f)	The victim of the juvenile's conduct induced or facilitated its commission; 
 
	(g)	The juvenile has compensated or will compensate the victim for the damage or injury that the victim has sustained, or will participate in a program of community service; 
 
	(h)	The juvenile has no history of prior delinquency or criminal activity or has led a law-abiding life for a substantial period of time before the commission of the present act; 
 
	(i)	The juvenile's conduct was the result of circumstances unlikely to recur; 
 
	(j)	The character and attitude of the juvenile indicate that the juvenile is unlikely to commit another delinquent or criminal act; 
 
	(k)	The juvenile is particularly likely to respond affirmatively to noncustodial treatment; 
 
	(l)	The separation of the juvenile from the juvenile's family by incarceration of the juvenile would entail excessive hardship to the juvenile or the juvenile's family; 
 
	(m)	The willingness of the juvenile to cooperate with law enforcement authorities; 
 
	(n)	The conduct of the juvenile was substantially influenced by another person more mature than the juvenile.  
 
	b. (1) There shall be a presumption of nonincarceration for any crime or offense of the fourth degree or less committed by a juvenile who has not previously been adjudicated delinquent or convicted of a crime or offense. 
 
	(2)	Where incarceration is imposed, the court and a panel comprised of at least two members of the Youth Justice Commission designated by the executive director and a member of the State Parole Board designated by the chairman shall consider the juvenile's eligibility for release pursuant to the provisions of subsection d. of this section.
 
	c.	The following juveniles shall not be committed to a State juvenile facility: 
 
	(1)	Juveniles age 11 or under unless adjudicated delinquent for the crime of arson or a crime which, if committed by an adult, would be a crime of the first or second degree; and 
 
	(2)	Juveniles who are developmentally disabled as defined in paragraph (1) of subsection a. of section 3 of P.L.1977, c.82 (C.30:6D-3). 
 
	d. (1) When the court determines that, based on the consideration of all the factors set forth in subsection a., the juvenile shall be incarcerated, unless it orders the incarceration pursuant to subsection c. of section 24 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-43), it shall state on the record the reasons for imposing incarceration, including any findings with regard to these factors, and commit the juvenile to the custody of the Youth Justice Commission which shall provide for the juvenile's placement in a suitable juvenile facility pursuant to the conditions set forth in this subsection and for terms not to exceed the maximum terms as provided herein for what would constitute the following crimes if committed by an adult: 
 
	(a)	Murder under 2C:11-3a(1) or (2)		20 years
 
	(b)	Murder under 2C:11-3a(3)			10 years
 
	(c)	Crime of the first degree, except murder	4 years
 
	(d)	Crime of the second degree			3 years
 
	(e)	Crime of the third degree			2 years
 
	(f)	Crime of the fourth degree			1 year
 
	(g)	Disorderly persons offense			6 months
 
	(2)	The period of confinement shall continue until the panel established pursuant to subsection b. of this section determines that the person is eligible for early release on parole or until expiration of the term of confinement, whichever shall occur first; except that in no case shall the period of confinement and parole exceed the maximum provided by law for the offense.  A juvenile shall be granted early release on parole when it appears that the juvenile has made substantial progress toward positive behavioral adjustment and rehabilitative goals articulated by the panel established pursuant to subsection b. of this section to the juvenile.  However, if a juvenile is approved for parole by the panel established pursuant to subsection b. of this section prior to serving one-third of any term imposed for any crime of the first, second, or third degree, including any extended term imposed pursuant to paragraph (3) or (4) of this subsection, or one-fourth of any term imposed for any other crime the granting of parole shall be subject to approval of the sentencing court.  Prior to approving parole, the court shall give the prosecuting attorney notice and an opportunity to be heard.  If the court denies the parole of a juvenile pursuant to this paragraph it shall state its reasons in writing and notify the panel established pursuant to subsection b. of this section, the juvenile, and the juvenile's attorney. The court shall have 30 days from the date of notice of the pending parole to exercise the power granted under this paragraph.  If the court does not respond within that time period, the parole will be deemed approved.  
 
	The panel established pursuant to subsection b. of this section shall determine at the time of release the conditions of parole, which shall be appropriately tailored to the needs of each juvenile.  Any conditions imposed at the time of release or modified thereafter as a graduated intervention in lieu of initiating parole revocation proceedings shall constitute the least restrictive alternatives necessary to promote the successful return of the juvenile to the community.  The juvenile shall not be required to enter or complete a residential community release program, residential treatment program, or other out-of-home placement as a condition of parole unless it is determined that the condition is necessary to protect the safety of the juvenile.
 
	Any juvenile committed under P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-20 et seq.) who is released on parole prior to the expiration of the juvenile's maximum term may be retained under parole supervision for a period not exceeding the unserved portion of the term. The panel established pursuant to subsection b. of this section, the juvenile, the juvenile's attorney, the juvenile's parent or guardian or, with leave of the court any other interested party, may make a motion to the court, with notice to the prosecuting attorney, for the return of the juvenile from a juvenile facility prior to the juvenile's parole and provide for an alternative disposition which would not exceed the duration of the original time to be served in the facility.  
 
	(3)	Upon application by the prosecutor, the court may sentence a juvenile who has been convicted of a crime of the first, second, or third degree if committed by an adult, to an extended term of incarceration beyond the maximum set forth in paragraph (1) of this subsection, if it finds that the juvenile was previously adjudged delinquent on at least two separate occasions, for offenses which, if committed by an adult, would constitute a crime of the first or second degree.  The extended term shall not exceed five additional years for an act which would constitute murder and shall not exceed three additional years for all other crimes of the first degree and shall not exceed two additional years for a crime of the second degree, if committed by an adult, and one additional year for a crime of the third degree, if committed by an adult. 
 
	(4)	Upon application by the prosecutor, when a juvenile is before the court at one time for disposition of three or more unrelated offenses which, if committed by an adult, would constitute crimes of the first, second or third degree and which are not part of the same transaction, the court may sentence the juvenile to an extended term of incarceration not to exceed the maximum of the permissible term for the most serious offense for which the juvenile has been adjudicated plus two additional years. 
 
	(5)	The panel established pursuant to subsection b. of this section may impose a term of post-incarceration supervision following the juvenile's release from custody only if it is deemed necessary to effectuate the juvenile's rehabilitation and reintegration into society.  Post-incarceration supervision shall not exceed six months, except the term may be extended for an additional six months if the panel established pursuant to subsection b. of this section deems continuation of the post-incarceration supervision necessary to effectuate the juvenile's rehabilitation and reintegration into society.  Post-incarceration supervision shall not exceed one year.  Post-incarceration supervision shall not be imposed on any juvenile who has completed a period of parole supervision of six months or more.  The term of post-incarceration supervision shall commence on the date of the expiration of the juvenile's maximum sentence.  During the term of post-incarceration supervision the juvenile shall remain in the community and in the legal custody of the commission.  The juvenile shall not be required to enter or complete a residential community release program, residential treatment program, or other out-of-home placement as a condition of post-incarceration supervision.  A term of post-incarceration supervision imposed pursuant to this paragraph may be terminated by the panel established pursuant to subsection b. of this section or court if the juvenile has made a satisfactory adjustment in the community while under supervision and if continued supervision is not required. 
 
	(6)	The commission shall review the case of each juvenile sentenced to a term of commitment with the commission at least every three months and submit a status report to the court, the prosecutor, and the counsel for the juvenile.  The commission's review and status report shall include, but not be limited to:  
 
	(a)	information on the treatment, care, and custody of the juvenile; 
 
	(b)	whether the juvenile is receiving the mental health, substance use disorder, educational, and other rehabilitative services necessary to promote the juvenile's successful reintegration into the community; 
 
	(c)	any incidents of violence involving the juvenile; and
 
	(d)	the juvenile's eligibility for parole. 
 
	Counsel for the juvenile shall have the opportunity to respond to the report required pursuant to this paragraph.
 
	The commission shall continue to submit quarterly reports to the court until the juvenile is paroled or released at the expiration of the term of incarceration and shall resume the quarterly reviews if the juvenile is returned to the custody of the commission.  The court may conduct a hearing at any time to determine whether commitment with the commission continues to be appropriate pursuant to section 24 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-43) and section 25 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-44), and may release the juvenile or otherwise modify the dispositional order.  Nothing in this paragraph shall abrogate the court's retention of jurisdiction pursuant to section 26 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-45).
 
	e.	If the panel established pursuant to subsection b. of this section determines there is probable cause to believe that the juvenile has seriously or persistently violated the terms and conditions of parole, the commission shall conduct a hearing to determine if the juvenile's parole should be revoked.  The juvenile shall be represented by counsel at the hearing.  The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer who is licensed as an attorney-at-law in this State.  The juvenile shall not be incarcerated prior to the hearing unless the panel established pursuant to subsection b. of this section determines by objective and credible evidence that the juvenile poses an immediate and substantial danger to public safety.  If the juvenile is incarcerated prior to the hearing, the hearing shall be held within 72 hours of the juvenile's return to custody and a written decision made and transmitted to the juvenile and the juvenile's counsel within 48 hours of the hearing.  Upon request of counsel for the juvenile, the hearing officer shall adjourn the hearing for not more than 72 hours.  Subsequent adjournments may be granted upon request of the juvenile and good cause shown.  
 
	The panel established pursuant to subsection b. of this section shall not revoke the parole of a juvenile unless the hearing officer determines, by clear and convincing evidence, that:
 
	(1)	the juvenile has seriously or persistently violated the conditions of parole; 
 
	(2)	the juvenile poses a substantial danger to public safety and no form of community-based supervision would alleviate that danger; and 
 
	(3)	revocation is consistent with the provisions of section 2 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-21).
 
	The procedures and standards set forth in sections 15 through 21 of P.L.1979, c.441 (C.30:4-123.59 through C.30:4-123.65) shall apply to juvenile parole revocation hearings, unless the procedures and standards conflict with those set forth in this subsection.
 
	Notwithstanding a determination that the juvenile violated a condition of parole, the panel established pursuant to subsection b. of this section may modify those conditions.
 
	f.	The panel established pursuant to subsection b. of this section may relieve a juvenile of any parole conditions, and may permit a parolee to reside outside the State pursuant to the provisions of the Interstate Compact on Juveniles, P.L.1955, c.55 (C.9:23-1 to 9:23-4), and after providing notice to the Attorney General, may consent to the supervision of a parolee by the federal government pursuant to the federal Witness Security Reform Act, Pub.L.98-473 (18 U.S.C. s.3521 et seq.). The panel established pursuant to subsection b. of this section may revoke permission, except in the case of a juvenile under the Witness Security Reform Act, or reinstate relieved parole conditions for any period of time during which a juvenile is under its jurisdiction.  
 
	g.	The commission shall promulgate rules and regulations governing the commission's duties and responsibilities concerning parole eligibility, supervision, and revocation.
 
	h.	The member of the State Parole Board who is designated by the chairman to be on the panel established pursuant to subsection b. of this section shall have experience in juvenile justice or have successfully completed a juvenile justice training program to be established by the chairman.  The training program shall be comprised of seven hours of instruction including, but not limited to: emerging scientific knowledge concerning adolescent development, particularly adolescent brain function and how adolescent development relates to incarcerated youth, the influence of peer relationships among adolescents and peer contagion effects, and the effects of juvenile crime on victims.
 
	i.	Any decision concerning parole made by the panel established pursuant to subsection b. of this section shall be unanimous.
 
	L.1982, c.77, s.25; amended 1993, c.133, s.2; 1995, c.280, s.11; 2001, c.408, s.4; 2015, c.89, s.3; 2019, c.363, s.3; 2023, c.177, s.2; 2025, c.35, s.8.

2A:4A-44.1.  State incarceration of juveniles in county juvenile detention facilities
	1.	The Youth Justice Commission established pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1995, c.284 (C.52:17B-170) may enter into an agreement with any county concerning the use of that county's juvenile detention facility for the housing of juveniles the court has placed under the custody of the commission for placement in State correctional facilities only if the county's juvenile detention facility is not over its maximum rated capacity.
 
	Unless the contract otherwise provides or the commission so directs in order to provide for the secure and orderly operation of the facility, a juvenile placed in a county detention facility pursuant to the provisions of this act shall not be segregated from the juveniles otherwise placed in the county detention facility or excluded from any program or activity offered in that facility.
 
	Any contract entered into pursuant to this section shall ensure that educational, vocational, mental health, health and rehabilitative services are provided to the juveniles and that these services are, at minimum, equivalent to those provided to adjudicated juveniles in State-operated facilities.

	L.1992,c.211,s.1; amended 1995,c.280,s.12; 2025, c.35, s.9.

2A:4A-44.2  Application of public health emergency credits to juvenile.
	2. a. Except as provided in subsection b. of this section, the award of public health emergency credits pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2020, c.111 (C.30:4-123.100) shall apply to any juvenile serving a sentence in a State correctional facility operated by the Youth Justice Commission who due to the expiration of the juvenile's term of commitment is scheduled to be released from custody within 365 days.
 
	b.	Public health emergency credits shall not be awarded to any juvenile serving a sentence in a State correctional facility operated by the Youth Justice Commission for:
 
	(1)	murder pursuant to N.J.S.2C:11-3;
 
	(2)	aggravated sexual assault pursuant to subsection a. of N.J.S.2C:14-2; or
 
	(3)	any offense enumerated in N.J.S.2C:47-1 and who is deemed a repetitive, compulsive sex offender.
 
	c.	A juvenile who was serving a sentence in a State correctional facility operated by the Youth Justice Commission during the Public Health Emergency and State of Emergency declared by the Governor in Executive Order 103 of 2020 concerning the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic shall receive public health emergency credits in accordance with section 1 of P.L.2020, c.111 (C.30:4-123.100).
 
	d.	A juvenile scheduled to be released from the custody of the Youth Justice Commission following an award of public health emergency credits pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2020, c.111 (C.30:4-123.100) shall be released on the scheduled release date based on the award of public health emergency credits.
 
	e.  (1)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection d. of this section, a juvenile scheduled to be released from the custody of the Youth Justice Commission following an award of public health emergency credits pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2020, c.111 (C.30:4-123.100) whose scheduled release date is less than 45 days after the effective date of P.L.2020, c.111 (C.30:4-123.100 et al.) shall be released within 45 days after the effective date, in order to allow the Youth Justice Commission to devise and implement a release plan for the juvenile and arrange for services to be provided to the juvenile upon release.
 
	(2)	A juvenile who is released from custody following an award of public health emergency credits pursuant to this section shall be prohibited from making contact with a victim as set forth in section 5 of P.L.2020, c.111 (C.30:4-123.103), which prohibition shall remain in force until the time that the juvenile was scheduled to be released prior to the award of public health emergency credits.
 
	f.	Prior to releasing a juvenile from the custody of the Youth Justice Commission following an award of public health emergency credits pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2020, c.111 (C.30:4-123.100), the Executive Director of the Youth Justice Commission shall: 
 
	(1)	notify the juvenile in writing of the prohibition against making contact with any victim of the crime for which the juvenile was serving a sentence pursuant to section  5 of P.L.2020, c.111 (C.30:4-123.103); 
 
	(2)	notify the juvenile that a violation of the prohibition against contact with the victim is a crime of the fourth degree; and 
 
	(3)	require the juvenile to acknowledge in writing the receipt of the notifications provided pursuant to this subsection.
 
	L.2020, c.111, s.2; amended 2025, c.35, s.10.

2A:4A-44.3  Identification of juveniles scheduled for release.
	6. a. The Executive Director of the Youth Justice Commission shall immediately identify any juvenile who is scheduled to be released from the custody of the Youth Justice Commission within 365 days as a result of the award of public health emergency credits pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2020, c.111 (C.30:4-123.100).
 
	b.	Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, the Executive Director of the Youth Justice Commission shall provide notice to the prosecutor of the county in which the juvenile was adjudicated delinquent or the Attorney General if the matter was prosecuted by the Attorney General.  The notice shall include:
 
	(1)	the name of any juvenile who, due to the expiration of the juvenile's term of commitment, is scheduled to be released from the custody of the Youth Justice Commission within 365 days as a result of the award of public health emergency credits;
 
	(2)	the date on which the juvenile is scheduled to be released from custody based on the award of public health emergency credits; and 
 
	(3)	the date on which the juvenile was scheduled to be released from custody prior to the award of public health emergency credits.
 
	c.	The Executive Director of the Youth Justice Commission shall make available to the public on the Internet website of the Youth Justice Commission, in both English and Spanish, information concerning:
 
	(1)	the procedures for filing an application for a restraining order pursuant to the "Prevention of Domestic Violence Act of 1991," P.L.1991, c.261 (C.2C:25-17 et seq.);
 
	(2)	resources for victims of domestic violence; and
 
	(3)	procedures for filing with the court a petition to dissolve the prohibition established pursuant to section  5 of P.L.2020, c.111 (C.30:4-123.103) prohibiting a juvenile from making contact with any victim of the crime for which the juvenile was serving a sentence.
 
	L.2020, c.111, s.6; amended 2025, c.35, s.11.

2A:4A-44.4  Actions of prosecutor, Attorney General.
	7.	Notwithstanding the provisions of any law to the contrary, upon receipt of notice from the Executive Director of the Youth Justice Commission that a juvenile is scheduled to be released from the custody of the Youth Justice Commission within 365 days based on the award of public health emergency credits pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2020, c.111 (C.30:4-123.100), the prosecutor or Attorney General, prior to the juvenile's scheduled release date, may:
 
	a.	use any reasonable means available to notify any identifiable victim of the crime for which the juvenile is serving a sentence in a State correctional facility operated by the Youth Justice Commission of the juvenile's scheduled release date;
 
	b.	notify the identifiable victim that the law prohibits the juvenile from having any contact with the victim unless a petition is filed with the court to dissolve the prohibition in accordance with the procedures established by the court;
 
	c.	notify the victim of the duration of the prohibition against the juvenile having contact with the victim;
 
	d.	notify the victim of the penalties imposed for the juvenile's violation of the prohibition against contact;
 
	e.	provide information to the victim concerning how a petition may be filed with the court to dissolve the prohibition against the juvenile having contact with the victim; and
 
	f.	provide information to the victim concerning the procedures for filing an application for a restraining order pursuant to the "Prevention of Domestic Violence Act of 1991," P.L.1991, c.261 (C.2C:25-17 et seq.), and resources for victims of domestic violence.
 
	L.2020, c.111, s.7; amended 2025, c.35, s.12.

2A:4A-45.  Retention of jurisdiction
	26. 	Retention of jurisdiction.
	a. 	The court shall retain jurisdiction over any case in which it has entered a disposition under paragraph 7 of subsection b. or subsection c. of section 24 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-43) or under section 25 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-44) for the duration of that disposition of commitment or incarceration and may substitute any disposition otherwise available to it under section 24 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-43) other than incarceration.

	b. 	Except as provided for in subsection a., the court shall retain jurisdiction over any case in which it has entered a disposition under section 24 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-43) and may at any time for the duration of that disposition, if after hearing, and notice to the prosecuting attorney, it finds violation of the conditions of the order of disposition, substitute any other disposition which it might have made originally.

	c. 	The court may by its order retain jurisdiction in any other case.

	L.1982,c.77,s.26; amended 1995,c.280,s.13.

2A:4A-46  Disposition of juvenile-family crisis.
 
	27. a. The court may order any disposition in a juvenile-family crisis provided for in paragraphs (2), (4), (5), (6), (7) and (13) of subsection b. of section 24 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-43) or other disposition specifically provided for in P.L.1982, c.80 (C.2A:4A-76 et seq.).
 
	b.	No juvenile involved in a juvenile-family crisis shall be committed to or placed in any institution or facility established for the care of delinquent children or in any facility, other than an institution for persons with intellectual disabilities, a mental hospital or facility for the care of persons addicted to controlled dangerous substances, which physically restricts such juvenile committed to or placed in it.
 
	L.1982, c.77, s.27; amended 1995, c.280, s.14; 2010, c.50, s.1.

2A:4A-47.  Termination of orders of disposition 
	28. a.  Any order of disposition entered in a case under this act shall terminate when the juvenile who is the subject of the order attains the age of 18, or three years from the date of the order whichever is later unless such order involves incarceration or is sooner terminated by its terms or by order of the court.

	b. 	Any agency providing services pursuant to any court ordered disposition shall give prior notice to the court at least 30 days before terminating these services which notice shall include the date of intended termination.

	c. 	Upon termination of an order of disposition, maximum term, parole or community supervision the court shall enter an order requiring payment of any amounts owed by the juvenile or the parent or guardian of the juvenile pursuant to the court ordered disposition and shall file a copy of the order with the Clerk of the Superior Court who shall enter the following information upon the record of docketed judgments;

	(1)	the name of the juvenile or the juvenile's parent or guardian as judgment debtor;

	(2)	the amount of the assessment imposed pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1979, c.396 (C.2C:43-3.1) and the Victims of Crime Compensation Board as a judgment creditor in that amount;

	(3)	the amount of any restitution ordered and the name of any person entitled to receive payment as judgment creditors in the amount and according to the priority set by the court;

	(4)	the amount of any fine and the governmental entity entitled to receive payment pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1979, c.396 (C.2C:46-4.)

	(5)	the amount of the mandatory Drug Enforcement and Demand Reduction penalty imposed;

	(6)	the amount of the forensic laboratory fee imposed; and

	(7) 	the date of the order.

	Where there is more than one judgment creditor the creditors shall be given priority consistent with the provisions of section 13 of P.L.1991, c.329 (C.2C:46-4.1).  These entries shall have the same force as a civil judgment docketed in the Superior Court.

	L.1982,c.77,s.28; amended 1995,c.281,s.1.

2A:4A-48.  Effect of disposition
    No disposition under this act shall operate to impose any of the civil disabilities ordinarily imposed by virtue of a criminal conviction, nor shall a  juvenile be deemed a criminal by reason of such disposition.

    The disposition of a case under this act shall not be admissible against the  juvenile in any criminal or penal case or proceeding in any other court except  for consideration in sentencing, or as otherwise provided by law.

     L.1982, c. 77, s. 29, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4A-60  Disclosure of juvenile information; penalties for disclosure.
	1.	Disclosure of juvenile information; penalties for disclosure.
 
	a.	Social, medical, psychological, legal and other records of the court and probation division, and records of law enforcement agencies, pertaining to juveniles charged as a delinquent or found to be part of a juvenile-family crisis, shall be strictly safeguarded from public inspection.  Such records shall be made available only to:
 
	(1)	Any court or probation division;
 
	(2)	The Attorney General or county prosecutor;
 
	(3)	The parents or guardian and to the attorney of the juvenile;
 
	(4)	The Department of Human Services or Department of Children and Families, if providing care or custody of the juvenile;
 
	(5)	Any institution or facility to which the juvenile is currently committed or in which the juvenile is placed;
 
	(6)	Any person or agency interested in a case or in the work of the agency keeping the records, by order of the court for good cause shown, except that information concerning adjudications of delinquency, records of custodial confinement, payments owed on assessments imposed pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1979, c.396 (C.2C:43-3.1) or restitution ordered following conviction of a crime or adjudication of delinquency, and the juvenile's financial resources, shall be made available upon request to the Victims of Crime Compensation Agency established pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2007, c.95 (C.52:4B-3.2), which shall keep such information and records confidential;
 
	(7)	The Youth Justice Commission established pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1995, c.284 (C.52:17B-170);
 
	(8)	Law enforcement agencies for the purpose of reviewing applications for a permit to purchase a handgun or firearms purchaser identification card;
 
	(9)	Any potential party in a subsequent civil action for damages related to an act of delinquency committed by a juvenile, including the victim or a member of the victim's immediate family, regardless of whether the action has been filed against the juvenile; provided, however, that records available under this paragraph shall be limited to official court documents, such as complaints, pleadings and orders, and that such records may be disclosed by the recipient only in connection with asserting legal claims or obtaining indemnification on behalf of the victim or the victim's family and otherwise shall be safeguarded from disclosure to other members of the public.  Any potential party in a civil action related to the juvenile offense may file a motion with the civil trial judge seeking to have the juvenile's social, medical or psychological records admitted into evidence in a civil proceeding for damages;
 
	(10)  Any potential party in a subsequent civil action for damages related to an act of delinquency committed by a juvenile, including the victim or a member of the victim's immediate family, regardless of whether the action has been filed against the juvenile; provided, however, that records available under this paragraph shall be limited to police or investigation reports concerning acts of delinquency, which shall be disclosed by a law enforcement agency only with the approval of the County Prosecutor's Office or the Division of Criminal Justice.  Prior to disclosure, all personal information regarding all individuals, other than the requesting party and the arresting or investigating officer, shall be redacted.  Such records may be disclosed by the recipient only in connection with asserting legal claims or obtaining indemnification on behalf of the victim or the victim's family, and otherwise shall be safeguarded from disclosure to other members of the public;
 
	(11)  The Office of the Child Advocate established pursuant to P.L.2005, c.155 (C.52:27EE-1 et al.).  Disclosure of juvenile information received by the child advocate pursuant to this paragraph shall be in accordance with the provisions of section 76 of P.L.2005, c.155 (C.52:27EE-76); 
 
	(12)  Law enforcement agencies with respect to information available on the juvenile central registry maintained by the courts pursuant to subsection g. of this section, including, but not limited to: records of official court documents, such as complaints, pleadings and orders for the purpose of obtaining juvenile arrest information; juvenile disposition information; juvenile pretrial information; and information concerning the probation status of a juvenile; and
 
	(13)  A Court Appointed Special Advocate as defined in section 1 of P.L.2009, c.217 (C.2A:4A-92).
 
	b.	Records of law enforcement agencies may be disclosed for law enforcement purposes, or for the purpose of reviewing applications for a permit to purchase a handgun or a firearms purchaser identification card to any law enforcement agency of this State, another state or the United States, and the identity of a juvenile under warrant for arrest for commission of an act that would constitute a crime if committed by an adult may be disclosed to the public when necessary to execution of the warrant.
 
	c.	At the time of charge, adjudication or disposition, information as to the identity of a juvenile charged with an offense, the offense charged, the adjudication and disposition shall, upon request, be disclosed to:
 
	(1)	The victim or a member of the victim's immediate family;
 
	(2)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2005, c.165).
 
	(3)	On a confidential basis, the principal of the school where the juvenile is enrolled for use by the principal and such members of the staff and faculty of the school as the principal deems appropriate for maintaining order, safety or discipline in the school or to planning programs relevant to the juvenile's educational and social development, provided that no record of such information shall be maintained except as authorized by regulation of the Department of Education; or
 
	(4)	A party in a subsequent legal proceeding involving the juvenile, upon approval by the court.
 
	d.	A law enforcement or prosecuting agency shall, at the time of a charge, adjudication or disposition, send written notice to the principal of the school where the juvenile is enrolled of the identity of the juvenile charged, the offense charged, the adjudication and the disposition if:
 
	(1)	The offense occurred on school property or a school bus, occurred at a school-sponsored function or was committed against an employee or official of the school; or
 
	(2)	The juvenile was taken into custody as a result of information or evidence provided by school officials; or
 
	(3)	The offense, if committed by an adult, would constitute a crime, and the offense:
 
	(a)	resulted in death or serious bodily injury or involved an attempt or conspiracy to cause death or serious bodily injury; or
 
	(b)	involved the unlawful use or possession of a firearm or other weapon; or
 
	(c)	involved the unlawful manufacture, distribution or possession with intent to distribute a controlled dangerous substance or controlled substance analog; or
 
	(d)	was committed by a juvenile who acted with a purpose to intimidate an individual or group of individuals because of race, color, religion, sexual orientation or ethnicity; or
 
	(e)	would be a crime of the first, second, or third degree.
 
	Information provided to the principal pursuant to this subsection shall be maintained by the school and shall be treated as confidential but may be made available to such members of the staff and faculty of the school as the principal deems appropriate for maintaining order, safety or discipline in the school or for planning programs relevant to a juvenile's educational and social development.
 
	e.	Nothing in this section prohibits a law enforcement or prosecuting agency from providing the principal of a school with information identifying one or more juveniles who are under investigation or have been taken into custody for commission of any act that would constitute an offense if committed by an adult when the law enforcement or prosecuting agency determines that the information may be useful to the principal in maintaining order, safety or discipline in the school or in planning programs relevant to the juvenile's educational and social development.  Information provided to the principal pursuant to this subsection shall be treated as confidential but may be made available to such members of the staff and faculty of the school as the principal deems appropriate for maintaining order, safety or discipline in the school or for planning programs relevant to the juvenile's educational and social development.  No information provided pursuant to this section shall be maintained.
 
	f.	Information as to the identity of a juvenile adjudicated delinquent, the offense, the adjudication and the disposition shall be disclosed to the public where the offense for which the juvenile has been adjudicated delinquent if committed by an adult, would constitute a crime of the first, second or third degree, or aggravated assault, destruction or damage to property to an extent of more than $500.00, unless upon application at the time of disposition the juvenile demonstrates a substantial likelihood that specific and extraordinary harm would result from such disclosure in the specific case.  Where the court finds that disclosure would be harmful to the juvenile, the reasons therefor shall be stated on the record.
 
	g. (1) Nothing in this section shall prohibit the establishment and maintaining of a central registry of the records of law enforcement agencies relating to juveniles for the purpose of exchange between State and local law enforcement agencies and prosecutors of this State, another state, or the United States.  These records of law enforcement agencies shall be available on a 24-hour basis.
 
	(2)	Certain information and records relating to juveniles in the central registry maintained by the courts, as prescribed in paragraph (12) of subsection a. of this section, shall be available to State and local law enforcement agencies and prosecutors on a 24-hour basis.
 
	h.	Whoever, except as provided by law, knowingly discloses, publishes, receives, or makes use of or knowingly permits the unauthorized use of information concerning a particular juvenile derived from records listed in subsection a. or acquired in the course of court proceedings, probation, or police duties, shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a disorderly persons offense.
 
	i.	Juvenile delinquency proceedings.
 
	(1)	Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the court may, upon application by the juvenile or his parent or guardian, the prosecutor or any other interested party, including the victim or complainant or members of the news media, permit public attendance during any court proceeding at a delinquency case, where it determines that a substantial likelihood that specific harm to the juvenile would not result.  The court shall have the authority to limit and control attendance in any manner and to the extent it deems appropriate;
 
	(2)	The court or, in cases where the county prosecutor has entered an appearance, the county prosecutor shall notify the victim or a member of the victim's immediate family of any court proceeding involving the juvenile and the court shall permit the attendance of the victim or family member at the proceeding except when, prior to completing testimony as a witness, the victim or family member is properly sequestered in accordance with the law or the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey or when the juvenile or the juvenile's family member shows, by clear and convincing evidence, that such attendance would result in a substantial likelihood that specific harm to the juvenile would result from the attendance of the victim or a family member at a proceeding or any portion of a proceeding and that such harm substantially outweighs the interest of the victim or family member to attend that portion of the proceeding;
 
	(3)	The court shall permit a victim, or a family member of a victim to make a statement prior to ordering a disposition in any delinquency proceeding involving an offense that would constitute a crime if committed by an adult.
 
	j.	The Department of Education, in consultation with the Attorney General, shall adopt, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), rules and regulations concerning the creation, maintenance and disclosure of pupil records including information acquired pursuant to this section.
 
	L.1982, c.79, s.1; amended 1994, c.56, s.1; 1995, c.135, s.8; 1995, c.280, s.15; 2001, c.3, s.2; 2001, c.191, s.1; 2001, c.407, s.1; 2005, c.155, s.106; 2005, c.165; 2006, c.47, s.19; 2009, c.157, s.3; 2009, c.217, s.2; 2025, c.35, s.13.

2A:4A-60.1.  Juvenile information, records; rules governing disclosure adoption
	2.	The Supreme Court of New Jersey may adopt Rules of Court governing the disclosure to State and local law enforcement agencies and prosecutors of  information and records relating to juveniles in the central registry maintained by the courts pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection g. of section 1 of P.L.1982, c.79 (C.2A:4A-60).

	L.2001,c.191,s.2.

2A:4A-60.2  Disclosure, use of juvenile's statement made in course of screening.
 
	4.	Except as otherwise required by law, any statement made by a juvenile in the course of a suicide or mental health screening, conducted with or without the juvenile's consent, or reports or records produced pursuant to such suicide or mental health screening, shall not be:
 
	a.	disclosed, except by an attorney representing the juvenile and with the juvenile's consent, to the court, prosecutor, or any law enforcement officer; or
 
	b.	used in any investigation or delinquency or criminal proceeding involving the juvenile that is currently pending or subsequently initiated.
 
	L.2007, c.315, s.4.

2A:4A-60.3  Disclosure of juvenile's information to court; conditions.
 
	13.	Reports or records relating to mental health services provided to a juvenile prior to an adjudication of delinquency or a finding of guilt, regardless of whether such mental health services were provided with or without the consent of the juvenile, may be disclosed to the court only after an adjudication of delinquency or a finding of guilt has been entered; provided however, an attorney representing a juvenile, with the juvenile's consent, may disclose such reports or records prior to the adjudication of delinquency or finding of guilt.  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to limit in any manner the applicability of any privilege or law that otherwise prohibits disclosure of a juvenile's mental health records.
 
	L.2007, c.315, s.13.

2A:4A-61.    Fingerprint records; photographs of juveniles  
    2.   Fingerprint records; photographs of juveniles.

	a.   Fingerprints of a juvenile may be taken only in the following circumstances:  

   (1)  Where latent fingerprints are found during the investigation of an offense and a law enforcement officer has reason to believe that they are those of a juvenile, he may, with the consent of the court or juvenile and his parent or guardian fingerprint the juvenile for the purpose of comparison with the latent fingerprints.  Fingerprint records taken pursuant to this paragraph may be retained by the department or agency taking them and shall be destroyed when the purpose for the taking of fingerprints has been fulfilled.  

   (2)  Where a juvenile is detained in or committed to an institution, that institution may fingerprint the juvenile for the purpose of identification. Fingerprint records taken pursuant to this paragraph may be retained by the institution taking them and shall be destroyed when the purpose for taking them has been fulfilled, except that if the juvenile was detained or committed as the result of an adjudication of delinquency, the fingerprint records may be retained by the institution.  

   (3)  Where a juvenile 14 years of age or older is charged with delinquency on the basis of an act which, if committed by an adult, would constitute a crime, fingerprint records taken pursuant to this paragraph may be retained by a law enforcement agency for criminal identification purposes.  

   b.   No juvenile under the age of 14 shall be photographed for criminal identification purposes without the consent of the court or of the juvenile and his parent or guardian.  

   c.   Fingerprints of a juvenile shall be taken if the juvenile is adjudicated delinquent on the basis of an act which, if committed by an adult, would constitute a crime.  

   d.   Fingerprints taken pursuant to subsection c. of this section shall be taken according to the fingerprint system of identification established by the Superintendent of State Police on the forms prescribed and shall be forwarded without delay to the State Bureau of Identification together with such information concerning the juvenile and the adjudication as the superintendent may require.  The State Bureau of Identification shall retain records received pursuant to this subsection for the sole purpose of exchange between State or local law enforcement agencies of this State, and law enforcement agencies of another state or the United States.  

   L.1982,c.79,s.2; amended 1994,c.56,s.2.  

2A:4A-62.    Sealing of records  
    3.   Sealing of records.     a.   On motion of a person who has been the subject of a complaint filed under this act or on its own motion, the court may vacate its order and findings and order the nondisclosure of social, medical, psychological, legal and other records of the court and probation services, and records of law enforcement agencies if it finds:  

   (1)  Two years have elapsed since the final discharge of the person from legal custody or supervision, or two years have elapsed after the entry of any other court order not involving custody or supervision; and  

   (2)  He has not been convicted of a crime, or a disorderly persons offense or adjudged delinquent, during the two years prior to the filing of the motion, and no proceeding or complaint is pending seeking such conviction or adjudication.  

   b.   In any case wherein a juvenile has been adjudicated delinquent and said juvenile enlists in any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States, he may at any time after the date of such adjudication present a duly verified petition to the court where such adjudication was entered, setting forth all the facts in the matter, including proof of enlistment and acceptance in said armed forces, and praying for the relief provided in this section, and subject to the limitations hereinafter provided in this section, an order may be granted to seal all the records concerning such adjudication including records of the court, probation services and law enforcement agencies.  Failure to enter the armed forces shall have the effect of nullifying the sealing order. 

   c.   Reasonable written notice of the motion shall be given to:

  

   (1)  The Attorney General and the county prosecutor;

  

   (2)  The authority granting the discharge if the final discharge was from an institution, parole, or probation; and  

   (3)  The law enforcement office, department, and central depository having custody of the files and records if such files and records are included in the motion.  

   d.   Upon the entry of the order, the proceedings in the case shall be sealed and all index references shall be marked "not available" or "no record" and law enforcement officers and departments shall reply and the person may reply to any inquiry that there is no record with respect to such person, except that records may be maintained for purposes of prior offender status, identification and law enforcement purposes.  Copies of the order shall be sent to each agency or official named therein.  

   Inspection of the files and records included in the order may thereafter be permitted by the court only upon motion and only to those persons named in the motion; provided, however, the court, in its discretion, may by special order in an individual case permit inspection by or release of information in the records to any clinic, hospital, or agency which has the person under care or treatment or to individuals or agencies engaged in fact-finding or research.  

   e.   Any adjudication of delinquency or conviction of a crime subsequent to sealing shall have the effect of nullifying the sealing order.  

   f.   Expungement of juvenile records shall be governed by the applicable provisions of chapter 52 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes.  

   L.1982,c.79,s.3; amended 1994,c.56,s.3.  

2A:4A-70.    County court intake services  
     County court intake services.  a.  Each county shall establish a court intake service which shall have among its responsibilities the screening of juvenile delinquency complaints and juvenile-family crisis referrals.  The intake service shall operate in compliance with standards established by the Supreme Court, but in no instance shall the standards for personnel employed as counselors be less than a master's degree from an accredited institution in mental health or social or behavioral science discipline including degrees in social work, counseling, counseling psychology, mental health counseling or education.  Equivalent experience is acceptable when it consists of a minimum of an associate's degree with a concentration in one of the behavioral sciences and a minimum of five years' experience working with troubled youth and their families or a bachelor's degree in one of the behavioral sciences and two year's experience working with troubled youth and their families. Intake personnel should also receive training in drug and alcohol abuse.  

    b.   The court intake service shall make arrangements for the receipt of complaints, on a continuous basis, in situations where the subject of the complaint is a juvenile, or referrals through crisis intervention units where a juvenile-family crisis may exist.  It shall assist the court in screening referrals for court intervention, making referrals to appropriate agencies, reviewing and approving alternative living arrangements as provided by law, determining that jurisdiction for juvenile-family crisis proceedings may exist prior to filing a petition, and in monitoring referrals for development and implementation of family service plans. Every complaint or juvenile-family crisis petition shall be reviewed by the court intake service unless otherwise ordered by the court.  

    c.   The court intake service shall have the responsibility for monitoring, on a 24-hour a day, 7-day a week basis, the admission of alleged delinquents to the detention or shelter care facilities and no juvenile may be admitted to a detention or shelter care facility without its approval.  

    d.   The Supreme Court shall have the authority to issue rules governing the duties, responsibilities, and practices of court intake services as it deems necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act; establish guidelines and procedures for the training of intake services staff; establish reporting procedures to be followed by court intake services in providing data for its evaluation; and conduct, at least annually, an evaluation of all intake services.  

    L.1982,c.81,s.1; amended 1991,c.119,s.3.  

2A:4A-71  Review and processing of complaints.
 
 	2.	Review and processing of complaints.  

	a.	The jurisdiction of the court in any complaint filed pursuant to section 11 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-30) shall extend to the juvenile who is the subject of the complaint and his parents or guardian. 
 
	b.	Every complaint shall be reviewed by court intake services for recommendation as to whether the complaint should be dismissed, diverted, or referred for court action.  Where the complaint alleges a crime which, if committed by an adult, would be a crime of the first, second, third or fourth degree, or alleges a repetitive disorderly persons offense or any disorderly persons offense defined in chapter 35 or chapter 36 of Title 2C, the complaint shall be referred for court action, unless the prosecutor otherwise consents to diversion.  Court intake services shall consider the following factors in determining whether to recommend diversion: 
 
	(1)	The seriousness of the alleged offense or conduct and the circumstances in which it occurred;
 
	(2)	The age and maturity of the juvenile;
 
	(3)	The risk that the juvenile presents as a substantial danger to others;
 
	(4)	The family circumstances, including any history of drugs, alcohol abuse or child abuse on the part of the juvenile, his parents or guardian;
 
	(5)	The nature and number of contacts with court intake services and the court that the juvenile or his family have had;
 
	(6)	The outcome of those contacts, including the services to which the juvenile or family have been referred and the results of those referrals;
 
	(7)	The availability of appropriate services outside referral to the court;
 
	(8)	Any recommendations expressed by the victim or complainant, or arresting officer, as to how the case should be resolved; 
 
	(9)	Any recommendation expressed by the county prosecutor; 
 
	(10) The amenability of the juvenile to participation in a remedial education or counseling program that satisfies the requirements of subsection b. of section 2 of P.L.2011, c.128 (C.2A:4A-71.1) if the offense alleged is an eligible offense as defined in subsection c. of section 2 of P.L.2011, c.128 (C.2A:4A-71.1); and
 
	(11) Any information relevant to the offense in any case where the juvenile is charged with an act which if committed by an adult would constitute prostitution in violation of N.J.S.2C:34-1 or any offense which the juvenile alleges is related to the juvenile being a victim of human trafficking.
 
	L.1982, c.81, s.2; amended 1988, c.44, s.17; 2011, c.128, s.1; 2011, c.195, s.4.

2A:4A-71.1  Diversionary programs for certain juveniles.
	2. a. Where a complaint against a juvenile pursuant to section 11 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-30) alleges that the juvenile has committed an eligible offense as defined in subsection c. of this section and the court has approved diversion of the complaint pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1982, c.81 (C.2A:4A-73), the resolution of the complaint shall include the juvenile's participation in a remedial education or counseling program.  The court shall take into consideration the availability of such a program in the area in which the juvenile resides and, where appropriate, may permit the juvenile to participate in a self-guided awareness program in lieu of a remedial education or counseling program provided that it satisfies the requirements of subsection b. of this section.
 
	b.	A remedial education or counseling program satisfies the requirements of P.L.2011, c.128 if the program is designed to increase the juvenile's awareness of:
 
	(1)	the legal consequences and penalties for sharing sexually suggestive or explicit materials, including applicable federal and State statutes;
 
	(2)	the non-legal consequences of sharing sexually suggestive or explicit materials including, but not limited to, the effect on relationships, loss of educational and employment opportunities, and being barred or removed from school programs and extracurricular activities;
 
	(3)	the potential, based upon the unique characteristics of cyberspace and the Internet, of long-term and unforeseen consequences for sharing sexually suggestive or explicit materials; and
 
	(4)	the possible connection between bullying and cyber-bullying and juveniles sharing sexually suggestive or explicit materials.
 
	c.	As used in P.L.2011, c.128, "eligible offense" means an offense in which:
 
	(1)	the facts of the case involve the creation, exhibition, or distribution of a photograph depicting nudity or portraying a child in a sexually suggestive manner, as defined in N.J.S.2C:24-4, through the use of an electronic communication device, an interactive wireless communications device, or a computer; and
 
	(2)	the creator and subject of the photograph are juveniles or were juveniles at the time of its making.
 
	L.2011, c.128, s.2; amended 2017, c.141, s.2; 2021, c.342, s.3.

2A:4A-72.  Recommendation of diversion
	3.	a.  Where court intake services recommends diverting the juvenile, the reasons for the recommendation shall be submitted by intake services and approved by the court before the case is deemed diverted.
 
	b.	Where, in determining whether to recommend diversion, court intake services has reason to believe that a parent or guardian is a person with a substance use disorder, the basis for this determination shall be stated  in its recommendation to the court.
 
	c.	The county prosecutor shall receive a copy of each complaint filed pursuant to section 11 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-30) promptly after the filing of the complaint.
 
	d.	Within 5 days after receiving a complaint, the intake services officer shall advise the presiding judge and the prosecuting attorney of intake service's recommendation, as well as any other recommendations or objections received as to the complaint.  In determining whether to divert, the court may hold a hearing to consider the recommendations and any objections submitted by court intake services in light of the factors provided in this section.  The court shall give notice of the hearing to the juvenile, his parents or guardian, the prosecutor, arresting police officer and complainant or victim. Each party shall have the right to be heard on the matter.  If the court finds that not enough information has been received to make a determination, a further hearing may be ordered. The court may dismiss the complaint upon a finding that the facts as alleged are not sufficient to establish jurisdiction, or that probable cause has not been shown that the juvenile committed a delinquent act.

     L.1982, c. 81, s. 3, eff. Dec. 31, 1983; amended 2023, c.177, s.3.

2A:4A-73.  Diverting complaints
    a.  The court may divert a complaint filed pursuant to section 11 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-30) to intake conferences or juvenile conference committees.  Where the complaint alleges a disorderly persons or petty disorderly persons offense the court may dispose of the case as a juvenile-family crisis pursuant to P.L.1982, c.80 (C.2A:4A-76 et seq.).  The county  prosecutor shall be promptly notified of the diversion of a complaint.

    b.  The complainant or victim of any offense committed by a juvenile diverted by the court, which offense would be a crime if committed by an adult,  shall receive a statement as to the reasons for the proposed diversion.

     L.1982, c. 81, s. 4, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4A-74  Court intake service conference.
  
	5.	Court intake service conference. a. Where the juvenile is diverted to a court intake service conference, notices of the conference shall be sent to the juvenile and his parents or guardian and to the complainant or victim.  The parties may be requested to bring to the conference all pertinent documents in their possession, including medical, social, and school records.
 
	b.	In determining the appropriate resolution of a complaint, the following factors shall be considered by court intake services:
 
	(1)	The seriousness of the alleged offense or conduct and the circumstances in which it occurred;
 
	(2)	The age and maturity of the juvenile;
 
	(3)	The risk that the juvenile presents as a substantial danger to others;
 
	(4)	The family circumstances, including any history of drugs, alcohol abuse or child abuse on the part of the juvenile, his parents or guardian;
 
	(5)	The nature and number of contacts with court intake services and the court that the juvenile and his family have had;
 
	(6)	The outcome of those contacts, including the services to which the juvenile or family have been referred and the results of those referrals;
 
	(7)	The availability of appropriate services;
 
	(8)	Any recommendations expressed by the victim or complainant, or arresting officer, as to how the case should be disposed;
 
	(9)	Whether diversion can be accomplished in a manner that holds the juvenile accountable for the conduct;
 
	(10) The impact of the offense on the victim or victims;
 
	(11) The impact of the offense on the community; and
 
	(12) Any information relevant to the offense in any case where the juvenile is charged with an act which if committed by an adult would constitute prostitution in violation of N.J.S.2C:34-1 or any offense which the juvenile alleges is related to the juvenile being a victim of human trafficking.
 
	c.	Each juvenile shall be reviewed without a presumption of guilt.  The intake conference shall be concerned primarily with providing balanced attention to the protection of the community, the imposition of accountability for offenses committed, fostering interaction and dialogue between the offender, victim and community and the development of competencies to enable the juvenile offender to become a responsible and productive member of the community. In addition, the conference shall be concerned with preventing more serious future misconduct by the juvenile offender by obtaining the cooperation of the juvenile and his parents or guardian in complying with its recommendations.  The court may schedule a hearing where the complainant or victim objects to the recommendations from the conference.
 
	d.	The resolution from the conference may include but shall not be limited to counseling, restitution, referral to appropriate community agencies, or any other community work programs or other conditions consistent with diversion that aids in providing balanced attention to the protection of the community, the imposition of accountability for offenses committed, fostering interaction and dialogue between the offender, victim and community and the development of competencies to enable the juvenile offender to become a responsible and productive member of the community, provided that:
 
	(1)	Obligations imposed as a result of the intake conference shall be an order of the court approved by the presiding judge and shall be set forth in writing and may not exceed six months.  The juvenile and his or her parents or guardian shall receive copies, as shall any agencies providing services under the agreement;
 
	(2)	The court intake service worker shall inform the juvenile and the juvenile's parents or guardian in writing of their right to object at any time prior to their written agreement to the facts or terms of the intake conference decision, and if objections arise, the intake service worker may alter the terms of the proposed agreement or refer the matter to the presiding judge who shall determine if the complaint will be heard in court or returned to intake conference for further action;
 
	(3)	Written agreement pursuant to intake conferences may be terminated at any time upon the request of the juvenile and the matter referred to the presiding judge;
 
	(4)	The court intake services conference may not order the confinement of a juvenile, place a juvenile on probation, or remove a juvenile from his family as a disposition; and
 
	(5)	If, at any time during the diversion period, the court intake service worker determines that the obligations imposed under the written agreement are not being met, the intake worker shall notify the presiding judge in writing.  In the case of failure to comply with the obligations imposed under the agreement by the parents or guardian, the court may proceed against such persons for enforcement of the agreement.  In the case of failure to comply by the juvenile, the matter shall be referred to the court for action.
 
	e.	At the end of the diversion period a second court intake services conference may be held with all parties to the written agreement present to ascertain if the terms of the agreement have been fulfilled.  If all conditions have been met, the intake worker shall so inform the presiding judge in writing who shall order the complaint dismissed.  A copy of the order dismissing the complaint shall be sent to the juvenile.  If the conditions of the written agreement have not been met, the intake worker may refer the matter to the presiding judge who shall determine if the complaint will be heard in court or returned to court intake services for further action.  Based on the evaluations required under this subsection, the intake conference agreement may be extended beyond the six-month maximum if all parties agree.  In no case shall an intake conference agreement exceed nine months.
 
	f.	All proceedings before the conference are confidential and they shall receive only those records which in the court's judgment are necessary to aid in making a recommendation.
 
	L.1982, c.81, s.5; amended 1995, c.280, s.16; 2001, c.408, s.5; 2011, c.195, s.5.

2A:4A-75  Juvenile conference committees.

	6. a. The court may appoint one or more juvenile conference committees for each county or municipality to hear and decide matters referred to it by the court.

	b.	The method of appointment and terms of membership to the committees shall be made pursuant to guidelines developed by the Supreme Court.

	c.	Where the juvenile is diverted to a juvenile conference committee, notices of the conference shall be sent to the juvenile and his parents or guardian and to the complainant or victim.  The parties may be requested to bring to the conference all pertinent documents in their possession, including medical, social, and school records.

	d.	The committee shall serve under the authority of the court in hearing and deciding such matters involving alleged juvenile offenders as are specifically referred to it by the court.  Each juvenile shall be reviewed without a presumption of guilt.  The committee shall be concerned primarily with providing balanced attention to the protection of the community, the imposition of accountability for offenses committed, fostering interaction and dialogue between the offender, victim and community and the development of competencies to enable the juvenile offender to become a responsible and productive member of the community.  In addition, the committee shall be concerned with preventing more serious future misconduct by the juvenile offender by obtaining the cooperation of the juvenile and his parents or guardian in complying with its recommendations.  The court may schedule a hearing where the complainant or victim objects to the recommendations from the conference.

	e.	The committee shall provide for the resolution of the matter and shall supervise and follow up compliance with its recommendations in the same manner and under the same limitations and with the same sanctions as the court intake service conference.

	f.	All proceedings before the juvenile conference committee are confidential and include only those records which in the court's judgment are necessary to aid in making a recommendation.

	L.1982,c.81,s.6; amended 2001, c.408, s.6.

2A:4A-76.  Juvenile-family crisis intervention units established
    There shall be established in each county one or more juvenile-family crisis  intervention units.  Each unit shall operate either as a part of the court  intake service, or where provided for by the county, through any other appropriate office or private service pursuant to an agreement with the Administrative Office of the Courts, provided that all such units shall be subject to the Rules of Court.  In any county where a crisis intervention service system, designed to attend and stabilize juvenile and family problems on a county-wide basis, is in operation as of the effective date of this act, such service shall satisfy all the provisions of this act, and may continue in its present form and under its present procedures, provided that it is operating in substantial compliance with the specific requirements and goals set forth in this act.

     L.1982, c. 80, s. 1, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4A-77.  Call service to attend and stabilize juvenile-family crises; referrals;  information;  form.
	2.	The purpose of the unit shall be to provide a continuous 24-hour on call service designed to attend and stabilize juvenile-family crises as defined pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-22).  The juvenile-family crisis intervention unit shall respond immediately to any referral, complaint or information made pursuant to section 5 or 6 of this act, except if, upon preliminary investigation, it appears that a juvenile-family crisis within the meaning of this act does not exist or that an immediate referral to another agency would be more appropriate.
 
	Upon the receipt of any referral pursuant to section 5 and 6 of this act, the crisis intervention unit shall request information through the use of a form developed by the unit and approved by the Administrative Office of the Courts concerning the juvenile-family crisis.  The form shall provide but shall not be limited to the following information:
 
	a.	The name, address, date of birth, and other appropriate personal data of  the juvenile and parents or guardian;
 
	b.	Facts concerning the conduct of the juvenile or family which may contribute to the crisis, including evidence of substance use disorder  or that a juvenile is an  "abused or neglected child"  as defined in P.L.1974, c.119 (C.9:6-8.21).

     L.1982, c. 80, s. 2, eff. Dec. 31, 1983; amended 2023, c.177, s.4."

2A:4A-78.  Intervention unit response
    A crisis intervention response shall consist of immediate interviews with the parents and juvenile involved by one or more crisis intervention workers. Where the juvenile is not in the home, or in the custody of the police, the intervention workers shall attempt to interview the juvenile wherever the juvenile may be found.  The juvenile and family shall be advised of the purpose  of the unit and of the emphasis upon the voluntary exhaustion of community  services prior to court involvement.  The unit shall make all reasonable  efforts to keep the family intact consistent with the physical safety and  mental well-being of the juvenile by obtaining, where possible, written  agreement of the family to accept recommendations which may include, but are  not limited to, referral to appropriate services and agencies.

     L.1982, c. 80, s. 3, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4A-79.  Intervention unit training and skills
    The juvenile-family crisis intervention unit shall have knowledge of community services and agencies and shall be specially trained in family counseling and crisis stabilization skills.  The Supreme Court may issue rules concerning the duties, responsibilities, training and practices of the juvenile-family crisis intervention units consistent with the provisions of this act, but in no instance shall the minimum qualifications for personnel employed as counselors and hired after the effective date of this act be less than a master's degree from an accredited institution in a mental health or social or behavioral science discipline including degrees in social work, counseling, counseling psychology, mental health or education.  Equivalent experience is acceptable when it consists of a minimum of an associate's degree  with a concentration in one of the behavioral sciences and a minimum of 5  years' experience working with troubled youth and their families or a bachelor's degree in one of the behavioral sciences and 2 years' experience working with troubled youth and their families.

     L.1982, c. 80, s. 4, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4A-80.  Law enforcement referral
    A law enforcement officer taking a juvenile into short-term custody pursuant  to section 12 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-31) shall immediately notify the juvenile-family crisis  intervention unit and shall promptly bring the juvenile to the unit or place  designated by the unit when:

    a.  The officer has reason to believe that it is not in the best interests of the juvenile or the family for the officer to return the juvenile to his home;

    b.  The juvenile resides in another county and the officer is unable to make  arrangements to return the juvenile to his home;

    c.  The juvenile resides in another state;

     d.  The juvenile has run away from a placement and the juvenile refuses to return home or the juvenile, through his past behavior, has demonstrated an inability to remain at home;

    e.  The law enforcement officer is unable, by all reasonable efforts to identify or locate a parent, relative or other such appropriate person;

    f.  The juvenile requires immediate emergency services, such as medical or psychiatric care;  or

    g.  No identification can be obtained from the juvenile.

     L.1982, c. 80, s. 5, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4A-81.  Other referrals
    a.  The juvenile-family crisis intervention unit shall also receive referrals on a continuous basis in situations where a juvenile-family crisis exists and there has been either:

    (1) A request by a parent or juvenile for intervention;  or

     (2) A referral by a public or private agency, educational institution, or any other organization serving children, which has contact with the juvenile or  family, and has reasonable cause to believe that a family crisis exists.

    b.  Any agency or organization making such a referral shall indicate whether  their agency is capable of providing the appropriate services to the family or  juvenile and indicate their present ability and willingness to do so in the  particular case referred.

    c.  Any public agency making the referral which is under a legal obligation  to provide services to the family or juvenile, shall, where it is unable to  provide appropriate services in the particular case referred, state the reasons  therefor.

     L.1982, c. 80, s. 6, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4A-82.  Juvenile-family crisis stabilized
    When the juvenile-family crisis has been stabilized and the juvenile is residing in the home, the crisis intervention unit shall arrange a second interview session with the family as soon as practicable and preferably the day  following the initial intervention, for the purpose of monitoring the family  situation.  The crisis intervention unit may, in appropriate cases, continue to  work with the family on a short-term basis in order to stabilize the family  situation.

     L.1982, c. 80, s. 7, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4A-83.  Juvenile-family crisis referral to the court;  continuing crisis
    When, in the judgment of the crisis intervention unit, a juvenile-family crisis continues to exist despite the provision of crisis intervention services  and the exhaustion of appropriate community services, court intake services  shall, by filing a petition, refer the case to the court.  In counties where  the crisis intervention units are not part of intake and a juvenile-family  crisis continues to exist, the court shall immediately refer the case to intake  for the filing of a petition pursuant to this section. Upon the filing of the  petition, the jurisdiction of the court shall extend to the juvenile, parent or  guardian, or other family member contributing to the crisis.

     L.1982, c. 80, s. 8, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4A-84.  Juvenile-family crisis recommendations
    Court intake services shall submit with its petition facts as to the nature  of the juvenile-family crisis and its recommendations for resolving the crisis,  including recommendations as to community services or programs which are  necessary to accomplish this purpose.

     L.1982, c. 80, s. 9, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4A-85  Parent with a substance use disorder.
	10.	Parent with a substance use disorder.  a.  When a petition is filed and as a result of any information supplied on the family situation by the crisis intervention unit, court intake services has reason to believe that the parent or guardian  has a substance use disorder, intake services shall state the basis for this determination and provide recommendations to the court. 
 
	b.	When, as a result of any information supplied by the crisis intervention unit, court intake services has reason to believe that a juvenile is an "abused or neglected child," as defined in P.L.1974, c.119 (C.9:6-8.21), they shall handle the case pursuant to the procedure set forth in that law.  The Division of Child Protection and Permanency shall, upon disposition of any case originated pursuant to this subsection, notify court intake services as to the nature of the disposition. 
 
	c.  (1)  When, as a result of any information supplied with regard to any juvenile by the crisis intervention unit or from any other source, court intake services has reason to believe that the juvenile may have an auditory or vision problem, intake services shall state the basis for this determination and provide recommendations to the court.  Before arriving at its determination, intake services may request the court to order any appropriate school medical records of the juvenile.  On the basis of this recommendation or on its own motion, the court may order any juvenile concerning whom a complaint is filed to be examined by a physician, optometrist, audiologist, or speech language pathologist. 
 
	(2)	Any examination shall be made and the findings submitted to the court within 30 days of the date the order is entered, but this period may be extended by the court for good cause.
 
	(3)	Copies of any reports of findings submitted to the court shall be available to counsel for all parties prior to an adjudication of whether or not the juvenile is delinquent.
 
	L.1982, c.80, s.10; amended 1985, c.437; 2012, c.16, s.2; 2023, c.177, s.5.

2A:4A-86.  Juvenile-family crisis hearing;  disposition
    Whenever the court receives a petition from court intake services stating that a juvenile-family crisis may exist the court shall hold a hearing and consider the facts and recommendations submitted by intake services in order to  determine the appropriate disposition to be made.  The court shall notify the  juvenile, his parent or guardian or other family member alleged in the petition  as contributing to the family crisis that a juvenile-family crisis may exist.   The juvenile, parent, guardian, or other family member may present witnesses  and evidence to rebut the determination.  If the court finds that there is not  enough information to make a disposition it may continue the matter and hold  one or more additional hearings.  The court shall enter an order of disposition  if it finds that a juvenile-family crisis exists as provided in section 27 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-46).  In support of any such order, the court may require the juvenile,  parent, guardian or family member contributing to the crisis, to participate in  appropriate programs and services consistent with the disposition.  The court  may dismiss the petition upon a finding that based upon the preponderance of  the evidence presented the petition is not sufficient to establish that a  juvenile-family crisis exists.  The court shall state the grounds for any  disposition made pursuant to this section. In the case of failure of any  person to comply with any orders entered pursuant to this section, the court  may proceed against such person for the enforcement of litigants' rights.

     L.1982, c. 80, s. 11, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4A-87.    Juvenile-family crisis referral to courts; out of home placement  
     Juvenile-family crisis referral to courts; out of home placement. When, despite provision of crisis intervention services and the exhaustion of all alternative services, there is a refusal on the part of the juvenile to stay in or return to the home or a refusal on the part of the parents to allow the juvenile to stay in or return home, or the physical safety of the juvenile is threatened, or the juvenile is in need of immediate care such that it is necessary to make an out of home placement of the juvenile, court intake services shall:  

    a.   Arrange, when agreed to by the parent or guardian and juvenile, alternate living arrangement for the juvenile with a relative, neighbor, or other suitable family setting.  It shall not be necessary for a court hearing to approve the living arrangement and the arrangement may continue as long as there is agreement; or  

    b.   Arrange, when no alternate living arrangement can be agreed to and when all possible resources for alternate living arrangements as set forth in subsection a. of this section have been exhausted, temporary out of home placement prior to the placement hearing.  Court intake services shall immediately file a petition for out of home placement which shall include documentation of the attempts made to provide alternate living arrangements including, but not limited to, the names of persons contacted, their responses and the lack of agreement by the juvenile or the juvenile's parents if the persons contacted are willing to take the juvenile with the court.  The crisis intervention unit shall inform the juvenile and parent or guardian that an out of home placement determination may be made by the court where an alternate living arrangement cannot be agreed to.  

    L.1982, c.80, s.12; amended 1989,c.305.  

2A:4A-88  Temporary placement.

	13.  Temporary placement.  Placement of the juvenile prior to the placement hearing or pending determination by the court concerning placement under a family service plan, pursuant to section 14 of P.L.1982, c.80 (C.2A:4A-89), shall be made in a host shelter, resource family or group home, a county shelter care facility as defined by law, or other suitable family setting.  In no event shall such placement be arranged in a secure detention or other facility or in a secure correctional institution for the detention or treatment of juveniles accused of crimes or adjudged delinquent.

	L.1982,c.80,s.13; amended 1995, c.280, s.17; 2004, c.130, s.7.

2A:4A-89  Out-of-home placement hearing.
 
 	14.	When intake has filed with the court a petition for out of home placement, the court shall, within 24 hours, conduct a hearing on the petition.  The court  shall notify the parents, the juvenile and his counsel and, if indigent, have  counsel appointed by the court.  The hearing shall be conducted in accordance  with the Rules of Court and shall be attended by the parents, the juvenile, and  when requested by the court, a representative of the  Department of Children and Families.  The following procedure shall be followed for the hearing:
 
	a.	The court shall hold the hearing to consider the petition and may approve or disapprove the temporary out of home placement.  The court may approve the temporary out of home placement if either of the following factors exists:
 
	(1)	A serious conflict or other problem between the parent and the juvenile which cannot be resolved by delivery of services to the family during continued placement of the juvenile in the parental home; or
 
	(2)	The physical safety and well-being of the juvenile would be threatened if the juvenile were placed in the parental home.
 
	b.	If the court disapproves a petition for an out of home placement, a written statement of reasons shall be filed, and the court shall order that the  juvenile is to remain at or return to the parental home.
 
	c.	Temporary out of home placement shall continue until otherwise provided by the court.  The order approving the temporary out of home placement shall direct the Department of Children and Families, or other service or agency to submit a family service plan that is designed to resolve the family crisis consistent with the well-being and physical safety of the juvenile.  The court shall direct such department, service or agency to make recommendations as to which agency or person shall have physical custody of the child, the extent of the parental powers to be awarded to such agency or person and parental  visitation rights.
 
	d.	Within 14 days of the date of the order approving the petition for temporary out of home placement is entered, unless for good cause shown, but no later than 30 days, the department, service or agency shall submit to the court a family service plan, which shall be presumed valid, detailing the specifics of the court order.  The plan shall be developed within the limits of fiscal and other resources available to the department, service or agency.  If the court determines that the service plan is inappropriate, given existing resources, the department, service or agency may request a hearing on that determination.
 
	e.	At the hearing held to consider the family service plan presented by the department or other service or agency, the court shall consider all such recommendations included therein.  The court, consistent with this section, may modify such plan and shall make its dispositional order for the juvenile. The court's dispositional order shall specify the responsibility of the Department of Children and Families or other service with respect to the juvenile who shall be placed, those parental powers temporarily ordered to the department or service and parental visitation rights.  Where placement cannot be immediately made, the department or other service or agency shall report to the court every 14 days on the status of the placement and progress toward implementation of the plan.
 
	L.1982, c.80, s.14; amended 2006, c.47, s.20.

2A:4A-90.  Long-term placement
    In considering whether to approve or disapprove out of home placement under  a family service plan on a long-term basis, the court shall consider whether  placement in the home would fail to provide adequate physical protection,  shelter or nutrition or would seriously obstruct the juvenile's medical care,  education or physical and emotional development as determined according to the  needs of the juvenile.  Upon making an order approving a long-term out of home  placement plan, the matter shall be reviewed pursuant to the provisions of the   "Child Placement Review Act,"  P.L.1977, c. 424 (C. 30:4C-50 et seq.).

     L.1982, c. 80, s. 15, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

2A:4A-92  "Court Appointed Special Advocate" (CASA) program.
  
	1. a. As provided in P.L.2009, c.217, a "Court Appointed Special Advocate" (CASA) shall mean a community volunteer who has been recruited, screened, trained, and supervised by a CASA program affiliated with Court Appointed Special Advocates of New Jersey or a similar organization as determined by the Administrative Office of the Courts. An affiliate CASA program shall meet all State Court Appointed Special Advocate and National Court Appointed Special Advocate standards, and shall be affiliated with Court Appointed Special Advocates of New Jersey and the National Court Appointed Special Advocates Association. 
 
	b.	There shall be established in the State of New Jersey a Court Appointed Special Advocate program which shall serve as a resource to the courts in determining the best interests of any child less than 18 years of age who has been removed from his home due to abuse or neglect. A Court Appointed Special Advocate may continue to undertake activities in furtherance of the child's best interests, in appropriate cases, until the child who is the subject of the court appointment reaches 21 years of age. 
 
	c.	Pursuant to the Rules of Court, the court may appoint a special advocate from the CASA program to act on behalf of the court.  The special advocate shall undertake certain activities in furtherance of the child's interests, but shall not supplant or interfere with the role of counsel or guardian ad litem for that child. Any such special advocate shall be a volunteer associated with a court-authorized CASA program. The duties and activities of a CASA program and all of its volunteers shall be subject to guidelines and standards established by the Administrative Director of the Courts.
 
	d.	A person seeking to volunteer as a Court Appointed Special Advocate shall be subject to the following:
 
	(1)	a criminal history record background check submitted by the Administrative Office of the Courts or its designee to the appropriate authorities.  A copy of the results shall be provided to the affiliate CASA program. A person shall not be approved as a Court Appointed Special Advocate if criminal history record information exists on file with the Federal Bureau of Investigation or the Division of State Police which would disqualify that person from serving in that capacity, as determined by the affiliate CASA program; and 
 
	(2)	a child abuse record information check conducted by the Department of Children and Families to determine if an incident of child abuse or neglect has been substantiated, pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1971, c.437 (C.9:6-8.11), against the prospective CASA volunteer.  The department shall cooperate by conducting the child abuse record information check and providing the results to the affiliate CASA program. 
 
	If a prospective volunteer refuses to consent to, or cooperate in, the securing of a criminal history record background check or a child abuse record information check, the person shall not be appointed as a Court Appointed Special Advocate.
 
	e.	Upon presentation of an order of appointment, the special advocate shall be provided access to all information and records relevant to the child, including but not limited to: school records, child care records, medical records, mental health records, family court and juvenile court records, and records of the Division of Child Protection and Permanency in the Department of Children and Families.
 
	f.	Any special advocate or affiliate CASA program staff member acting in good faith within the scope of his appointment or employment shall have immunity from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might result by reason of his actions or failure to act, except in cases of willful or wanton misconduct. 
 
	L.2009, c.217, s.1; amended 2012, c.16, s.3.

2A:5A-1.     Continuation of county clerk as officer  
     The county clerk shall continue as an elected constitutional officer in the executive branch of county government.

    L.1989, c.296, s.1.  

2A:5A-2.     Position of deputy clerk of the Superior Court created  
     There is created the position of deputy clerk of the Superior Court in each county of this State in addition to the position of the county clerk.

    L.1989, c.296, s.2.  

2A:5A-3.       County clerk, eligibility to apply for position of deputy clerk of the Superior Court  
  3.  a.  Every county clerk shall be eligible, on January 1, 1995 and for a period up to and including the date the incumbent county clerk must declare candidacy for re-election as county clerk, to apply for the position of deputy clerk of the Superior Court and to resign as county clerk.  Any county clerk who applies to become a deputy clerk of the Superior Court as provided herein and who resigns as county clerk shall become a deputy clerk of the Superior Court on the date of his resignation in the county in which he is serving at the time of his resignation.  

 b.     The deputy clerk of the Superior Court shall be an employee of the judiciary and the position of deputy clerk of the Superior Court shall be included in the budget of the State Judiciary.  Any county clerk becoming a deputy clerk of the Superior Court pursuant to this section shall be in the permanent service of the Superior Court with tenure and shall retain any accumulated sick leave, longevity or vacation time that he has earned as county clerk.  

 L.1989,c.296,s.3; amended 1993,c.275,s.18.  

2A:5A-4.     County clerk's office, transferred to supervision of Superior Court  
     a.   All employees of each county clerk's office performing judicial functions shall be transferred to the supervision of the Superior Court and shall cease to be employees of the county clerk's office on the effective date of this act.  

    b.   All judicial responsibilities of the county clerk's office shall become responsibilities of the Superior Court on the effective date of this act.

  

    c.   No employee transferred pursuant to the provisions of this act shall be deprived of any tenure rights or any right or protection provided by Title 11A of the New Jersey Statutes or any pension law or retirement system.  

    L.1989, c.296, s.4.  

2A:5A-5.     Responsibilities of deputy clerk  
     The deputy clerk of the Superior Court in each county shall be responsible to the assignment judge and trial court administrator for the management and budget of all case processing responsibilities for the Civil Division, General Equity Division and Special Civil Part and whatever other responsibilities may be assigned to the position of deputy clerk.  

    L.1989, c.296, s.5.  

2A:5A-6.     Office of county register not affected  
     Notwithstanding any other provision of this act, the office of county register of deeds and mortgages in those counties in which the office of register of deeds and mortgages has been established shall not be affected by the implementation of this act.  

    L.1989, c.296, s.6.  

2A:8-13.1  Tenure for administrator of borough municipal court.


	1.	Any person holding office, position or employment as administrator of the municipal  court in any borough who has held such office, position or employment continuously for five years or more and who has become certified during that period shall hold and continue to hold said office,  position or employment during good behavior and shall not be removed therefrom  for political or other reasons except for good cause, upon written charges and  after a public, fair and impartial hearing.

	L.1953,c.168,s.1; amended 1997, c.389, s.1.

2A:8-13.3  Tenure for full-time administrator of municipal court.


	1.	Any person holding office, position or employment as full-time administrator of a municipal court who has held such office, position or employment continuously for five years or more and who has become certified during that period shall hold and continue to hold said office, position or employment during good behavior and shall not be removed therefrom for political or other reasons except for good cause, upon written charges and after a public, fair and impartial hearing.

	L.1975,c.39,s.1; amended 1997, c.389, s.2.

2A:10-1.  What constitutes contempt in general
    The power of any court of this state to punish for contempt shall not be construed to extend to any case except the:

    a.  Misbehavior of any person in the actual presence of the court;

     b.  Misbehavior of any officer of the court in his official transactions; and

     c.  Disobedience or resistance by any court officer, or by any party, juror,  witness or any person whatsoever to any lawful writ, process, judgment, order,  or command of the court.

    Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the inherent jurisdiction of the superior court to punish for contempt.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:10-2.  County court;  punishment of sheriff for contempt
    The County Court of any county shall have the same power to punish for contempt a sheriff of the county, as the Superior Court.

     	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1971, c. 2, s. 1, eff. Jan. 15, 1971.

2A:10-3.     Review of convictions for contempt in certain inferior courts  
     2A:10-3. Every summary conviction and judgment, by the Superior Court in the law division or chancery division or by any inferior court except the municipal court, for a contempt, shall be reviewable by the appellate division of the Superior Court and all convictions and judgments for contempt by the municipal courts shall be reviewable by the Superior Court. Such review shall be both upon the law and the facts and the court shall give such judgment as it shall deem to be lawful and just under all the circumstances of the case and shall enforce the same as it shall order.  

    	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1965,c.161; 1991,c.91,s.24.  

2A:10-4.     Breach of condition of supersedeas bond  
     2A:10-4. Upon the breach of the condition of any supersedeas bond given to the clerk of any inferior court in a contempt proceeding, the county prosecutor of the county in which the bond is given shall prosecute the same to effect, in the name of the clerk, and shall pay the proceeds of the recovery thereon to the county treasurer, to be distributed by him according to law.  

    	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.25.  

2A:10-5.     Civil contempt; punishment  
     2A:10-5. Any person who shall be adjudged in contempt of the Superior Court by reason of his disobedience to a judgment, order or process of the court, shall, where the contempt is primarily civil in nature and before he is discharged therefrom, pay to the clerk of the court, for every such contempt, a sum not exceeding $50 as a fine, to be imposed by the court, together with the costs incurred.  

    	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.26.  

2A:10-6.     Contempt by sheriff or other officer  
     2A:10-6. A sheriff or other officer to whom any writ, process, judgment or order of the Superior Court is directed or delivered, who shall be adjudged in contempt of the court for failure to make return thereof or thereto, shall, before he is discharged from his contempt pay to the clerk of the court a sum not exceeding $50 as a fine, to be imposed by the court, together with the costs incurred.  

    	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.27.  

2A:10-7.     Contempt in municipal courts  
     2A:10-7. The municipal courts in this State shall have full power to punish for contempt in any case provided by N.J.S.2A:10-1.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.28.  

2A:10-8.  Issuance of warrant
    Any court may issue a warrant for the arrest of any person subject to punishment for a contempt pursuant to the provisions of chapter 10 of Title 2A of the New Jersey Statutes, directed to any officer or person authorized by law  to serve process, who shall be empowered to serve such warrant in any county of  this State and to produce the person subject to punishment for contempt as  herein provided before the judge of such court issuing said warrant.

     L.1966, c. 145, s. 1, eff. June 18, 1966.

2A:12-1.  Administrative office of the courts;  administrative director and  deputy
    There shall be a State office to be known as the administrative office of the courts with an administrative director appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court pursuant to Article VI, Section 7, paragraph 1, of the Constitution, as the head thereof and a deputy administrative director also appointed by the Chief Justice.  The administrative director and the deputy director shall be, and shall have been for not less than 3 years immediately prior to their appointment, bona fide residents of this State.  The compensation, duties and functions of the director and deputy director shall be  fixed by the Chief Justice or as otherwise provided by law.  The director shall  cause a seal of office to be made in such design as the Chief Justice shall  approve and judicial notice shall be taken of the seal.

     	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1956, c. 159, p. 639, s. 3;  L.1965, c. 74, s. 14;  L.1973, c. 301, s. 1, eff. Dec. 7, 1973.

2A:12-2.     Employees; other gainful pursuits forbidden; civil service  
    2A:12-2.  Employees; other gainful pursuits forbidden; civil service. The director, with the approval of the chief justice, shall appoint and fix the salaries of such employees as may be necessary to perform the duties vested in him by this chapter.  The director and such employees shall not engage directly or indirectly in the practice of law and shall not be subject to the provisions of Title 11A, Civil Service, of the New Jersey Statutes.  

  	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended L.1994,c.86,s.1.  

2A:12-3.  Functions of director
    The director shall, subject to the direction of the chief justice, perform the following functions:

    (a) Examine the administrative methods, systems and activities of the judges, clerks, stenographic reporters and employees of the courts and their offices and make recommendations to the chief justice with respect thereto.

    (b) Examine the state of the dockets of the courts, secure information as to  their needs for assistance, if any, prepare statistical data and reports of the  business of the courts and advise the chief justice to the end that proper  action may be taken.

    (c) Prepare and submit budget estimates of state appropriations necessary for the maintenance and operation of the courts and make recommendations with respect thereto.

    (d) File requests for appropriations or permission to spend, as request officer for the supreme and superior courts and, as approval officer, approve and sign all encumbrance requests and statements of indebtedness on behalf of said courts.

    (e) Make necessary arrangements for accommodations for the use of the supreme and superior courts and the clerks thereof and for the purchase, exchange, transfer and distribution of equipment and supplies for said courts and clerks.

    (f) Investigate and collect statistical data and make reports relating to the expenditures of public moneys, state, county and municipal, for the maintenance of the courts and the offices connected therewith.

    (g) Examine, from time to time, the operation of the courts, investigate complaints with respect thereto, and formulate and submit to the chief justice recommendations for the improvement thereof.

    (h) Act as secretary of the judicial conference held pursuant to supreme court rules.

    (i) Attend to such other matters as may be assigned by the chief justice.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:12-4.  Information and statistical data
    All judges, clerks, and stenographic reporters and their assistants and employees, shall comply with any and all requests made by the director for information and statistical data bearing on the state of the dockets of the courts and such other information as may reflect the business transacted by them and the expenditure of public moneys for the support of the courts and the  officers connected therewith.  All law enforcement officers shall comply with  any and all requests made by the director for information and statistical data  bearing on the operation of their offices.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:12-5.  Annual report
    The director shall submit annually as of August 31 to the Chief Justice, a report of the activities of the administrative office of the courts together with his recommendations.

     	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1978, c. 87, s. 1, eff. July 27, 1978.

2A:12-5.1  Findings, declarations relative to school-based probation.

	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	School-based probation is an approach to the supervision of children which shifts the primary location of probation operations to the school environment; 

	b.	School-based probation is designed to provide closer monitoring of a juvenile's behavior in order to improve school attendance and academic performance, lower school drop-out rates and reduce recidivism and out-of-home placements resulting from delinquent behaviors;

	c.	School-based probation programs have stimulated much interest and enthusiasm because they are believed to enhance both the school environment and probation services;

	d.	Studies that have been conducted on the program are very  encouraging and have shown that children who have been assigned to school-based probation are more likely to be in the community longer prior to their first charge after their assignment to probation and are also more likely to be charged with probation violation  and status offenses rather than new charges of a more serious nature; 

	e.	Children who have been assigned to school-based probation tend not to "penetrate" the juvenile justice system as deeply as do children  who are assigned to more traditional forms of supervision, resulting in not only cost savings, but also reductions in the destructive effects of extended placements and involvement in the more restrictive components of the juvenile justice system;

	f.	Various models of school-based probation have been implemented in many counties of this State, each designed to address the particular needs of the individual county or school district; and

	g.	The Legislature would benefit from input by probation departments currently involved in school-based probation and the school districts with which they are in partnership on their evaluation of the program and any recommendations regarding the expansion and replication of the program throughout the State. 

	L.2001,c.406,s.1.

2A:12-5.2  Annual report to Legislature.

	2.  a. The Administrative Director of the Courts, in consultation with the Commissioner of Education, shall submit an annual report to the Legislature evaluating the effectiveness of the school-based probation program.  The report shall include, but need not be limited to: information on the cost-effectiveness of the program as compared to the more traditional model of juvenile probation; the methods by which the confidentiality of the child involved in the program has been protected and any information-sharing protocols which have been developed between school and probation staff;  information on the impact of the program in such areas as drop-out rates, disciplinary referrals, tardiness, absenteeism and academic performance; recommendations as to the preferred model or models of school-based probation to implement on a Statewide basis or any specific parameters of the program that should be mandated; and any other recommendations regarding the expansion of the program.  

	b.	For the purposes of compiling the report required pursuant to subsection a. of this section, the Administrative Director of the Courts shall have access to the pupil record of any child  who has been assigned to school-based probation.   Information which is provided to the Administrative Director of the Courts pursuant to this subsection regarding a student who has been assigned to school-based probation shall be used under strict conditions of anonymity and  confidentiality.

	No liability shall attach to any member, officer or employee of any board of education for the furnishing of any pupil records pursuant to this subsection.

	L.2001,c.406,s.2.

2A:12-5.3  DLWD, DHS to receive incarceration information electronically from AOC.
 
 	7.	The Administrative Office of the Courts shall compile and provide to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development and the Department of Human Services identifying information on each inmate incarcerated in each county and local institution in each county which provides inmate incarceration information to the Administrative Office of the Courts, and any county which does not provide that information to the Administrative Office of the Courts shall provide the information to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development and the Department of Human Services.  The information shall be transmitted electronically in a timely manner and shall provide identifying characteristics, including name and Social Security number, to be used by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development and the Department of Human Services to verify individuals' eligibility for benefit programs administered by each department.
 
	L.2013, c.274, s.7.

2A:12-6  Distribution of law reports.
 
	2A:12-6.  The Administrative Director of the Courts is authorized to distribute or cause to be distributed any bound volumes of the New Jersey Reports and the New Jersey Superior Court Reports heretofore or hereafter published and delivered to him, as follows:  
 
	To each member of the Legislature, one copy of each volume of such reports.
 
	To the following named, for official use, to remain the property of the State, the following number of copies of each volume of such reports:  
 
	a.	To the Governor, four copies;
 
	b.	To the Department of Law and Public Safety, for the Division of Law, four copies; and the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control, one copy;  
 
	c.	To the Department of the Treasury, for the State Treasurer, one copy; the Division of Taxation, three copies; and the Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs, one copy; 
 
	d.	To the Department of State, one copy;
 
	e.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2008, c.29);
 
	f.	To the Department of Banking and Insurance, two copies; 
 
	g.	To the Board of Public Utilities in the Department of the Treasury, one copy; 
 
	h.	To the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, for the commissioner, one copy; the Division of Workers' Compensation, five copies; the State Board of Mediation, one copy; and the Division of Employment Security, three copies; 
 
	i.	To the Department of Education, for the commissioner, one copy; 
 
	j.	To the Department of Transportation, one copy;
 
	k.	To the Department of Human Services, one copy; the Department of Corrections, one copy; and the Department of Children and Families, one copy;
 
	l.	To each judge of the federal courts in and for the district of New Jersey, one copy; 
 
	m.	To each justice of the Supreme Court, one copy;
 
	n.	To each judge of the Superior Court, one copy;
 
	o.	To the Administrative Director of the Courts, one copy;
 
	p.	To each standing master of the Superior Court, one copy;
 
	q.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.1983, c.36.)
 
	r.	To the clerk of the Supreme Court, one copy;
 
	s.	To the clerk of the Superior Court, one copy;
 
	t.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.1983, c.36.)
 
	u.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.1983, c.36.)
 
	v.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.1991, c.91.)
 
	w.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.1991, c.91.)
 
	x.	To each county prosecutor, one copy;
 
	y.	To the Central Management Unit in the Office of Legislative Services, one copy; 
 
	z.	To each surrogate, one copy;
 
	aa.  To each county clerk, one copy;
 
	ab.  To each sheriff, one copy;
 
	ac.  To Rutgers, The State University, two copies; and the law schools, five copies each; 
 
	ad.  To the law school of Seton Hall University, five copies;
 
	ae.  To Princeton University, two copies;
 
	af.  To the Library of Congress, four copies;
 
	ag.  To the New Jersey Historical Society, one copy;
 
	ah.  To every library provided by the board of chosen freeholders of any county at the courthouse in each county, one copy; 
 
	ai.  To the library of every county bar association in this State, one copy; 
 
	aj.  To each incorporated library association in this State, which has a law library at the county seat of the county in which it is located, one copy;
 
	ak.  To each judge of the tax court, one copy;
 
	al.  The State Library, 60 copies, five of which shall be deposited in the Law Library, and 55 of which shall be used by the State Librarian to send one copy to the state library of each state and territory of the United States, the same to be in exchange for the law reports of such states and territories sent to the State Library, which reports shall be deposited in and become part of the collection of the Law Library.
 
	The remaining copies of such reports shall be retained by the administrative director for the use of the State and for such further distribution as he may determine upon. 
 
	Amended 1983, c.36, s.1; 1991, c.91, s.29; 2001, c.137, s.1; 2006, c.47, s.21; 2008, c.29, s.84.

2A:12-7.  Legislative findings and declarations
    The Legislature finds and declares that:

    a.  In the area of child visitation a court often orders supervised visitation where there has been a history of child abuse, medical disabilities,  psychiatric problems or other situations where the safety and welfare of the  child may be jeopardized.

    b.  Often court ordered supervised visitation never occurs due to the inability to locate volunteers willing to be present during the visitation and a facility in which the visitation may take place.

    c.  The inability of a parent or guardian to spend time with a child poses serious psychological problems to both the parent and the child and prevents the growth of a normal, healthy relationship.

    d.  The purpose of this act is to facilitate supervised visitation by making  the facilities and members of local community organizations available to assist  in court ordered supervised visitation.

     L.1983, c. 424, s. 1.

2A:12-8.  Definitions
    As used in this act:

    a.   "Approved community organization"  means a community organization which  applies to the director for participation in the program and is approved for  participation;

    b.   "Director"  means the Director of the Administrative Office of the Courts;

    c.   "Program"  means the Supervised Visitation Program created pursuant to  this act.

     L.1983, c. 424, s. 2.

2A:12-9.  Supervised visitation program;  creation
    There is created a program to be known as the  "Supervised Visitation Program"  which shall be administered by the director.

     L.1983, c. 424, s. 3.

2A:12-10.  Purpose
    The purpose of the program shall be to promote court ordered supervised visitation by having approved community organizations throughout the State supply facilities and personnel to enable supervised visitation to take place.

     L.1983, c. 424, s. 4.

2A:12-11.  Duties of director
    The director shall:

    a.  Publicize the existence of the program;

     b.  Adopt rules for the program including among other things--

     (1) Standards for approved community organizations,

     (2) Standards for accounting and auditing, and

     (3) The number of approved community organizations needed throughout each county;

     c.  Prepare uniform applications for community organizations to apply for participation in the program, which application shall request, among other things--

     (1) The name, address, county and function of the community organization,

     (2) The size and location of the facility where supervised visitation would  take place,

     (3) The average number of persons available in the facility at any given time who would be present during the supervised visitation,

     (4) The community organization's fee for use of its personnel and facilities  for the program,

     (5) The number of persons the facility could accommodate at one time, and

     (6) The general contents of the facility;

     d.  Select and approve those community organizations which comply with the director's standards and which would accept the lowest fee for participation in  the program;

     e.  Prepare a printed list by county of approved community organizations available for participation in the program;

     f.  Distribute the list to each court within the State having jurisdiction over child visitation matters;

     g.  Prepare and submit budget estimates of State appropriations necessary for the operation of the program and make recommendations with respect thereto;

     h.  Report annually to the Legislature and the Chief Justice of the Supreme  Court on the activities of the program and make recommendations with respect  thereto;  and

     i.  Do all other things necessary and proper to implement the purposes of this act.

     L.1983, c. 424, s. 5.

2A:12-12.  Court with jurisdiction;  order for visitation at approved community organization
    Any court having jurisdiction over a child visitation matter, which orders supervised child visitation, may direct in the order that the visitation take place at an approved community organization.

     L.1983, c. 424, s. 6.

2A:12-13.    Child of incarcerated person; care ensured; guideline development by Administrative Director of the Courts  
    1.  a.  The Administrative Director of the Courts, in consultation with the Governor's Task Force on Child Abuse and Neglect, shall develop and recommend to the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, no later than the 120th day after the effective date of this act, guidelines for each judge of the Superior Court and each municipal court judge to follow in order to ensure that appropriate arrangements are made for the care of an incarcerated person's child by a responsible adult.  The Chief Justice shall provide for implementation of these guidelines as soon as is practicable after the date of receipt of the recommended guidelines.  

   b.   The administrative director, in consultation with the Governor's Task Force on Child Abuse and Neglect, shall periodically review the guidelines adopted pursuant to subsection a. of this section and recommend to the Chief Justice such revisions as are deemed necessary.  The Chief Justice shall provide for implementation of the revised guidelines as soon as is practicable after the date of receipt of the recommended revisions.  

   L.1994,c.113.  

2A:12-14.    Advance notice to prosecutor; notice to victims; "prosecutor defined  
    2.  a.  The Administrative Office of the Courts shall establish procedures to ensure that advance notice is given to the prosecutor in any matter in which (1) a victim of an offense has been identified, and (2) the offense is within the jurisdiction of the Superior Court, and (3) the offense involves criminal conduct or conduct arising from an incident of domestic violence pursuant to N.J.S.2C:25-17 et seq. in which a criminal complaint has been filed.  Notice shall include the date, time and place of the defendant's appearance before a judicial officer and shall include, but not be limited to, notice of motions or hearings to establish or reduce bail or authorize other pre-trial release from custody; notice of proceedings in which any plea agreement may be submitted; notice of trial and notice of sentencing.  

   b.   Upon receipt of such notice from the court, the prosecutor shall use any reasonable means available to notify a victim in advance of a scheduled proceeding.  

   c.   As used in this act, "Prosecutor" means the prosecutor of the county in which the defendant was convicted, unless the matter was prosecuted by the Attorney General, in which case "prosecutor" means the Attorney General.  

   L.1994,c.131,s.2.  

2A:13-1.  Oath of practitioner
    Every counsellor at law or attorney at law, shall, before he is permitted to  practice in any court of this state, take and subscribe in open court, the following oath:

    I,         , do solemnly promise and swear, that I will support the constitution of this state and the constitution of the United States and will perform the duties of my office faithfully to the best of my ability. So help me God.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:13-2.  Attorneys suable
    Attorneys may be sued as other persons in all courts of this state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:13-3.  Attorneys not to be sureties on bonds
    No practicing attorney shall be surety on a bond as security for costs or a  replevin bond or a bond given in connection with any proceeding in lieu of a  prerogative writ.  Any such bond signed by a practicing attorney as surety shall be insufficient.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:13-4.  Liability for damages
    If an attorney shall neglect or mismanage any cause in which he is employed,  he shall be liable for all damages sustained by his client.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:13-5.  Lien for services
    After the filing of a complaint or third-party complaint or the service of a  pleading containing a counterclaim or cross-claim, the attorney or counsellor  at law, who shall appear in the cause for the party instituting the action or  maintaining the third-party claim or counterclaim or cross-claim, shall have a  lien for compensation, upon his client's action, cause of action, claim or  counterclaim or cross-claim, which shall contain and attach to a verdict,  report, decision, award, judgment or final order in his client's favor, and the  proceeds thereof in whosesoever hands they may come.  The lien shall not be  affected by any settlement between the parties before or after judgment or  final order, nor by the entry of satisfaction or cancellation of a judgment on  the record.  The court in which the action or other proceeding is pending, upon  the petition of the attorney or counsellor at law, may determine and enforce  the lien.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:13-6.  Recovery of fees and disbursements
    Every attorney and counsellor may commence and maintain an action for the recovery of reasonable fees, charges or disbursements against his client or his  legal representative, provided he shall have first delivered to the client or  his legal representative or left for him at his dwelling house or usual place  of abode with some competent member of his family of the age of 14 years or  over then residing therein, a copy of his bill of fees, charges and  disbursements or shall forward a copy of same, by certified or registered mail,  in a sealed envelope with proper postage prepaid and return receipt requested,  to the client or his legal representative at his last known address.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344;  amended by L.1963, c. 133, s. 1, eff. July 2, 1963.

2A:13-7.  Bar examiners;  salary and expenses
    Each bar examiner shall be paid a salary to be fixed by the supreme court and such traveling and incidental expenses as shall be approved by a supreme court justice.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:13-8.  Clerk of board of bar examiners
    The supreme court may appoint a suitable person to be clerk to the board of  bar examiners to hold office during the pleasure of the court and may appoint  successors from time to time and may fix the compensation to be paid such  clerk.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:13-9.  Filing of certificates of commission and qualification and autographed signature in county clerks' offices
    Any attorney-at-law, after having been duly commissioned and qualified, shall, upon request, receive from the Clerk of the Supreme Court as many certificates of his commission and qualification as he shall require for filing  in the county clerks' offices of this State, and upon receipt thereof, such  attorney may present the same, together with his autographed signature, to such  county clerks as he may desire for filing.

     L.1959, c. 126, p. 558, s. 1, eff. June 18, 1959.

2A:13-10.  Certification by county clerk of authority of attorney to take proofs, acknowledgments or affidavits
    The county clerk of any county in which any such attorney-at-law shall have  filed his autographed signature and certificate, as provided in section 1 of  this act, shall, upon request, subjoin to any certificate of proof, acknowledgment or affidavit signed by the attorney, a certificate under the clerk's hand and seal stating that the attorney-at-law was at the time of taking such proof, acknowledgment or affidavit duly commissioned and sworn and residing in this State, and was as such an officer of this State duly authorized to take and certify said proof, acknowledgment or affidavit as well as to take and certify the proof or acknowledgment of deeds for the conveyance of lands, tenements or hereditaments and other instruments in writing to be recorded in this State;  that said proof, acknowledgment or affidavit is duly executed and taken according to the laws of this State;  that full faith and credit are and ought to be given to the official acts of the attorney-at-law, and that the county clerk is well acquainted with the handwriting of the attorney-at-law and believes the signature to the instrument to which the certificate is attached is his genuine signature.

     L.1959, c. 126, p. 559, s. 2.

2A:13-11.  Notice of disbarment;  cancellation of certificates filed by attorney
    In event that any such attorney-at-law shall be disbarred, the Clerk of the  Supreme Court shall notify each county clerk accordingly and the county clerk  shall cancel any certificate filed in his office pursuant to this act by such  attorney.

     L.1959, c. 126, p. 559, s. 3.

2A:14-1.  6 years
	2A:14-1. a. Every action at law for trespass to real property, for any tortious injury to real or personal property, for taking, detaining, or converting personal property, for replevin of goods or chattels, for any tortious injury to the rights of another not stated in N.J.S.2A:14-2 and N.J.S.2A:14-3, or for recovery upon a contractual claim or liability, express or implied, not under seal, or upon an account other than one which concerns the trade or merchandise between merchant and merchant, their factors, agents and servants, shall be commenced within six years next after the cause of any such action shall have accrued.
 
	b.	This section shall not apply to any action for breach of any contract for sale governed by N.J.S.12A:2-725.
 
	c.	The period of time for the filing of a claim by a condominium association, cooperative corporation, or other planned real estate development association against a developer or any person acting through, on behalf of or at the behest of the developer under subsection a. of this section, shall be tolled until an election is held and the owners comprise a majority of the board pursuant to paragraph (3) of subsection a. of section 5 of P.L.1993, c.30 (C.45:22A-47), or subsection d. of section 2 of P.L.1979, c.157 (C.46:8B-12.1).  Any cause of action involving a condominium, cooperative, or other planned real estate development under the provisions of subsection a. of this section that has not been subject to a final judgment dismissing the claim as of the effective date of P.L.2021, c.379 shall be subject to the terms of this subsection.

     	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1961, c. 121, p. 723, s. 1; amended 2021, c.379.

2A:14-1.1.  Damages for injury from unsafe condition of improvement to real property; statute of limitations; exceptions; terms defined
	1.  a.  No action, whether in contract, in tort, or otherwise, to recover damages for any deficiency in the design, planning, surveying, supervision or construction of an improvement to real property, or for any injury to property, real or personal, or for an injury to the person, or for bodily injury or wrongful death, arising  out of the defective and unsafe condition of an improvement to real property, nor any action for contribution or indemnity for damages sustained on account of such injury, shall be brought against any person performing or furnishing the design, planning, surveying, supervision of construction or construction of such improvement to real property, more than 10 years after the performance or furnishing of such services and construction.  This limitation shall serve as a bar to all such actions, both governmental and private, but shall not apply to actions against  any person in actual possession and control as owner, tenant, or otherwise, of the improvement at the time the defective and unsafe condition of such  improvement constitutes the proximate cause of the injury or damage for which the action is brought.

	b.	This section shall not bar an action by a governmental unit:

	(1)	on a written warranty, guaranty or other contract that expressly provides for a longer effective period;

	(2)	based on willful misconduct, gross negligence or fraudulent concealment in connection with performing or furnishing the design, planning, supervision or construction of an improvement to real property;

	(3)	under any environmental remediation law or pursuant to any contract entered into by a governmental unit in carrying out its responsibilities under any environmental remediation law; or

	(4)	Pursuant to any contract for application, enclosure, removal or encapsulation of asbestos.

	c.	As used in this section:

	"Asbestos " shall have the meaning as defined in subsection a. of section 3 of P.L.1984, c.173 (C.34:5A-34) and any regulations adopted pursuant thereto.

	"Environmental remediation law" means chapter 10B of Title 58 of the Revised Statutes (C.58:10B-1 et seq.) and any regulations adopted pursuant thereto.

	"Governmental"means the State, its political subdivisions, any office, department, division, bureau, board, commission or public authority or public agency of the State or one of its political subdivisions, including but not limited to, a county or a municipality and any board, commission, committee, authority or agency which is not a State board, commission, committee, authority or agency.

	L.1967,c.59,s.1; amended 1997, c.355; 2001, c.76, s.1.

2A:14-1.2 Civil actions commenced by the State, 10 years; "State" defined; exceptions.
  
	2. a. Except where a limitations provision expressly and specifically applies to actions commenced by the State or where a longer limitations period would otherwise apply, and subject to any statutory provisions or common law rules extending limitations periods, any civil action commenced by the State shall be commenced within ten years next after the cause of action shall have accrued. 
 
	b.	For purposes of determining whether an action subject to the limitations period specified in subsection a. of this section has been commenced within time, no such action shall be deemed to have accrued prior to January 1, 1992.
 
	c.	As used in this act, the term "State" means the State, its political subdivisions, any office, department, division, bureau, board, commission or agency of the State or one of its political subdivisions, and any public authority or public agency, including, but not limited to, the New Jersey Transit Corporation.
 
	The provisions of this section shall not apply to any civil action commenced by the State concerning the remediation of a contaminated site or the closure of a sanitary landfill facility, or the payment of compensation for damage to, or loss of, natural resources due to the discharge of a hazardous substance, and subject to the limitations period specified in section 5 of P.L.2001, c.154 (C.58:10B-17.1).
 
	L.1991, c.387, s.2; amended 2001, c.154, s.7; 2012, c.45, s.63.

2A:14-1.3.  Prohibition of certain actions after 10 years
	2.	No action whether in contract, in tort or otherwise to recover damages for any deficiency in a survey of real property performed under contract for any purpose other than for any improvement to real property shall be taken against any person performing or furnishing such survey more than 10 years after the performance or furnishing of such survey.

	L.2001,c.76,s.2.

2A:14-1.4.  Inapplicability of time limitation for adverse possession cases
	3.	The 10-year time period limitation on actions for the statute of repose set forth in section 1 of P.L.1967, c.59 (C.2A:14-1.1) for surveying shall not be applicable to cases of adverse possession.  In adverse possession cases the statute of repose for surveying shall be coterminous with the time period required for the adverse possession.

	L.2001,c.76,s.3.

2A:14-2  Actions for injury caused by wrongful act, appointment of guardian ad litem.
	2A:14-2. a. Except as otherwise provided by law, every action at law for an injury to the person caused by the wrongful act, neglect or default of any person within this State shall be commenced within two years next after the cause of any such action shall have accrued; except that an action by or on behalf of a minor that has accrued for medical malpractice for injuries sustained at birth shall be commenced prior to the minor's 13th birthday.
 
	b.	In the event that an action by or on behalf of a minor that has accrued for medical malpractice for injuries sustained at birth is not commenced by the minor's parent or guardian prior to the minor's 12th birthday, the minor or a person 18 years of age or older designated by the minor to act on the minor's behalf may commence such an action.  For this purpose, the minor or designated person may petition the court for the appointment of a guardian ad litem to act on the minor's behalf.
 
	amended 2004, c.17, s.3; 2019, c.120, s.1.

2A:14-2a  Statute of limitations for action at law resulting from certain sexual crimes against a minor.
 	2. a. (1) Every action at law for an injury resulting from the commission of sexual assault, any other crime of a sexual nature, a prohibited sexual act as defined in section 2 of P.L.1992, c.7 (C.2A:30B-2), or sexual abuse as defined in section 1 of P.L.1992, c.109 (C.2A:61B-1) against a minor under the age of 18 that occurred prior to, on or after the effective date of P.L.2019, c.120 (C.2A:14-2a et al.) shall be commenced within 37 years after the minor reaches the age of majority, or within seven years from the date of reasonable discovery of the injury and its causal relationship to the act, whichever date is later.
 
	(2) To the extent applicable, any action for an injury that occurred prior to the effective date of P.L.2019, c.120 (C.2A:14-2a et al.) shall be subject to the provisions of subsection c. of section 1 of P.L.1959, c.90 (C.2A:53A-7) and P.L.2005, c.264 (C.2A:53A-7.4 et seq.), as amended by P.L.2019, c.120 (C.2A:14-2a et al.).
 
	b. (1) Every action at law for an injury resulting from the commission of sexual assault or any other crime of a sexual nature against a person 18 years of age or older that occurred prior to, on or after the effective date of P.L.2019, c.120 (C.2A:14-2a et al.) shall be commenced within seven years from the date of reasonable discovery of the injury and its causal relationship to the act.
 
	(2)	To the extent applicable, any action for an injury that occurred prior to the effective date of P.L.2019, c.120 (C.2A:14-2a et al.) shall be subject to the provisions of subsection c. of section 1 of P.L.1959, c.90 (C.2A:53A-7), as amended by P.L.2019, c.120 (C.2A:14-2a et al.).
 
	Nothing in this section is intended to preclude the court from finding that the statute of limitations was tolled in an action because of the plaintiff's mental state, physical or mental disability, duress by the defendant, or any other equitable grounds.  Such a finding shall be made after a plenary hearing.  The court may order an independent psychiatric evaluation of the plaintiff in order to assist in the determination as to whether the statute of limitations was tolled.
 
	c. (1) Every action at law for an injury that is commenced pursuant to this section shall proceed on an individual basis, and not proceed on behalf of a class in a class action, due to the particular circumstances, source of injury and its discovery, and damages relating to each occurrence or occurrences of sexual assault, any other crime of a sexual nature, a prohibited sexual act as defined in section 2 of P.L.1992, c.7 (C.2A:30B-2), or sexual abuse as defined in section 1 of P.L.1992, c.109 (C.2A:61B-1) against either a minor under the age of 18 or a person 18 years of age or older. 
 
	(2)	Any private, contractual arrangement intending to settle claims for occurrences described in paragraph (1) of this subsection on a class basis is against public policy and shall be void and unenforceable. 
 
	L.2019, c.120, s.2.

2A:14-2b  Commencement of actions regardless of statute of limitations.
 	9.  a. Notwithstanding the statute of limitations provisions of N.J.S.2A:14-2, section 2 of P.L.2019, c.120 (C.2A:14-2a), section 1 of P.L.1964, c.214 (C.2A:14-2.1), or any other statute, an action at law for an injury resulting from the commission of sexual assault, any other crime of a sexual nature, a prohibited sexual act as defined in section 2 of P.L.1992, c.7 (C.2A:30B-2), or sexual abuse as defined in section 1 of P.L.1992, c.109 (C.2A:61B-1), that occurred prior to the effective date of P.L.2019, c.120 (C.2A:14-2a et al.), and which action would otherwise be barred through application of the statute of limitations, may be commenced within two years immediately following the effective date.
 
	b.	To the extent applicable, any action brought during the two-year period pursuant to subsection a. of this section shall be subject to the provisions of subsection c. of section 1 of P.L.1959, c.90 (C.2A:53A-7) and P.L.2005, c.264 (C.2A:53A-7.4 et seq.), as amended by P.L.2019, c.120 (C.2A:14-2a et al.).
 
	c. (1) Every action at law for an injury that is commenced pursuant to this section shall proceed on an individual basis, and not proceed on behalf of a class in a class action, due to the particular circumstances, source of injury and its discovery, and damages relating to each occurrence or occurrences of sexual assault, any other crime of a sexual nature, a prohibited sexual act as defined in section 2 of P.L.1992, c.7 (C.2A:30B-2), or sexual abuse as defined in section 1 of P.L.1992, c.109 (C.2A:61B-1) against either a minor under the age of 18 or a person 18 years of age or older. 
 
	(2)	Any private, contractual arrangement intending to settle claims for occurrences described in paragraph (1) of this subsection on a class basis is against public policy and shall be void and unenforceable.
 
	L.2019, c.120, s.9.

2A:14-2c  Effective date.
 	10.	The provisions of this amendatory and supplementary act, P.L.2019, c.120 (C.2A:14-2a et al.), shall take effect on December 1, 2019.  These provisions shall be inapplicable to any civil action governed solely by the statute of limitations of another jurisdiction.
 
	L.2019, c.120, s.10.

2A:14-2.1.  2 years;  action by parent or other person for injury to minor child;  joinder with action on behalf of minor child
    Where a parent or other person has a claim for damages suffered by him because of an injury to a minor child caused by the wrongful act, neglect or default of any person within this State, an action at law upon such claim may be commenced by the said parent or other person within the same period of time as provided by law in the case of the said minor child so injured, provided that, if an action is commenced by or on behalf of the said minor child, the said claim of the parent or other person shall be asserted and maintained in such action brought on behalf of the injured minor child either as a plaintiff or third party plaintiff and if not so asserted shall be barred by the judgment  in the action brought on behalf of said injured minor child.

     L.1964, c. 214, s. 1.

2A:14-3.  1 year;  libel or slander
    Every action at law for libel or slander shall be commenced within 1 year next after the publication of the alleged libel or slander.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-4.  Actions on lease, specialty, recognizance or award;  16 years; effect of payments;  action on instrument under seal brought by merchant or financial institution;  6 years
    Every action at law for rent or arrears of rent, founded upon a lease under  seal, every action at law upon a single or penal bill under seal for the  payment of money only, upon an obligation under seal conditioned for the payment of money only, upon a recognizance or upon an award under the hands and  seals of arbitrators for the payment of money only shall be commenced within 16  years next after the cause of any such action shall have accrued. If, however,  any payment is made on any such lease, specialty, recognizance or award within  or after such period of 16 years, an action thereon may be commenced within 16  years next after such payment, and not thereafter.

    This section shall not apply to any action for breach of any contract for sale governed by N.J.S. 12A:2-725.

    This section shall also not apply to any action founded upon an instrument under seal brought by a merchant or bank, finance company, or other financial institution.  Any such action shall be commenced within 6 years next after the cause of any such action shall have accrued.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1961, c. 121, p. 723, s. 2, eff. Jan. 1, 1963;  L.1979, c. 436,  s. 1, eff. Feb. 14, 1980.

2A:14-5.  20 years;  judgments
    A judgment in any court of record in this state may be revived by proper proceedings or an action at law may be commenced thereon within 20 years next after the date thereof, but not thereafter.  An action may be commenced on a judgment obtained in any other state or country within 20 years next after the date thereof or within the period in which a like action might be brought thereon in that state or country, whichever period is shorter, but not thereafter.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-6.  20 years;  right of entry into real estate
    Every person having any right or title of entry into real estate shall make  such entry within 20 years next after the accrual of such right or title of  entry, or be barred therefrom thereafter.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-7.  20 years;  real actions
    Every action at law for real estate shall be commenced within 20 years next  after the right or title thereto, or cause of such action shall have accrued.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-8.  20 years;  actions by state for real estate or rents
    No person or body politic or corporate shall be sued or impleaded by the state of New Jersey for any real estate, or for any rents, revenues, issues or profits thereof, except within 20 years next after the right or title thereto or cause of such action shall have accrued.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-9.  2 months;  actions against sheriffs by claimants of personal property attached or levied upon under execution
    Where a person other than a defendant in attachment or execution lays claim  to personal property attached, levied upon, taken or sold by a sheriff or other  officer, by virtue of a writ of attachment or execution issuing out of any  court of this state, no action shall lie or be brought by the claimant against  such sheriff or other officer, either in his official or individual capacity,  or against the agent of or person acting for him, to enforce the claim against  the sheriff or other officer, agent or person, for such attachment, levy,  taking or sale, or to recover the proceeds of such a sale, unless the same is  commenced within 2 months from the time the claimant delivers a written notice  of his claim to the sheriff or other officer, his attorney or agent.  If no  such written notice has been delivered to him, the sheriff or other officer may  give written notice of the attachment, levy, taking or sale to any person who  he may have reason to suppose claims, or before a sale claimed, the property so attached, levied upon, taken or sold; and such person shall thereupon, and within 2 months from the receipt by him of such notice, bring his action against the sheriff or other officer, or the agent or person acting for him, for the enforcement of his claim, or for damages for such attachment, levy, taking or sale, or for the proceeds of such a sale, or be forever thereafter barred therefrom.

    This section shall not be construed to affect in any way the liability of any person except such sheriff or officer, in his official capacity and personally, and the agent of such sheriff or officer.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-10.  2 years and 1 year;  actions on penal statutes
    All actions at law brought for any forfeiture upon any penal statute made or  to be made, shall be commenced within the periods of time herein prescribed:

    a.  Within 2 years next after the offense committed or to be committed against the statute, when the forfeiture is or shall be limited by the statute to the state of New Jersey only;

    b.  Within 2 years next after the offense committed or to be committed against the statute, or cause of action accrued, when the benefit of the forfeiture and the action therefor is or shall be limited or given to the party  aggrieved;

    c.  Within 1 year next after the offense committed or to be committed against the statute, when the benefit of the forfeiture and the action therefor  is or shall be limited or given by the statute to any person who shall  prosecute for the same, or to the state of New Jersey, and to any other who  shall prosecute in that behalf, except that, in default of such action, the  same shall be brought for the state of New Jersey, at any time within 1 year  after the termination of the aforesaid year;

    d.  Within 1 year next after the offense committed or to be committed against the statute, when the forfeiture is or shall be limited by the statute to any county or municipality, or to any officer of such county or municipality, or to any person for the use of such county or municipality, or to the use of the poor of such municipality, either in whole or together with any other person who may lawfully sue for the same.

    Where, however, by any statute made or to be made it is provided that any such action is to be brought within a shorter time than that prescribed by this  section, such action shall be commenced within the time so provided by that  statute.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-11.  1 year;  action on vacation of public rights by ordinance; park lands accepted by municipality
    Whenever any municipality has heretofore adopted, or shall hereafter adopt,  any ordinance vacating, extinguishing, or releasing the public rights in any  road, street, avenue, public highway, lane, alley, path, park, square or  pleasure grounds, or any part thereof, any person or persons having or claiming  any right, title or interest in such road, street, avenue, public highway,  lane, alley, path, park, square or pleasure grounds, or any part thereof, or  the lands included therein, in which said public rights have been vacated,  extinguished or released, shall bring his action or actions respecting the same  within 1 year of the date of adoption of such ordinance, or in case such  ordinance shall have been adopted prior to July 3, 1950, then before July 3,  1951, and not otherwise;  provided, however, that this section shall not apply  to any person or persons owning lands, of any interest therein, abutting any  part of such road, street, avenue, public highway, lane, alley or path in which  the public rights have been vacated, extinguished or released, or whose right  of ingress and egress to a public street or highway is solely over such road,  street, avenue, public highway, lane, alley or path in which the public rights  were vacated, extinguished or released.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-12.  2 years;  persons claiming interest in park lands not accepted by  municipality
    Whenever any municipality shall after July 24, 1950 adopt any ordinance vacating any park or park lands or any part thereof, which shall have heretofore been dedicated by map, plat, deed, deed reference or otherwise but shall not have been accepted by such municipality, any person or persons, other  than the owner of the fee title therein, having or claiming any easement,  right, or interest in the lands vacated, shall be precluded from bringing an  action to establish such easement, right, or interest therein unless:

    a.  Such person shall, within 2 years after the effective date of such ordinance, commence and diligently prosecute an action or actions in the superior court to establish such easement, right, or interest in the lands vacated against the owner or owners of record of the fee title of said lands, and

    b.  Such person shall, within 10 days after the filing of his complaint in such action file in the office of the recording officer, as the case may be, of  the county where the lands vacated are situated, a written notice of the pendency of the action pursuant to article 2 of chapter 15 of Title 2A.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-13.  Enforcement of mortgage judgment or lien
    Section 2A:14-12 of this title shall not be construed to preclude the holder  of a mortgage judgment or lien upon and enforceable against the vacated lands  from enforcing such mortgage judgment or lien.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-14.  60 years;  claims to real estate by devisees under invalid will as heirs to other real estate mentioned therein
    Where lands are attempted to be devised to 2 or more persons, the heirs of the decedent, in severalty by a writing purporting to be a last will which, though executed by the owner of such lands in the presence of 2 or more witnesses, is inoperative and void as a will, and such persons, their heirs, executors and assigns, remain for a period of 60 years after the death of such decedent in the actual or constructive possession of the land, so purporting to  be devised to them, and the writing mentions other land not purporting to be  devised to them, every such person, his heirs, executors and assigns, shall be  estopped from claiming any right, title or interest in any land mentioned in  such writing, other than that attempted to be devised to such person in  severalty.  No action shall be brought by any such persons, their heirs,  executors or assigns, to enforce any right or claim as heir of such decedent in  the other lands mentioned in such writing.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-15.  Actions by public officers or employees whose compensation was reduced to be brought prior to November 18, 1938
    L.1938, c. 200, p. 477 (R.S. 2:24-25) entitled  "An act concerning the limitation of civil actions, and supplementing chapter 24 of Title 2 of the Revised Statutes" , approved May 18, 1938, saved from repeal.  [This act provides that persons holding offices or employment under the government of this state or any county, municipality or school district thereof, whose compensation was reduced must bring his action for the recovery of such moneys alleged to be due by reason of the reduction prior to November 18, 1938.]

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-16.  20 years;  actions on bonds of fiduciaries
    No action at law brought upon a bond given by any executor, administrator, guardian, trustee, receiver or assignee under any law relating to insolvent debtors or insolvent estates, for the faithful performance of any or all of the  duties of any of such fiduciaries, shall in any way operate against or affect  the sureties named in and bound by the bond, unless the same is commenced  within 20 years next after the date of the bond.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-17.  9 years;  actions on bonds of sheriffs, county treasurers and municipal collectors or treasurers
    No action at law brought upon any bond given by any sheriff and his sureties  for the faithful performance of the office of sheriff, or by any county  treasurer and his sureties for the faithful performance of the duties of the  office of such treasurer, or by any collector or treasurer of any municipality  and his sureties for the faithful performance of the duties of the office of  such collector or treasurer, shall in any way operate against or affect the  sureties named in and bound by the bond, unless such action shall be commenced  within 9 years next after the date of the bond.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-19.  10 years;  actions on bonds of municipal magistrates
    No action at law brought upon a bond given by any municipal magistrate and his sureties or by the clerk of any municipal court and his sureties shall in any way operate against or affect the sureties named in and bound by the bond, unless such action shall be commenced within 10 years next after the date of the bond.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-20.  16 years;  actions on prison limits bonds
    No action at law brought upon a prison limits bond, given to the sheriff of  any county by an insolvent debtor or person arrested upon final process in a  civil action, shall in any way operate against or affect the sureties named in  and bound by the bond, unless such action shall be commenced within 16 years  next after the date of the bond.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-21  Disabilities affecting limitation; action on behalf of minor.
  
	2A:14-21.  If a person entitled to commence an action or proceeding specified in N.J.S.2A:14-1 to 2A:14-8 or N.J.S.2A:14-16 to 2A:14-20 or to a right or title of entry under N.J.S.2A:14-6 is under the age of 18 years or a person who has a mental disability that prevents the person from understanding his legal rights or commencing a legal action at the time the cause of action or right or title accrues, the person may commence the action or make the entry, within the time as limited by those statutes, after reaching majority or having the mental capacity to pursue the person's lawful rights. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section to the contrary, an action by or on behalf of a minor that has accrued for medical malpractice for injuries sustained at birth shall be commenced prior to the minor's 13th birthday, as provided in N.J.S.2A:14-2.
 
	amended 2004, c.17, s.4; 2013, c.103, s.2.

2A:14-22.      Tolling of statute of limitations  
   2A:14-22.  a.  If (1) any person against whom there is any of the causes of action specified in sections 2A:14-1 to 2A:14-5 and 2A:14-8, or if any surety against whom there is a cause of action specified in any of the sections of article 2 of this chapter, is not a resident of this State when such cause of action accrues, or removes from this State after the accrual thereof and before the expiration of the times limited in said sections, or if any corporation or corporate surety not organized under the laws of this State, against whom there is such a cause of action, is not represented in this State by any person or officer upon whom summons or other original process may be served, when such cause of action accrues or at any time before the expiration of the times so limited, and (2) it appears by affidavit of plaintiff's attorney or of any person having knowledge of the facts that, after diligent inquiry and effort, long-arm service cannot be effectuated, the time or times during which such person or surety is not residing within this State or such corporation or corporate surety is not so represented within this State shall not be computed as part of the periods of time within which such an action is required to be commenced by the section.  The person entitled to any such action may commence the same after the accrual of the cause therefor, within the period of time limited therefor by said section, exclusive of such time or times of nonresidence or nonrepresentation.  

  b.     A corporation shall be deemed represented for purposes of this section if the corporation has filed with the Secretary of State a notice designating a representative to accept service of process.  

  c.     A person shall be deemed a resident for purposes of this section if such person has filed with the Secretary of State a notice designating a representative to accept service of process.  

  d.     A designation by a corporation pursuant to subsection b. of this section or by a person pursuant to subsection c. of this section shall expose such corporation or person to suit only as to those causes of action as to which such corporation or person has sufficient contacts with this State to satisfy the requirements of due process of law.  

  	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1984,c.131; 1991,c.387,s.1.  

2A:14-23.  Death of person liable
    If any person against whom there is any of the causes of action specified in  sections 2A:14-1, 2A:14-2, 2A:14-4, 2A:14-5 and 2A:14-8 of this title, or if  any surety against whom there is a cause of action specified in any of the sections of article 2 of this chapter, dies before the expiration of the time limited thereby, the space of 6 months next succeeding such death shall not be computed as a part of the period of time within which the action is required by  the section to be commenced.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-23.1.  Cause of action belonging to decedent
    No statute of limitation running on a cause of action belonging to a decedent which had not been barred as of the date of his death, shall apply to bar a cause of action surviving the decedent's death sooner than 6 months after  death.  A cause of action which, but for this section, would have been barred  less than 6 months after death, is barred 6 months after death, unless tolled.

     L.1977, c. 61, s. 1, eff. April 15, 1977.

2A:14-24.  Acknowledgment or new promise
    In actions at law grounded on any simple contract, no acknowledgment or promise by words only shall be deemed sufficient evidence of a new or continuing contract, so as to take any case out of the operation of this chapter, or to deprive any person of the benefit thereof, unless such acknowledgment or promise shall be made or continued by or in some writing to be signed by the party chargeable thereby.

    Where there shall be 2 or more joint contractors or executors or administrators of any contractor, no such joint contractor, executor or administrator shall lose the benefit of this chapter so as to be chargeable in respect or by reason only of any written acknowledgment or promise signed by another or others of them.  If, in an action against 2 or more joint contractors, or executors or administrators of a contractor, it appears at the trial or otherwise that the plaintiff, although barred as to 1 or more of such joint contractors, or executors or administrators, shall, nevertheless be entitled to recover against any other or others of the defendants by virtue of a new acknowledgment or promise, or otherwise, judgment may be given, with costs, for the plaintiff as to such defendant or defendants, against whom he shall recover, and for the other defendant or defendants against the plaintiff.

    Nothing in this section shall take away, lessen or alter the effect of any payment of principal or interest made by any person whatsoever on the obligation in suit.

2A:14-25.  Indorsement or memorandum of payment on written obligation; effect
    No indorsement or memorandum of any payment written or made upon a promissory note, bill of exchange or other writing, by or on behalf of the party to whom the payment is made, shall be deemed sufficient proof of such payment so as to take the case out of the operation of this chapter.

	L.1951 (1stSS), c.344.

2A:14-26.  Military or naval service during war;  effect on limitations
    The period of service, in time of war and 6 months thereafter, of any person, in active service in any of the armed forces of the United States, or the women's auxiliary corps, the women's reserve of the naval reserve, or any similar organization authorized by the United States to serve with its armed forces, shall not be included in computing any period limited on April 16, 1945, or thereafter by any law for the bringing of any action by or against any  such person or by or against his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns,  whether such cause of action shall have accrued prior to, or during, the period  of such service or during such 6 months thereafter.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-26.1. Findings, declarations relative to statute of limitations regarding hemophiliacs infected with HIV, AIDS; accrual of actions

	1.  a.  The Legislature finds and declares:

	(1)  Over one-half of the people with hemophilia in this country were infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the early 1980's from contaminated blood products.

	(2)  AIDS, unlike any other disease, stigmatizes and isolates its victims.  Victims, their families and survivors have been reluctant to step forward and seek compensation for their injuries through the legal system because of their legitimate fear of attendant publicity.

	(3)  Because of this fear, many did not seek timely redress.  They  also were unaware that blood product manufacturers may have had the technical capacity at the time to address the situation and may have  been responsible for their injuries.  It is only very recently that a government-sponsored report was issued indicating that the blood products could have been virally inactivated prior to the advent of the AIDS epidemic among blood product recipients.

	(4)  The scientific complexity of the issue, the compelling psychological and emotional trauma associated with the disease, the lack of publicly available information and the lack of definitive studies  at the time combined to create a singular, unique circumstance which existing limitations principles are ill-suited to address.

	(5)  This act will provide a remedy for the bar which may be imposed by the statute of limitations in these cases by setting a date certain for the accrual of the cause of action.

	(6)  The Legislature expresses no opinion as to whether any blood product manufacturers may, or may not, have actually been at fault for the contracting of HIV and AIDS among blood product recipients.  It is simply the intent of the Legislature to allow these particular victims "their day in court" in light of the unique and extraordinary circumstances of their plight.

	b.  Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, no action for damages based upon personal injury, survivorship or wrongful death brought against a proprietary manufacturer of blood products based on infusion of a blood product resulting in contracting human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) shall be deemed to accrue prior to July 13, 1995.

	c.  The provisions of this act shall apply to all pending claims, including any action which has been filed with a court but not yet dismissed or finally adjudicated.

L.1996,c.23,s.1.

2A:14-26.2. Inapplicability of act

	2.  The provisions of this act shall be inapplicable to any civil action governed by the statute of limitations of another jurisdiction.

L.1996,c.23,s.2.

2A:14-27.  Set-off
    The limitations provided by this chapter shall apply to the case of any debt  or demand for liquidated damages alleged by way of set-off.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-28.  New action after judgment reversed or relief granted
    If, in any of the actions or proceedings specified in sections 2A:14-1 to 2A:14-19, sections 2A:14-22 to 2A:14-25 or section 2A:14-27 of this Title, judgment is given for the plaintiff therein, and such judgment is reversed on appeal, or, if a judgment pass for the plaintiff and, upon motion for relief from the judgment, judgment is given against him, the plaintiff, his heirs, executors or administrators, may commence a new action within 1 year next after  the judgment is reversed or judgment is given against plaintiff, and not  thereafter.

    This section shall not apply to any action for breach of any contract for sale governed by section 12A:2-725 of the New Jersey Statutes.

     	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1961, c. 121, p. 724, s. 3, eff. Jan. 1, 1963.

2A:14-29.  Limitation of lien of civil recognizance
    All recognizances of bail made or entered into before any court, judge or magistrate having civil jurisdiction, upon which no actions or proceedings to enforce or collect the same shall have been prosecuted to final judgment within  a period of 6 years after the same shall have been filed and recorded in the  clerk's office, shall no longer be a lien or charge upon or against any real  estate of which any principal or surety named in any such recognizance was or  shall have been seized at the time of his entering into such recognizance, or  at any time thereafter.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-30.  30 years' possession of real estate, except woodlands or uncultivated tracts, and 60 years' possession of woodlands or uncultivated tracts however commenced or continued
    Thirty years' actual possession of any real estate excepting woodlands or uncultivated tracts, and 60 years' actual possession of woodlands or uncultivated tracts, uninterruptedly continued by occupancy, descent, conveyance or otherwise, shall, in whatever way or manner such possession might  have commenced or have been continued, vest a full and complete right and title  in every actual possessor or occupier of such real estate, woodlands or  uncultivated tracts, and shall be a good and sufficient bar to all claims that  may be made or actions commenced by any person whatsoever for the recovery of  any such real estate, woodlands or uncultivated tracts.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-31.  30 years' actual possession of any real estate under claim or color of title
    Thirty years' actual possession of any real estate, uninterruptedly continued by occupancy, descent, conveyance or otherwise, wherever such possession commenced or is founded upon a proprietary right duly laid thereon, and recorded in the office of the surveyor general of the division in which the  location was made, or in the office of the secretary of state, pursuant to law,  or wherever such possession was obtained by a fair bona fide purchase of such  real estate from any person in possession thereof and supposed to have a legal  right and title thereto, or from the agent of such person, shall be a good and  sufficient bar to all prior locations, rights, titles, conveyances, or claims  whatever, not followed by actual possession as aforesaid, and shall vest an  absolute right and title in the actual possessor and occupier of all such real  estate.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-32  Disabilities affecting right to enforce right or title to real estate.
 
 	2A:14-32. If any person having a right or title to real estate is under the age of 18, or has been adjudicated incapacitated, or is outside the United States for purposes other than a military tour of duty at the time the right or title first accrued or descended, that person may, notwithstanding the fact that the periods of time specified in N.J.S.2A:14-30 and N.J.S.2A:14-31 have expired, bring an action to enforce the right or title, provided the action is commenced within five years after the disability is removed or the person is physically present within the United States.
 
	amended 2013, c.103, s.3.

2A:14-33.  Prescriptive right to maintain wires or cables
    Whenever any wire or cable used for any telegraph, telephone, electric light, or other wire or cable for electric purposes, is or shall be attached to, or does or shall extend upon or over any building or land, no lapse of time  whatsoever shall raise a presumption, or justify a prescription of any perpetual right to such attachment or extension.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:14-34.  Immateriality of descent cast
    If the disseizor of an interest in real estate, having no right or title thereto, shall hereafter die seized of such interest, the descent of the right or title acquired by the disseizin to the heir of the disseizor shall not take away the right of entry of the person who, at the time of such descent, had lawful title.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-1  Actions in person or by attorney.
  
	2A:15-1. Every person who has reached the age of majority pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1972, c.81 (C.9:17B-3) and has the mental capacity may prosecute or defend any action in any court, in person or through another duly admitted to the practice of law in this State.
 
	amended 2013, c.103, s.4.

2A:15-2.  Beneficiary in contract suing or defending
    A person for whose benefit a contract is made, either simple or sealed, may  sue thereon in any court and may use such contract as a matter of defense in an  action against him although the consideration of the contract did not move from  him.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-3  Actions which survive; torts to decedent; funeral and burial expenses; statute of limitations.
 	2A:15-3. a. (1) Executors, administrators, and administrators ad prosequendum may have an action for any trespass done to the person or property, real or personal, of their testator or intestate against the trespasser, and recover their damages as their testator or intestate would have had if he was living. In those actions based upon the wrongful act, neglect, or default of another, where death resulted from injuries for which the deceased would have had a cause of action if he had lived, the executor, administrator, or administrator ad prosequendum may recover all reasonable funeral and burial expenses in addition to damages accrued during the lifetime of the deceased.
 
	(2) In the case of a plaintiff qualified for appointment as administrator who was not yet appointed administrator at the time the plaintiff commenced an action under this section, the court may allow the plaintiff to be designated administrator for the purposes of this section and to allow the plaintiff to amend pleadings nunc pro tunc relating back to the plaintiff's first filed pleading to reflect the designation.
 
	b.	Every action brought under this chapter shall be commenced within two years after the death of the decedent, and not thereafter, provided, however, that if the death resulted from murder, aggravated manslaughter or manslaughter for which the defendant has been convicted, found not guilty by reason of insanity or adjudicated delinquent, the action may be brought at any time.
 
	Amended 1969, c.266; 2009, c.266; 2021, c.481, s.1.
 
2A:15-4.  Actions which survive;  torts committed by decedent
    Where any testator or intestate shall, in his lifetime, have taken or carried away or converted to his use, the goods or chattels of any person, or shall, in his lifetime, have committed any trespass to the person or property, real or personal, of any person, such person, his executors or administrators, shall have and may maintain the same action against the executors or administrators of such testator or intestate as he or they might have had or maintained against the testator or intestate, and shall have the like remedy and process for the damages recovered in such action as are now had and allowed  in other actions against executors or administrators.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-5.  Statutory proceedings;  entitling;  filing of papers; certified copies
    All statutory proceedings begun and conducted before a judge of any court, although not proceedings in the court itself, shall, nevertheless, be entitled in the court, and all writs, pleadings, orders, judgments and other papers therein shall be filed with the clerk and shall be records of his office.  The clerk shall make certified copies of any or all of such statutory proceedings when requested, which shall have the same force and effect as certified copies of proceedings in causes in the court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-5.1.  Contributory negligence;  elimination as bar to recovery; comparative negligence to determine damages
    Contributory negligence shall not bar recovery in an action by any person or  his legal representative to recover damages for negligence resulting in death  or injury to person or property, if such negligence was not greater than the  negligence of the person against whom recovery is sought or was not greater  than the combined negligence of the persons against whom recovery is sought.   Any damages sustained shall be diminished by the percentage sustained of  negligence attributable to the person recovering.

     L.1973, c. 146, s. 1.  Amended by L.1982, c. 191, s. 1, eff. Dec. 6, 1982.

2A:15-5.2.   Findings of fact; percentage of fault; terms defined  
    2.  a.  In all negligence actions and strict liability actions in which the question of liability is in dispute, including actions in which any person seeks to recover damages from a social host as defined in section 1 of P.L.1987, c.404 (C.2A:15-5.5) for negligence resulting in injury to the person or to real or personal property, the trier of fact shall make the following as findings of fact:  

   (1)  The amount of damages which would be recoverable by the injured party regardless of any consideration of negligence or fault, that is, the full value of the injured party's damages.  

   (2)  The extent, in the form of a percentage, of each party's negligence or fault.  The percentage of negligence or fault of each party shall be based on 100% and the total of all percentages of negligence or fault of all the parties to a suit shall be 100%.  

   b.   In an action in which a person seeks to recover damages from a social host for negligence resulting in injury to the person or to real or personal property, the negligence of any person in becoming intoxicated shall be considered by the trier of fact, and the trier of fact shall allocate a percentage of negligence to that person.  

   c.   As used in this section:

   (1)  "Negligence actions" includes, but is not limited to, civil actions for damages based upon theories of negligence, products liability, professional malpractice whether couched in terms of contract or tort and like theories.  In determining whether a case falls within the term "negligence actions," the court shall look to the substance of the action and not the conclusory terms used by the parties.  

   (2)  "Strict liability actions" includes, but is not limited to, civil actions for damages based upon theories of strict liability, products liability, breach of warranty and like theories.  In determining whether a case falls within the term "strict liability actions," the court shall look to the substance of the action and not the conclusory terms used by the parties. 

   d.   The judge shall mold the judgment from the findings of fact made by the trier of fact.  

   L.1973,c.146,s.2; amended 1987,c.325,s.1; 1987,c.404,s.4; 1995,c.140,s.1.  

2A:15-5.3.   Recovery of damages; apportionment among responsible parties 
    3.   Except as provided in subsection d. of this section, the party so recovering may recover as follows:  

   a.   The full amount of the damages from any party determined by the trier of fact to be 60% or more responsible for the total damages.  

   b.   (Deleted by amendment, P.L.1995, c.140.)

  

   c.   Only that percentage of the damages directly attributable to that party's negligence or fault from any party determined by the trier of fact to be less than 60% responsible for the total damages.  

   d.   With regard to environmental tort actions, the following provisions shall apply:  

   (1)  the party so recovering may recover the full amount of the compensatory damage award from any party determined to be liable , except in cases where the extent of negligence or fault can be apportioned.  Such apportionment shall be done in accordance with section 2 of P.L.1973, c.146 (C.2A:15-5.2);  

   (2)  in those cases where it is possible to apportion negligence or fault, if the party so recovering is unable to recover the percentage of compensatory damages attributable to a non-settling insolvent party's negligence or fault, that amount of compensatory damages may be recovered from any non-settling party in proportion to the percentage of liability attributed to that party; and  

   (3)  notwithstanding the provisions of any other provision of law to the contrary, if the percentage of liability or fault of any party is found to be five percent or less, upon acceptance of that determination by that party and payment thereof in full, that party shall not be liable for any further claims for contribution regarding that action.  

   e.   Any party who is compelled to pay more than his percentage share may seek contribution from the other joint tortfeasors.  

   f.   As used in this section, "environmental tort action" means a civil action seeking damages for personal injuries or death where the cause of the damages is the negligent manufacture, use, disposal, handling, storage or treatment of hazardous or toxic substances.  

   L.1973,c.146,s.3; amended 1987,c.325,s.2; 1995,c.140,s.2.  

2A:15-5.4.   Exceptions 
     Nothing in this act shall be construed to apply to any action brought by the Department of Environmental Protection, or any other governmental agency or entity pursuant to the environmental laws of this State, including, but not limited to, the "Solid Waste Management Act" P.L.1970, c. 39 (C. 13:1E-1 et seq.); the "Water Pollution Control Act" P.L.1977, c. 74 (C. 58:10A-1 et seq.); the "Spill Compensation and Control Act" P.L.1976, c. 141 (C. 58:10-23.11 et seq.); the "Major Hazardous Waste Facilities Siting Act" P.L.1981, c. 279 (C. 13:1E-49 et seq.); the "Sanitary Landfill Facility Closure and Contingency Fund Act" P.L.1981, c. 306 (C. 13:1E-100 et seq.); the "Environmental Cleanup Responsibility Act" P.L.1983, c. 330 (C. 13:1K-6 et seq.); the "Air Pollution Control Act (1954)" P.L.1954, c. 212 (C. 26:2C-1 et seq.); the "Toxic Catastrophe Prevention Act" P.L.1985, c. 403 (C. 13:1K-19 et seq.); the "Pesticide Control Act of 1971" P.L.1971, c. 176 (C. 13:1F-1 et seq.); and the "Radiation Protection Act" P.L.1958, c. 116 (C. 26:2D-1 et seq.). 

    L. 1987,c.325,s.3. 

2A:15-5.5.   Definitions 
     As used in this act: 

    "Visibly intoxicated" means a state of intoxication accompanied by a perceptible act or series of actions which present clear signs of intoxication. 

    "Social host" means a person who, by express or implied invitation, invites another person onto an unlicensed premises for purposes of hospitality and who is not the holder of a liquor license for the premises and is not required to hold a liquor license for the premises under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes, and who legally provides alcoholic beverages to another person who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages. 

    "Vehicle" means a device primarily propelled by a motor that is used to transport a person or property. 

    "Person" means a natural person, the estate of a natural person, an association of natural persons, or an association, trust company, partnership, corporation, organization, or the manager, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 

    L. 1987, c. 404, s. 1. 

2A:15-5.6.   Exclusive civil remedy 
     a.   This act shall be the exclusive civil remedy for personal injury or property damage resulting from the negligent provision of alcoholic beverages by a social host to a person who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages. 

    b.   A person who sustains bodily injury or injury to real or personal property as a result of the negligent provision of alcoholic beverages by a social host to a person who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages may recover damages from a social host only if: 

    (1)  The social host willfully and knowingly provided alcoholic beverages either: 

    (a)  To a person who was visibly intoxicated in the social host's presence;  or 

    (b)  To a person who was visibly intoxicated under circumstances manifesting reckless disregard of the consequences as affecting the life or property of another; and 

    (2)  The social host provided alcoholic beverages to the visibly intoxicated person under circumstances which created an unreasonable risk of foreseeable harm to the life or property of another, and the social host failed to exercise reasonable care and diligence to avoid the foreseeable risk; and 

    (3)  The injury arose out of an accident caused by the negligent operation of a vehicle by the visibly intoxicated person who was provided alcoholic beverages by a social host. 

    c.   To determine the liability of a social host under subsection b. of this section, if a test to determine the presence of alcohol in the blood indicates a blood alcohol concentration of: 

    (1)  less than 0.10% by weight of alcohol in the blood, there shall be an irrebuttable presumption that the person tested was not visibly intoxicated in the social host's presence and that the social host did not provide alcoholic beverages to the person under circumstances which manifested reckless disregard of the consequences as affecting the life or property of another; or

    (2)  at least 0.10% but less than 0.15% by weight of alcohol in the blood, there shall be a rebuttable presumption, that the person tested was not visibly intoxicated in the social host's presence and that the social host did not provide alcoholic beverages to the person under circumstances which manifested reckless disregard of the consequences as affecting the life or property of another. 

    L. 1987, c. 404, s. 2. 

2A:15-5.7.   No liability to consumer 
     No social host shall be held liable to a person who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages for damages suffered as a result of the social host's negligent provision of alcoholic beverages to that person. 

    L. 1987, c. 404, s. 3. 

2A:15-5.8.   Joint tortfeasors 
     Notwithstanding the provisions of P.L. 1952, c. 335 (C. 2A:53A-1 et seq.), section 3 of P.L. 1973, c. 146 (C. 2A:15-5.3) or any other law to the contrary, in any case where a social host or any other party to a suit instituted pursuant to the provisions of this act is determined to be a joint tortfeasor, the social host or other party shall be responsible for no more than that percentage share of the damages which is equal to the percentage of negligence attributable to the social host or other party. 

    L. 1987, c. 404, s. 5. 

2A:15-5.9.   Short title  
    1.   This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Punitive Damages Act."  

   L.1995,c.142,s.1.  

2A:15-5.10.  Definitions relative to punitive damages awards.  
    2.   As used in this act:

   "Actual malice" means an intentional wrongdoing in the sense of an evil-minded act.  

   "Clear and convincing evidence" means that standard of evidence which leaves no serious or substantial doubt about the correctness of the conclusions drawn from the evidence.  It is a standard which requires more than a preponderence of evidence, but less than beyond a reasonable doubt, to draw a conclusion.  

   "Compensatory damages" means damages intended to make good the loss of an injured party, and no more.  The term includes general and special damages and does not include nominal, exemplary or punitive damages.  

   "Defendant" means any party against whom punitive damages are sought.

   "Nominal damages" are damages that are not designed to compensate a plaintiff and are less than $500.  

   "Plaintiff" means any party claiming punitive damages.

   "Punitive damages" includes exemplary damages and means damages awarded against a party in a civil action because of aggravating circumstances in order to penalize and to provide additional deterrence against a defendant to discourage similar conduct in the future.  Punitive damages do not include compensatory damages or nominal damages.  

   "Wanton and willful disregard" means a deliberate act or omission with knowledge of a high degree of probability of harm to another and reckless indifference to the consequences of such act or omission.  

   L.1995,c.142,s.2.  

2A:15-5.11.  Punitive damages requested in complaint  
    3.   An award of punitive damages must be specifically prayed for in the complaint.  

   L.1995,c.142,s.3.  

2A:15-5.12.  Award of punitive damages; determination  
    4.  a.  Punitive damages may be awarded to the plaintiff only if the plaintiff proves, by clear and convincing evidence, that the harm suffered was the result of the defendant's acts or omissions, and such acts or omissions were actuated by actual malice or accompanied by a wanton and willful disregard of persons who foreseeably might be harmed by those acts or omissions.  This burden of proof may not be satisfied by proof of any degree of negligence including gross negligence.  

   b.   In determining whether punitive damages are to be awarded, the trier of fact shall consider all relevant evidence, including but not limited to, the following:  

   (1)  The likelihood, at the relevant time, that serious harm would arise from the defendant's conduct;  

   (2)  The defendant's awareness of reckless disregard of the likelihood that the serious harm at issue would arise from the defendant's conduct;  

   (3)  The conduct of the defendant upon learning that its initial conduct would likely cause harm; and  

   (4)  The duration of the conduct or any concealment of it by the defendant.

  

   c.   If the trier of fact determines that punitive damages should be awarded, the trier of fact shall then determine the amount of those damages. In making that determination, the trier of fact shall consider all relevant evidence, including, but not limited to, the following:  

   (1)  All relevant evidence relating to the factors set forth in subsection b. of this section;  

   (2)  The profitability of the misconduct to the defendant;

  

   (3)  When the misconduct was terminated; and

  

   (4)  The financial condition of the defendant.

  

   L.1995,c.142,s.4.  

2A:15-5.13.  Bifurcated trial at defendant's request  
    5.  a.  Any actions involving punitive damages shall, if requested by any defendant, be conducted in a bifurcated trial.  

   b.   In the first stage of a bifurcated trial, the trier of fact shall determine liability for compensatory damages and the amount of compensatory damages or nominal damages.  Evidence relevant only to the issues of punitive damages shall not be admissible in this stage.  

   c.   Punitive damages may be awarded only if compensatory damages have been awarded in the first stage of the trial.  An award of nominal damages cannot support an award of punitive damages.  

   d.   In the second stage of a bifurcated trial, the trier of fact shall determine if a defendant is liable for punitive damages.  

   e.   In any action in which there are two or more defendants, an award of punitive damages must be specific as to a defendant, and each defendant is liable only for the amount of the award made against that defendant.  

   L.1995,c.142,s.5.  

2A:15-5.14  Determination of award; limitations; exceptions.

	6. a. Before entering judgment for an award of punitive damages, the trial judge shall ascertain that the award is reasonable in its amount and justified in the circumstances of the case, in light of the purpose to punish the defendant and to deter that defendant from repeating such conduct.  If necessary to satisfy the requirements of this section, the judge may reduce the amount of or eliminate the award of punitive damages.

	b.	No defendant shall be liable for punitive damages in any action in an amount in excess of five times the liability of that defendant for compensatory damages or $350,000, whichever is greater.

	c.	The provisions of subsection b. of this section shall not apply to causes of action brought pursuant to P.L.1993, c.137 (C.2A:53A-21 et seq.), P.L.1945, c.169 (C.10:5-1 et seq.), P.L.1989, c.303 (C.26:5C-5 et seq.), P.L.1992, c.109 (C.2A:61B-1) or P.L.1986, c.105, (C.34:19-1 et seq.), or in cases in which a defendant has been convicted pursuant to N.J.S.2C:11-3, N.J.S.2C:11-4, R.S.39:4-50 or section 2 of P.L.1981, c.512 (C.39:4-50.4a) or the equivalent under the laws of any other jurisdiction.

	L.1995,c.142,s.6; amended 2005, c.323; 2005, c.329, s.3.

2A:15-5.15.  Claims under existing law  
    7.   Nothing contained in this act is to be construed as creating any claim for punitive damages which is not now available under the law of this State.  

   L.1995,c.142,s.7.  

2A:15-5.16.  Jury not informed of cap  
    9.   The jury shall not be informed of the cap on punitive damages established by section 6 of this act.  

   L.1995,c.142,s.9.  

2A:15-5.17.  Record referred for criminal investigation  
    10.  Upon the conclusion of any action in which punitive damages have been awarded, the court shall refer the record of that action to the prosecutor of the county in which the case was tried and to the Attorney General for investigation as to whether a criminal act has been committed by the defendant.  

   L.1995,c.142,s.10.  

2A:15-6.     Written notice of pendency of action; contents  
    2A:15-6.  In every action, instituted in any court of this State having civil jurisdiction or in the United States District Court for the District of New Jersey, the object of which is to enforce a lien upon real estate or to affect the title to real estate or a lien or encumbrance thereon, plaintiff or his attorney shall, after the filing of the complaint, file in the office of the county clerk or register of deeds and mortgages, as the case may be, of the county in which the affected real estate is situate, a written notice of the pendency of the action, which shall set forth the title and the general object thereof, with a description of the affected real estate.  

   No notice of lis pendens shall be filed under this article in an action to recover a judgment for money or damages only.  

   	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1960,c.159; 1993,c.318,s.39.  

2A:15-7.  Filed notice;  effect as to persons claiming interest in real estate affected by notice
    a.   In action to enforce or declare rights in, or concerning, or for partition of real estate, wherein plaintiff's claim arises out of a written instrument, which instrument either is executed by defendant and identifies such real estate or appears of record with respect to the title thereto, from and after the filing of a notice of lis pendens, any person claiming title to, interest in or lien upon the real estate described in the notice through any defendant in the action as to which the notice is filed shall be deemed to have  acquired the same with knowledge of the pendency of the action, and shall be  bound by any judgment entered therein, as though he had been made a party  thereto and duly served with process therein.

    b.  In an action other than one specified in subsection a. of this section,  if a notice of lis pendens is filed, that notice shall have the same effect as  provided in subsection a., until the entry of a determination by the court  pursuant to this subsection.  When a notice of lis pendens is filed in such an  action, the plaintiff shall, within three days after the filing of the notice  of lis pendens, serve upon the defendant a copy of the notice of lis pendens  and of the complaint.  Any party claiming an interest in the real estate  affected by the notice of lis pendens may, at any time thereafter, file with  the court, in accordance with the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of  New Jersey, except as otherwise provided herein, a motion for a determination  as to whether there is a probability that final judgment will be entered in  favor of the plaintiff sufficient to justify the filing or continuation of the  notice of lis pendens.  The plaintiff shall bear the burden of establishing  such probability.  The court shall, after hearing and within 10 days, enter a determination as to whether there is a sufficient probability that final judgment will be entered in favor of the plaintiff.  If the court determines that there is a sufficient probability of final judgment in favor of the plaintiff, the notice of lis pendens shall be continued of record and shall have the same effect as provided in subsection a.  If the court fails so to determine, the court shall forthwith order the notice of lis pendens discharged  of record.

     	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1982, c. 200, s. 1.

2A:15-8.  Rights of bona fide purchasers, mortgagees or lienors before notice filed and prior to final judgment
    Unless and until a notice of lis pendens is filed as herein provided, no action, as to which such notice is required, shall, before final judgment entered therein, be taken to be constructive notice to a bona fide purchaser or  mortgagee of, or a person acquiring a lien on, the affected real estate.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-9.  Notice of foreclosure action
    In actions for the satisfaction or foreclosure of a duly recorded or registered mortgage or the foreclosure of a duly recorded certificate of tax sale, the notice of lis pendens shall, in addition to describing the affected real estate, specify the book and page of the record or registration of the mortgage or of the record of the certificate of tax sale, as the case may be. Such notice shall be filed, and the time of its filing and the time of the filing of the complaint with the name of the plaintiff and the first defendant named, shall, in lieu of any other indexing and recording, be noted in the margin of the record of the mortgage or of the record of the abstract thereof or in the margin of the record of the certificate of tax sale, as the case may be.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-10.  Discharge of lis pendens of record when action not prosecuted
    If plaintiff in an action as to which a notice of lis pendens has been filed  as herein required fails to prosecute the same diligently, the court wherein  the action is pending may, for such cause or for other good cause shown, by  order direct the county clerk or register of deeds and mortgages, as the case  may be, to discharge the lis pendens of record.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-11.	Notice of lis pendens
	2A:15-11.  Notice of  lis pendens.  No notice of lis pendens shall be effective after five years from the date of its filing.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1995,c.244,s.16.

2A:15-12.  Record and index of notices;  access to
    Except as provided by section 2A:15-9 of this title, the county clerk or register of deeds and mortgages, with whom a notice of lis pendens is filed, shall forthwith record the same, with the time of the filing thereof, in a proper book provided and kept by him in his office.  The record book shall be properly indexed, and shall be a public record, to which persons desiring to examine the same shall have access.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-13.  Fee for recording notice as taxable costs
    The fee for recording a notice of lis pendens shall be taxable as a part of  the costs in the action.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-14.  Marginal notation in record of notice of judgment for defendant;   appeal;  further lis pendens
    Whenever a final judgment is made in favor of the defendant or defendants in  any action, notice of the pendency of which has been filed in the office of any  county clerk or register of deeds and mortgages, the county clerk or register  of deeds and mortgages in whose office the notice has been filed shall, when a  copy of such judgment, certified under the seal of the court in which the  judgment shall have been obtained, is filed in his office, enter in the margin  of the record of the notice a statement of the substance of the judgment.   Thereafter the real estate described in the notice shall be discharged of all  equities or claims set up in the complaint in the action, unless the plaintiff  takes an appeal or institutes proceedings for relief from the judgment and  files a similar notice of lis pendens in said office, stating in the notice the  object of the appeal or proceedings.  Such notice shall, during the pendency of  such appeal or proceedings, have the effect of the notice first filed, and the  real estate described in the notice may be discharged of all equities set up in  the complaint, in the manner provided for the discharge of the notice first filed.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-15.  Order discharging real estate from claim
    If, in an action for the enforcement against real estate of a claim for the  payment of money, except for the foreclosure of a mortgage, as to which a notice of lis pendens has been filed, the defendant therein gives such sufficient security as the court having jurisdiction of the action shall direct, to pay such sum of money as may, by the final determination of the action, be ascertained to be chargeable upon the affected real estate, the court may by order discharge the real estate from such claim.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-16.  Record of discharge of real estate from claim
    Upon the filing of a copy of the order mentioned in section 2A:15-15 of this  title, certified under the seal of the court out of which it issued, with the  county clerk or register of deeds with whom the notice of lis pendens has been  filed, that officer shall enter, on the margin of the record of the notice, a  notation of the discharge of the real estate from the claim set up in the  action.

    Thereafter the real estate shall be discharged from the claim, except such as may be covered by the security given for the payment thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-17.  Discharge of lis pendens when judgment is paid, satisfied or action settled or abandoned
    When a judgment made in an action, of the pendency of which notice has been  filed as herein provided, is paid, satisfied or performed, or the action has  been settled by the parties thereto or has been abandoned by plaintiff therein,  a statement of such payment, satisfaction, performance, settlement or  abandonment shall be entered by the county clerk or register of deeds and mortgages in whose office the notice has been filed, upon the receipt and filing by him of a warrant for that purpose, executed by the party who filed the notice, or his attorney, as warrants to satisfy judgments are required to be executed.

    If the judgment has been paid, satisfied or performed or the action has been  settled or abandoned as aforesaid, but the party who filed the notice of lis  pendens fails to file the warrant stated, the court having jurisdiction of the  action may, upon being satisfied of the fact of such payment, satisfaction,  performance, settlement or abandonment and upon such notice as it may by its  order direct, order the real estate affected and described in the notice of lis  pendens to be discharged of all claims or equities set up in the complaint in  the action.

    The county clerk or register of deeds and mortgages shall, upon the filing by him of the warrant mentioned in the first paragraph of this section or upon the filing by him of the original or a certified copy of the order mentioned in  the second paragraph of this section, note in the margin of the record of the  lis pendens notice the discharge thereof by the warrant or order.

    Thereupon the real estate affected by the action and described in the notice  shall be discharged of all claims or equities set up in the complaint in the  action.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-18.  Action by taxpayer on failure of county or municipality to sue
    If the board of chosen freeholders of a county or the governing body of a municipality fails to prosecute a claim or demand of the county or municipality, any court in which an action on such claim or demand is cognizable may, upon terms, allow a taxpayer and resident of the county or municipality to commence and prosecute an action upon the claim or demand in the name and on behalf of the county or municipality, if in the opinion of the court the interests of the county or municipality would be promoted thereby.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-19.  Intervention by taxpayer in action by or against county or municipality
    When, in an action by or against a county or municipality, if in the opinion  of the court the interests of the county or municipality would be promoted  thereby, the court may, upon terms, allow a taxpayer and resident of the county  or municipality to intervene in the action on behalf of and prosecute or defend  the same in the name of the county or municipality.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-30.1  Service of process on business entity; substituted service.

	1. a. If a business entity, foreign or domestic, is required to register with a State official or agency to transact business in this State and is required to register an address or an agent in this State for the service of process, process in any action in any court of this State directed to the business may be served at the address or on the agent registered.

	b.	If a business entity, foreign or domestic, is required to register with a State official or agency to transact business in this State and is required to register an address or an agent in this State for the service of process, process in any action in any court of this State directed to the business may be served on the State official or agency, if:

	(1)	The business entity has failed to register or re-register as required by law; or 

	(2)	The business entity has failed to maintain a registered address or a registered agent in this State for service of process, as required by law.

	c.	The official or agency upon which substituted service has been made, within two days after service, shall notify the business entity to which the process was directed, by a letter to its registered office, if any, or to any officer of the entity known to the official or agency.  A copy of the process or other paper served shall be enclosed with the letter.

	d.	Service of process as provided in subsection (a) shall be as effective in any action as if the business entity had entered its general appearance in the action.

	L.1999,c.319,s.1.

2A:15-41.  Capias;  grounds in action founded upon tort
    A capias ad respondendum shall issue in an action founded upon a tort only when the action is founded upon (a) an outrageous battery or a mayhem, (b) a claim of damages for the misconduct or neglect of a public officer or (c) a wilful or malicious act and the defendant is a nonresident or is about to remove from the state.  In such a case the court shall hold the defendant to bail, in an amount which it thinks proper under the circumstances.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-42.  Capias;  grounds in action founded upon contract
    A capias ad respondendum shall issue in an action founded upon contract, express or implied, due to plaintiff from defendant, only when the proof establishes the particulars specified in one or more of the following subparagraphs:

    a.  That defendant is about to remove any of his property out of the jurisdiction of the court in which the action is about to be commenced or is then pending with intent to defraud his creditors;  or

    b.  That defendant has property or choses in action which he fraudulently conceals;  or

    c.  That defendant has assigned, removed or disposed of, or is about to assign, remove or dispose of, any of his property with intent to defraud his creditors;  or

    d.  That defendant fraudulently contracted the debt or incurred the demand.

     In such a case, the court shall hold the defendant to bail in such an amount  as is shown by the proof to be due plaintiff from defendant except that in  actions to recover money from a public officer, the amount shall be that which  the court thinks proper under the circumstances.

    This section shall not apply to proceedings as for contempt to enforce civil  remedies.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-43.  Production of defendant to give bail
    The sheriff or other officer executing a capias ad respondendum shall, at the time of the arrest or at any time thereafter before judgment in the action,  if requested so to do, produce the defendant before the court in order that he  may give bail, and the defendant shall be released from custody upon his  entering into a recognizance of bail to the plaintiff, with surety, in double  the sum in which he is held to bail.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-44.  Amercement of bail;  arrest and imprisonment of defendant
    If the bail fails to bring in the body of the defendant when ordered by the  court, they shall be amerced in a sum not exceeding plaintiff's debt or demand,  with costs.  The amercement shall have the force and effect of a judgment, upon  which execution in the name and for the use of the plaintiff may be awarded if  the court so directs;  or in lieu of amercement, the court may arrest and  commit the defendant as if upon a capias.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-45.  Who may be bail
    No attorney at law, sheriff, sheriff's deputy or other person concerned in the execution of process shall be bail in any action.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-46.  Recognizance filed;  record book
    Every recognizance of bail shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the  court in which the action is pending, within 2 days after the approval of the  bail, and the clerk shall thereupon deliver a bail piece to the bail. The  clerk shall keep a properly indexed book for recording abstracts of recognizances of bail, which shall be accessible to all persons at all proper times.  The abstract to be recorded in such book shall contain a statement of the name of the court, the names of plaintiff and defendant and the bail, the residence of the bail and the amount of the bail.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-47.  Render in discharge of bail
    The defendant may, on notice to the plaintiff, render himself or be rendered  in discharge of his bail, either before or after judgment, to the court in  which the action was brought;  but such render shall be made within 20 days  after proceedings or an action is commenced against the bail on the recognizance of bail and not after, unless for good cause the court grants further time.  Upon the render the defendant shall be committed, and thereupon the bail shall be discharged.  At any time before judgment in the action, a defendant who has been rendered in discharge of his bail or has been arrested as provided in section 2A:15-44 of this title, may be released on again giving bail, on notice to the plaintiff.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-48.  Set-off
    Any defendant failing to set off a liquidated debt or demand, or a debt or demand capable of being ascertained by calculation, shall thereafter be precluded from bringing any action for such debt or demand.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-49.  What constitutes
    No judge of any court shall sit on the trial of or argument of any matter in  controversy in a cause pending in his court, when he:

    a.  Is related in the third degree to any of the parties to the action, which degree shall be computed as at common law;  or

    b.  Has been attorney of record or counsel for a party to such action; or

     c.  Has given his opinion upon a matter in question in such action;  or

     d.  Is interested in the event of such action.

     This section shall not be construed to prevent a judge from sitting on such  trial or argument because he has given his opinion in another action in which  the same matter in controversy came in question or given his opinion on any  question in controversy in the pending action in the course of previous proceedings therein, or because the board of chosen freeholders of a county or municipality in which he is a resident or liable to be taxed are or may be parties to the record or otherwise interested.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-50.  Challenges;  triors;  determination
    Challenges to a judge for any of the causes mentioned in section 2A:15-49 of  this title shall be made before the trial or argument.  The court may, in its  discretion, try the challenges or appoint 3 disinterested persons as triors  thereof.  The finding of a majority of the triors shall be their determination.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-51.  Restraining order or interlocutory or permanent injunction in disputes concerning terms or conditions of employment prohibited
    No court of the state of New Jersey, nor any judge or judges thereof, shall  issue any restraining order or interlocutory or permanent injunction to prohibit any person or persons (as these terms are defined in this article) from doing, whether singly or in concert, any of the following acts:

    a.  Ceasing or refusing to perform any work or to remain in any relation of  employment;

    b.  Becoming or remaining a member of any labor organization or of any organization of employers, regardless of any undertaking or promise hereafter made;

    c.  Paying or giving to, or withholding from any person or persons any strike or unemployment benefits or insurance or other moneys or things of value;

    d.  By all lawful means aiding any person or persons in any labor dispute who is or are being proceeded against in, or is or are prosecuting, any action in any court of this state;

    e.  Giving publicity to the existence of, or the facts involved in, any labor dispute, whether by advertising, speaking, patrolling, picketing, without  fraud or violence, or by any other method not involving fraud or violence, and  not in violation of any other law of the state of New Jersey;

    f.  Assembling peaceably to act or to organize to act in promotion of their  interests in a labor dispute;

    g.  Advising or notifying persons of an intention to do any of the acts heretofore specified;

    h.  Agreeing with other persons to do or not to do any of the acts heretofore specified;

    i.  Advising, urging, or otherwise causing or inducing without fraud or violence the acts heretofore specified regardless of any undertaking or promise  hereafter made;

    j.  Requiring as a condition of employment that all employees of a particular employer or group of employers shall be members of a particular labor organization.

    k.  The aforesaid acts are hereby declared, as a matter of public policy of  the state of New Jersey, to be lawful and in no wise to constitute a tort or a  nuisance.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-52.  Public policy in matter of injunctions in labor disputes
    In the interpretation and application of this article, the public policy of  the state of New Jersey is hereby defined and declared as follows:

    Procedure that permits a complaining party, to obtain in any case involving  or growing out of a labor dispute, as hereinafter defined, sweeping injunctive  relief that is not preceded by or conditioned upon notice to and hearing of the  responding party or parties, or that issues after hearing based upon written  affidavits alone and not wholly or in part upon examination, confrontation and  cross-examination of witnesses in open court, is subject to abuse and contrary  to the public policy of the state of New Jersey for the reason that:

    a.  The status quo cannot be maintained, but is necessarily altered by the injunction.

    b.  Determination of issues of veracity and of probability of fact from affidavits of the opposing parties that are contradictory and, under the circumstances, untrustworthy, rather than from oral examination in open court is subject to grave error.

    c.  Error in issuing the injunctive relief is usually irreparable to the opposing party, and

    d.  Delay incident to the normal course of appellate practice frequently makes ultimate correction of error in law or in fact unavailing in the particular case.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-53.  Temporary or permanent injunctions in labor disputes; hearing and findings required;  notice;  duration of temporary restraining order; bond  or undertaking
    No court of the state of New Jersey nor any judge or judges thereof shall issue a temporary or permanent injunction in any case involving or growing out of a labor dispute, as herein defined, except after hearing the testimony of witnesses in open court (with opportunity for cross-examination) in support of the allegations of a complaint made under oath, and testimony in opposition thereto, if offered, and except after findings of all the following facts by the court or judge or judges thereof:

    a.  That unlawful acts have been committed and are likely to be continued unless restrained;

    b.  That substantial and irreparable injury to plaintiff's property will follow unless the relief is granted;

    c.  That as to each item of relief granted greater injury will be inflicted  upon plaintiff by the denial thereof than will be inflicted upon defendants by  the granting thereof;

    d.  That plaintiff has no adequate remedy at law.

     Such hearing shall be held after due and personal notice thereof has been given, in such manner as the court shall direct, to all known persons against whom relief is sought;  provided, however, that if a plaintiff shall also allege that unless a temporary restraining order shall be issued without notice, a substantial and irreparable injury to plaintiff's property will be unavoidable, then in that case a temporary restraining order may be issued; provided, the plaintiff presents oral testimony under oath sufficient to justify the court in issuing a temporary injunction upon a hearing after notice.

    Such temporary restraining order shall be effective for no longer than 5 days, and at the expiration of said 5 days shall become void.

    No temporary restraining order or interlocutory injunction or permanent injunction shall be allowed, except upon condition that plaintiff shall first file with the court a bond or undertaking, in favor of the person or persons enjoined or restrained, in an amount to be fixed by the court issuing the restraining order or injunction, sufficient to secure to the person or persons enjoined their court costs, attorney and counsel fees taxed against the plaintiff, in the event that the injunctive relief sought is subsequently denied by the court or in the event that the order or judgment granting such injunctive relief is thereafter reversed by an appellate court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-54.  When restraining order or injunctive relief not to be granted
    No restraining order or injunctive relief shall be granted to any plaintiff  who has failed to comply with any obligation imposed by law which is involved  in the labor dispute in question, or who has failed to make every reasonable  effort to settle such dispute either by negotiation or with the aid of any  available governmental machinery of mediation or voluntary arbitration.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-55.  Finding of fact as basis for restraining order or injunction; acts to be enjoined;  duration of permanent injunction
    a.  No restraining order or interlocutory or permanent injunction shall be granted in a case involving or growing out of a labor dispute, except on the basis of findings of fact made and filed by the court in the record of the case  prior to the issuance of such restraining order or injunction; and every restraining order or injunction granted in a case involving or growing out of a  labor dispute shall include only a prohibition of such specific act or acts as  may be expressly complained of in the complaint filed in such case and as shall  be expressly included in said findings of fact made and filed by the court as  provided herein.

    b.  No permanent injunction shall remain in full force more than 6 months from the date on which the judgment and order or either is filed; provided, however, that the duration of the injunction might be extended for another 6 months if after a further hearing initiated and conducted in the same manner as  the original hearing, the court shall determine that the injunction shall be  continued or modified in accordance with the findings of fact on the subsequent  hearing.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-56.  Disobedience of restraining order or injunction;  contempt; jury  trial;  fees;  trial without jury
    Whenever any person or persons shall be cited for disobeying, or shall be directed or ordered to show cause why they should not be adjudged in contempt of court for disobeying the restraining order, interlocutory injunction, or injunction above-mentioned, then the person or persons so cited or directed or ordered to show cause shall, on application to the court, have the facts concerning such dispute determined by a jury presided over by a judicial officer other than the one who issued such temporary restraining order, interlocutory injunction, or permanent injunction and shall order such jury trial.

    The procedure before the court presiding at the hearing on the citation in impaneling and selecting the jury and in admitting evidence shall be the same as that provided for civil cases tried in the superior court.  The jurymen so summoned shall be entitled to the same fees for services as are now allowed in other civil trials.  In the event that the person cited or directed or ordered to show cause as aforesaid shall not demand a jury trial, then and in that case, such dispute shall be determined and presided over by a judicial officer other than the one who issued such temporary restraining order, interlocutory injunction or permanent injunction.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-57.  Punishment for contempt
    Punishment for a contempt specified in section 2A:15-56 of this title may be  by fine, not exceeding $100, or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, in the  jail of the county where the court is sitting, or both, in the discretion of  the court;  provided, however, that this limitation shall not apply to any contempt conviction based on violations committed by a defendant subsequent to his initial conviction for violating any provision of the same injunction. Where a person is committed to jail, for the nonpayment of such a fine, he must be discharged at the expiration of 15 days;  but where he is also committed for a definite time, the 15 days must be computed from the expiration  of the definite time.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-58.  Definitions
    For the purpose of this article:

    a.  A case shall be held to involve or to grow out of a labor dispute when the case involves persons who are engaged in industry, trade, craft, employment, or occupation;  or who are members of an affiliated organization of  employers or employees;  whether such dispute is (1) between 1 or more employees and 1 or more employers;  (2) between 1 or more employees and an association or associations of employees or employers;  (3) between an association or associations of employees and any other association or associations of employees;  (4) between 1 or more associations of employees and  1 or more employers or associations of employers;  or when the case involves  any conflicting or competing interests in a  "labor dispute"  (as hereinafter  defined) of  "persons participating or interested"  therein (as hereinafter  defined).

    b.  A person or association shall be held to be a person participating or interested in a labor dispute if relief is sought against him or it, and if he or it is engaged in the industry, trade, craft, or occupation in which such dispute occurs, or has a direct or indirect interest therein, or is a member, officer, or agent of any association of employers or employees engaged in such industry, trade, craft, or occupation.

    c.  The term  "labor dispute"  includes any controversy concerning terms or  conditions of employment, or concerning the association or representation of  persons in negotiating, fixing, maintaining, changing, or seeking to arrange  terms or conditions of employment, or concerning employment relations, or any  other controversy arising out of the respective interests of employer and  employee, regardless of whether or not the disputants stand in the proximate  relation of employer and employee.

    d.  The word  "person"  as used in this article shall include the plural thereof and shall include and be taken to mean any organization of such persons.  Wherever used in this article, the words  "plaintiff" , "employer" , "employee" , and  "proximate relation of employer and employee"  shall include the plural thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-59.  Costs allowed in discretion of court
    Except as otherwise provided by law, costs may be allowed or disallowed in the discretion of the court to any party in any action, motion, appeal or proceeding, whether or not he be successful therein;  and where allowed, they may be taxed according to law.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-59.1.  Frivolous causes of action  
    1.  a.  (1)  A party who prevails in a civil action, either as plaintiff or defendant, against any other party may be awarded all reasonable litigation costs and reasonable attorney fees, if the judge finds at any time during the proceedings or upon judgment that a complaint, counterclaim, cross-claim or defense of the nonprevailing person was frivolous.  

   (2)  When a public entity is required or authorized by law to provide for the defense of a present or former employee, the public entity may be awarded all reasonable litigation costs and reasonable attorney fees if the individual for whom the defense was provided is the prevailing party in a civil action, and if there is a judicial determination at any time during the proceedings or upon judgment that a complaint, counterclaim, cross-claim, or defense of the nonprevailing party was frivolous.  

   b.   In order to find that a complaint, counterclaim, cross-claim or defense of the nonprevailing party was frivolous, the judge shall find on the basis of the pleadings, discovery, or the evidence presented that either:  

   (1)  The complaint, counterclaim, cross-claim or defense was commenced, used or continued in bad faith, solely for the purpose of harassment, delay or malicious injury; or  

   (2)  The nonprevailing party knew, or should have known, that the complaint, counterclaim, cross-claim or defense was without any reasonable basis in law or equity and could not be supported by a good faith argument for an extension, modification or reversal of existing law.  

   c.   A party or public entity seeking an award under this section shall make application to the court which heard the matter. The application shall be supported by an affidavit stating in detail:  

   (1)  The nature of the services rendered, the responsibility assumed, the results obtained, the amount of time spent by the attorney, any particular novelty or difficulty, the time spent and services rendered by secretaries and staff, other factors pertinent in the evaluation of the services rendered, the amount of the allowance applied for, an itemization of the disbursements for which reimbursement is sought, and any other factors relevant in evaluating fees and costs; and  

   (2)  How much has been paid to the attorney and what provision, if any, has been made for the payment of these fees in the future.  

   L.1988,c.46,s.1; amended 1995,c.13.  

2A:15-60.  State or person prosecuting therefor
    In an action brought by the state, or the governor, or any person for the use of the state, the plaintiff shall recover costs as any other plaintiff; but the defendant in such an action shall not recover any costs against such plaintiff, whether the action is dismissed, judgment shall pass in favor of the  defendant or any other proceeding is taken.

    This section shall not apply to any popular action, nor to any action on a penal statute, prosecuted by any person on behalf of himself and the state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-61.  Double costs on appeal after jury verdict
    Where an appeal is taken from a judgment of any court of record of this state after verdict of a jury, and the judgment is affirmed, the prevailing party shall, unless the appellate court shall in express terms adjudge to the contrary, be entitled to double costs on the appeal.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-62.    Actions cognizable before the Superior Court, Law Division, Special Civil Part commenced in Law Division  
     2A:15-62. If an action cognizable before the Superior Court, Law Division, Special Civil Part is brought in the Superior Court, Law Division and if the plaintiff obtains judgment for an amount not exceeding the jurisdictional limit of the Special Civil Part exclusive of costs, the plaintiff may be allowed costs, but not exceeding the amount allowable in the Special Civil Part.  

    This section shall not extend to any action in which the title to real estate may, in any way, come in question, nor to any action in which the judge before whom it is tried shall, immediately after the verdict or the finding, certify that, in his judgment, the action should have been brought in the division and part of the Superior Court in which it was instituted.  

    	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1957,c.120,s.3; 1969,c.177,s.3; 1981,c.223,s.6; 1991,c.91,s.32.  

2A:15-63.  Actions for assault, battery, imprisonment, libel or slander
    If, in an action for damages based upon an assault, battery or imprisonment  or for libel or slander, plaintiff does not recover damages to the amount of  $50, his costs shall not exceed the damages recovered.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-64.  By whom taxed;  clerk to sign bill of costs
    Costs shall be taxed by the clerks of the respective courts upon application  of the party entitled thereto, or, where taxation is necessary and proper to  enable any other party to proceed in the action, then upon his application;  or  they may be taxed by the court.  The clerk when taxing the costs shall sign the  bill of costs.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-65.  Time within which costs must be taxed
    If costs are not taxed within 6 months next after the entry of a judgment or  order or, where the judgment or order becomes the subject of review or further  litigation, within 6 months after such judgment or order is finally disposed  of, no costs shall thereafter be allowed or taxed, unless the court, upon good  cause shown, orders allowance and taxation thereafter.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-66.  Duties of taxing officer
    The officer authorized to tax costs in any civil matter shall, whether or not objection is made, examine the bills presented to him for taxation, satisfy  himself that all the items allowed are correct and legal, strike out all  charges for fees, not expressly allowed by law, as to which it does not appear  that the services charged for were actually and necessarily performed, and, so  far as possible, classify and segregate the fees payable to attorneys and  counsellors, the clerk of the court, the court, the sheriff and other persons.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-67.    Bond for costs by nonresident claimant  
     2A:15-67.  Where in any action in the Superior Court any plaintiff or any party asserting a counterclaim, cross-claim or third-party claim is a nonresident, he shall, if, at any time before trial, notice is given to him by an opposing party demanding security for costs, give bond in favor of the opposing party, or, if there is more than one making the demand, in favor of each of them, in the sum of $200, with sufficient surety, conditioned to prosecute the action with effect and to pay costs if the action is dismissed or judgment passes against him.  If there is more than one plaintiff or claimant, they may give bond jointly in the sum of $200, all as aforesaid.  

    If the surety on the bond is an individual and not a corporation, he shall be a resident of this State.  

    The bond shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.33; 1991,c.177,s.17.  

2A:15-68.  Deposit in lieu of bond
    In lieu of a bond for costs, the nonresident party may deposit with the clerk cash in the amount of $100 or, if there is more than one opposing party demanding security, then in the amount of $100 for each such party.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-69.  Proceedings stayed until bond filed or deposit made
    Whenever a notice is given demanding from a nonresident party security for costs, all proceedings on his claim shall be stayed until the required security  is filed or deposit made.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-70.  Notice of security given
    Upon filing bond or making deposit, the nonresident party shall give notice  thereof to the opposing party or parties making the demand, with the names of  the sureties on the bond and the residences of the individual sureties.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-71.  Bond or deposit filed before demand is made for security
    Before security is demanded, the nonresident party may file a bond for security for costs as provided in this article or make deposit in lieu of it, and give notice thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-72.  Exception to bond
    Where the nonresident party files a bond and with it an affidavit of the surety that he is a resident of this state and worth, above all debts and liabilities, more than double the amount of the bond, or in the case of a corporate surety, other sufficient justification, no exception may be taken to the surety.  But if the affidavit or other sufficient justification is not filed, the party demanding the security may within 10 days after receiving the notice of the filing of the bond, give notice to the nonresident party that he excepts to the surety.  Upon such exception, the nonresident party shall file the affidavit or other justification or file a new bond with a like affidavit or other justification, or make a deposit as aforesaid, and give the party making the demand notice thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-73  Investment of moneys brought into Superior Court
	2A:15-73. The chief justice may cause any moneys brought into the Superior Court or remaining on deposit therein to be invested (a) in the bonds and other securities of the United States, (b) in interest-bearing bonds of such character and description as are or may be lawful investments for moneys deposited with savings banks of this State, (c) in bonds secured by mortgages which shall be a first lien upon improved real estate situate in this State worth at least double the amount loaned thereon, (d) in programs as approved by the State Investment Council which are managed by the Division of  Investment and in the New Jersey Cash Management Fund established pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1977, c.281 (C.52:18A-90.4), or (e) in any combination thereof.  For the purpose of making such investments, moneys remaining to the credit of different persons or causes  may be commingled.  The moneys so deposited or invested, and the securities in which the same may be invested, shall be from time to time accounted for, invested, transferred, reinvested, or otherwise disposed of, as the chief justice shall deem reasonable and proper; and the interest and income derived from such investments, after deducting expenses, losses and reserves for the protection thereof, shall be apportioned to the several parties entitled thereto at such rate as the chief justice shall from time to time determine.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1997, c.206.

2A:15-74.  Care and supervision of funds, investments and securities; persons employed for;  compensation and salaries
    The chief justice may, from time to time, employ some suitable persons and assistants, to be selected by him, to exercise general care and supervision, subject to his orders, over the funds, investments and securities from time to time remaining in the superior court and fix the compensation and salaries for such persons, to be paid either out of the general income of the funds or out of any fund for the benefit of which special services may be rendered, as may be equitable and just.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-75.  Payment of judgments out of funds in court
    If in any cause moneys are deposited with any court of this state, and any person shall hold a judgment in any of the courts of this state against any person entitled to the moneys, or any part thereof, the court in which the moneys are deposited shall, upon application made in the cause by or in behalf of such judgment creditor, and upon proof by affidavit or otherwise, as the court directs, that the residence of the person entitled to such moneys is unknown and cannot be ascertained, order and direct such moneys to be applied upon such judgment.  It shall not be necessary that the judgment creditor be, or be admitted as, a party defendant in such cause.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-92.  Actions during world war II against persons in enemy or enemy-occupied countries
    In any action involving real or personal property subject to the control of  this state, or any interest therein, in which service of process is required to  be made upon any person who is or is believed to be, in a designated enemy  country or enemy-occupied territory, in addition to the service of process upon  such person otherwise required, a copy of such process shall be sent by  registered mail to the attorney general of the United States in care of the  office of alien property, department of justice, Washington, District of  Columbia.

    If the person upon whom process is required to be served shall not appear or  answer within the time limited or granted, the court shall appoint a guardian  ad litem for him, who shall appear and who may defend the action, and the  action may proceed in all respects as if such person had been duly served in  this state with process.  The court may appoint the attorney general of the  United States as such guardian ad litem.

    For the purposes of this section:  (a)  "designated enemy country" means any foreign country with which the United States of America was on March 25, 1943 at war and any other country with which the United States shall be at war thereafter during the course of the hostilities existing on March 25, 1943; (b)  "enemy-occupied territory"  shall be taken to mean any place under the control of any designated enemy country or any place with which, by reason of the existence of a state of war during such hostilities, the United States of America does not maintain postal communication.

    This and the next sections are declared to be remedial and emergency legislation, and shall remain in force only so long as a state of war shall exist between the United States and any designated enemy country.  They shall be liberally construed and administered.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-93.  Payment of enemy property to United States attorney general
    When an action mentioned in section 2A:15-92 of this title, or a proceeding  in any such action, is brought for the purpose of directing, approving or  authorizing the payment of any money or the delivery, transfer or conveyance of  any property to a person mentioned in that section or to his heirs, devisees,  grantees, next of kin, issue, legatees, and personal representatives, or any  other defendant, or for the purpose of adjudging that he is or they are  entitled to any moneys or property or an interest therein, and it appears to be  in the public interest that such payment, delivery, transfer or conveyance  should be withheld, the court in which the action is pending may direct by its  judgment or order that such money be paid or such property be delivered,  transferred or conveyed to the attorney general of the United States, if he  will receive the same.  Upon such payment or delivery, transfer or conveyance,  any fiduciary, or officer or other person in possession or having custody or  control of said moneys or property, or any other person adjudged by the court  to be liable for the payment of any money or the delivery of any property to  such defendant, shall take therefor the receipt of the attorney general.  If  the attorney general, within 60 days after receipt by him of a certified copy  of said judgment or order, which shall be sent to him at the office of alien property by registered mail, shall not file with the clerk of the court a consent to accept and receipt for such money or property, the said fiduciary,  officer or other person may, upon filing an affidavit stating the failure of  the attorney general so to do, pay the said money or, if the court so orders,  deliver, transfer or convey the said property to the clerk of the court, taking  therefor the receipt of the said clerk.

    Such receipt signed by or on behalf of the attorney general or the said clerk, as the case may be, shall be a full and sufficient discharge, of the fiduciary, officer or other person for money so paid or the property so delivered, transferred or conveyed to the attorney general or the said clerk and against any claimant thereto entitled.  The receipt may be recorded in the office of the surrogate, or the clerk of the court, appointing him, in the same  manner in which releases for legacies and distributive shares may be recorded.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-94.  Transfer of actions pending September 15, 1948
    L.1948, c. 367, p. 1501, [C. 2:16-70 to 2:16-86] entitled  "An act concerning the administration of justice and regulating the causes and proceedings pending in the courts upon the taking effect of the judicial article of the constitution and which are transferred to the courts established  by said judicial article" , approved September 10, 1948, saved from repeal.   [The purpose of this act is to facilitate the transfer of causes pending in  the courts on September 15, 1948.]

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-95.  Validation of sales where defect in notice to non-resident defendants
    L.1939, c. 54, p. 79, s. 1, entitled  "An act validating the sales of certain  lands, tenements, hereditaments or real estate made under any decree, judgment  or order of any court of this state, or any execution or other process issued  thereon,"  saved from repeal.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:15-96.  Payment for losses resulting from accident without admission of liability
    Any person, including his insurer, may make payments to, or on behalf of, a  potential plaintiff for losses or expenses resulting from any accident, without  any admission of liability.  Any such payment may be made without prejudice to  the rights of any of the parties, including the insurer, but shall not be  recoverable from a potential plaintiff.  Any such payment shall be deducted  from any settlement or judgment.

     L.1969, c. 280, s. 1, eff. Jan. 14, 1970.

2A:15-97.    Deduction of duplicate benefits 
     In any civil action brought for personal injury or death, except actions brought pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1972, c. 70 (C. 39:6A-1 et seq.), if a plaintiff receives or is entitled to receive benefits for the injuries allegedly incurred from any other source other than a joint tortfeasor, the benefits, other than workers' compensation benefits or the proceeds from a life insurance policy, shall be disclosed to the court and the amount thereof which duplicates any benefit contained in the award shall be deducted from any award recovered by the plaintiff, less any premium paid to an insurer directly by the plaintiff or by any member of the plaintiff's family on behalf of the plaintiff for the policy period during which the benefits are payable.  Any party to the action shall be permitted to introduce evidence regarding any of the matters described in this act. 

    L. 1987,c.326. 

2A:16-1.  Effective from time of entry
	2A:16-1.  No judgment of the Superior Court shall affect or bind any real estate, but from the time of the actual entry of such judgment on the minutes or records of the court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1981,c.388,s.1.

2A:16-2.  Minute entry of verdict or judgment as record of judgment
    Until the clerk of any court enters the record of a judgment in any action which has been finally determined, the verdict or judgment entered in the minutes shall be held and taken in the court in which the judgment is obtained to be the record of the judgment in such action, and shall be received in evidence in such court as such judgment, as fully as if the record had been made up and signed.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-3.     Security for payment of judgment; order discharging real estate from lien  
     2A:16-3. If appellant, in an appeal from a judgment of the Superior Court, deposits with the clerk of the court such an amount as shall be deemed by that court to be sufficient, as security for the payment of such amount as may finally be determined to be due in the action, the court may by order discharge the real estate of appellant from the lien of the judgment appealed from.  

    The amount deposited shall be subject to the lien of the judgment appealed from and of any subsequent judgment recovered in the action, and shall be retained by the clerk until the final determination of the action.  

    When the order has been filed and the deposit made as required, the clerk shall enter in the margin of the record of the judgment or at a discernible place at the entry of the judgment, the words "lien of judgment discharged by order of the court," with the date of the discharge. Thereupon and thereafter the real estate of appellant shall be absolutely discharged and freed from any claim on account of the judgment appealed from or the action in which the judgment was rendered.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.34.  

2A:16-4.  Cash deposit in lieu of supersedeas bond
    When a cash deposit is made in lieu of a supersedeas bond on appeal, the cash deposit shall be retained until the final determination of the cause and shall be subject to the lien of the judgment appealed from and costs, interest thereon and the costs of the appeal.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-5.  Interest of purchasers and mortgagees, etc., saved
    No proceedings to be relieved of a final judgment shall, unless the judgment  be void, in any wise affect the title of a purchaser or mortgagee for value, of  any property derived under such judgment or process issued thereon or the right  of any person who has acquired an interest therein for value depending upon any  such judgment or process, or of their respective successors in interest.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-6.  Setting aside fraudulent judgment on motion of judgment creditor
    A judgment entered in any action in any court by confession or otherwise which was confessed or obtained for the purpose of defrauding the creditors of the defendant, may be set aside by proceedings in the action taken by any judgment creditor of the defendant as though the judgment creditor were a party  to the action.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-7  Judgment for conveyance of land; effect.
 
 	2A:16-7. When a judgment of the Superior Court is entered for a conveyance, release, or acquittance of real estate or an interest therein, and the party against whom the judgment is entered has failed to comply by the time specified in the judgment, or within 15 days after entry of the judgment if no time is specified therein, the judgment shall have the same operation and effect in all courts as if the conveyance, release, or acquittance had been executed in conformance with the judgment, notwithstanding any disability of the party because of not having reached the age of majority pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1972, c.81 (C.9:17B-3), mental incapacity, or otherwise.
 
	amended 2013, c.103, s.5.

2A:16-8.  Offset against judgment of taxes, etc., due municipality
    Whenever any judgment is recovered in an action in any court of competent jurisdiction in this state, against any municipality by any person who is, at the time of the recovery of the judgment, indebted to such municipality upon any indebtedness of a public nature, including taxes, assessments or water rates which constitute an indebtedness, or who shall become so indebted before the satisfaction of the judgment, such municipality may apply to the court in the action for an order to reduce or extinguish the judgment, and any execution  issued thereon, by offsetting and crediting against the same any such  indebtedness.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-9.  Warrant of attorney to confess judgment not revocable; ineffectual if found in instrument
    A warrant of attorney to confess judgment shall not be revocable by the party making it.  No judgment by confession shall be entered upon a warrant of attorney which is included in the body of a bond, note or any instrument for the payment of money.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-9.1  Business financing not extended to concern containing a judgment by confession.
 	1. a. (1) No provider of business financing shall extend business financing to a concern in this State that contains a judgment by confession.
 
	(2)	No judgment shall be entered on warrant of attorney in any action on a bond or other instrument for the payment of money, except on motion after notice to the defendant served in lieu of summons in accordance with applicable court rules or by registered or certified mail.
 
	b.	A provision of any contract for business financing that provides for a judgment by confession that does not meet the requirements of subsection a. of this section shall be invalid and unenforceable against any concern.
 
	c.	As used in this section:
 
	"Business financing" means a loan, line of credit, cash advance, factoring or asset-based transaction made for a business purpose.
 
	"Concern" means any trade, business or professional entity conducted for profit, and includes, but is not limited to, individuals, partnerships, corporations, joint ventures, associations and cooperatives.
 
	"Judgment by confession" means a written agreement that accepts liability and specifies damages in cases in which a concern is in violation of a business financing agreement.
 
	L.2019, c.430, s.1.

2A:16-9.2  Violations, civil action.
  	2. a. The Attorney General shall investigate violations of this act.  If the Attorney General finds that a person has violated or is violating this act, the Attorney General may bring a civil action in State or federal court against the person.  The Superior Court shall have jurisdiction over a State action brought pursuant to this act.
 
	b.	Any person who violates this act shall be liable for a penalty of not more than $5,000 for the first violation, $10,000 for the second violation and $15,000 for each subsequent violation.  The court shall also award court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees to the Attorney General.
 
	L.2019, c.430, s.2.

2A:16-11.    Civil judgment and order docket  
    2A:16-11. The Clerk of the Superior Court shall keep a book known as a civil judgment and order docket in which shall be entered an abstract of each judgment or order for the payment of money, submitted for entry, including a judgment or order to pay counsel fees and other fees or costs, entered from, or made in, the Superior Court. A judgment of the Special Civil Part of the Law Division shall not be entered unless it is docketed in the manner specifically provided for Special Civil Part judgments. A judgment or order for the payment of money is one which has been reduced to a fixed dollar amount. Any judgment for periodic payments where a total amount has not been fixed shall not be considered as having been reduced to a fixed dollar amount unless a judgment fixing arrearages has been entered.  

   The entry required by this section shall constitute the record of the judgment, order or decree and a transcript thereof duly certified by the clerk of the court shall be a plenary evidence of such judgment, order or decree.  

   The clerk shall also make an entry upon the civil judgment and order docket indicating the nature of every judgment or order and an entry on return showing execution of process and the date when such judgment or order was entered.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1981,c.388,ss.2,5(amended 1982,c.65,s.3); 1982,c.65,s.1; 1983,c.299; 1991,c.91,s.35; 1994,c.81,s.2.  

2A:16-11.1  Issuance of certificate of debt; definitions.
 
	1. a. In addition to any other remedy provided by law, where a debt is owed to a State department or agency, and the person who owes the debt has failed to comply within 30 days after service of any notice, demand or order directing payment of any amount found to be due, the Department of the Treasury, on behalf of the department or agency, may issue a certificate of debt to the Clerk of the Superior Court stating that the person identified in the certificate of debt is indebted to the State in such amount as shall be stated in the certificate of debt.
 
	b.	The certificate of debt shall reference the statute, regulation or other legal authority under which the indebtedness arises. Thereupon the clerk to whom such certificate of debt shall have been issued shall immediately enter upon the record of docketed judgments the name of such person or entity as debtor; the State as creditor; the address of such person or entity, if shown in the certificate of debt; a reference to the statute, regulation or other legal authority under which the debt arises; and the date of making such entries.
 
	c.	The docketing of the certificate of debt shall have the same force and effect as a civil judgment docketed in the Superior Court subject to the procedures for appeal as set forth in section 4 of P.L. 2005, c. 124 (C.52:18-38).  The docketing of the certificate of debt shall be without prejudice to the right of appeal to the Appellate Division of the Superior Court.
 
	d.	As used in this section, in sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 8 of P.L.2005, c.124 (C.52:18-36, C.52:18-37, C.52:18-38, C.52:14F-22, C.52:18-39 and C.52:14F-23), and in sections 3 and 4 of P.L.2008, c.24 (C.52:18-40 and C.52:18-41):
 
	"Debt" means a fee, fine, cost, penalty or assessment that has been due and owing a State department or agency for 90 days or more.  "Debt" does not include inter-agency debts and debts associated with loans, notes, grants, and contracts.
 
	e.	As used in this amendatory and supplementary act, "State department or agency" does not include an independent authority or instrumentality that is independent of the operational and budgetary control of the department to which it is allocated.
 
	L.2005, c.124, s.1; amended 2008, c.24. s.1.

2A:16-12.  Recording of judgments, orders and proceedings
    The clerk of the superior court shall record every judgment and appealable order and in actions in which any writ or other proceeding shall require the removal of the record of any judgment to any other court, or other circumstances render it necessary, the clerk shall record also the proceedings in the action in full, by entering the warrants of attorney, process and return, pleadings, proceedings and judgment, so as to make a complete record thereof, which entry shall constitute the record.

    In each such case, the clerk shall enter on the civil docket and, when the judgment is recorded therein, on the civil judgment and order docket, the date and place where the judgment is recorded in full as provided by this section.

    The photographing and placing in suitable secured binders of photostats, or  the microphotographing and development of the microfilm reel, or the placing of  carbon copies in suitable secured binders, of any pleading, judgment, order or  any instrument filed with the clerk of the court, with a suitable index  thereto, shall constitute a recording as required by this section.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-13.  Judgments by confession
    The clerk shall record by similar entry in the civil judgment and order docket all judgments by confession entered in his office and shall record in the manner provided in section 2A:16-12 of this title, all documents filed or lodged with him to be recorded in his office in connection with the entry of any such judgment.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-15.  Assignments of, postponement of lien of or warrant to satisfy judgments;  recording;  entry of satisfaction
    The clerk shall enter upon the civil judgment and order docket, if the judgment is entered therein, and otherwise in the civil docket, a notation of the filing or lodging with him for record of any assignment of, postponement of  the lien of, or warrant to satisfy, any judgment, indicating when and where the  same is recorded or filed, at a discernible place on or at the entry of such  judgment in said docket and shall cause all such assignments of judgments and  all postponements or warrants to satisfy judgments to be recorded in the manner  provided by section 2A:16-12 of this title.

    Judgments shall be satisfied of record as required by law but the entry of satisfaction may be made at any discernible place on or at the entry of such judgment on the civil judgment and order docket and upon any other record of such judgment.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-16.  Indices
    The clerk shall keep and maintain suitable indices in alphabetical order of  the civil judgment and order docket and the record of all judgments, assignments of judgments, postponement of the lien of judgments, or warrants to  satisfy judgments, in such form as shall be prescribed by the administrative  director with the approval of the chief justice.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-17.  Notation of filing or lodging for record
    The entry upon the civil judgment and order docket of a notation of the filing or lodging for record of any instrument required so to be entered by this article shall be a sufficient compliance with any provision of law requiring notations thereof on the margin or at the foot or in any other location on any book or record thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-18.  Judgments or orders for payment of money;  operation and effect
    Every judgment, or order for the payment of money, entered in the Superior Court, Chancery Division, from the time of its entry upon the civil judgment and order docket, and every decree or order for the payment of money, of the former court of chancery, from the time it was signed, shall have the force, operation and effect of a judgment of the Superior Court, Law Division, and execution may issue thereon as in other cases.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1981, c. 388, s. 3, eff. July 1, 1982;  L.1982, c. 65, s. 2, eff.  July 12, 1982.

2A:16-28.  Statement and affidavit
    The statements provided for by section 2A:16-27 and section 2A:16-29 of this  title shall be certified by the surrogate and shall contain the names of the  parties to the judgment or order (designating particularly those against whom  it was rendered), the time when it was signed, the amount of the money therein  ordered to be paid or allowances made, the fine imposed and costs, with an  affidavit annexed thereto stating the amount due on the judgment or order at  the time of the filing of the statement.  The affidavit shall be sworn to by  the filing party or his attorney.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-29.  Liens and priorities of judgments or orders on filing statement in superior court clerk's office
    Upon the filing by a party in interest with the clerk of the superior court  of a statement thereof and affidavit in the form provided in section 2A:16-28  of this title, judgments or orders referred to in section 2A:16-27 of this  title shall have the same liens and priorities as judgments of the superior  court, and like executions may issue thereon.  The clerk shall forthwith record  the statement and affidavit in a proper public record book kept and indexed by  him for that purpose.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-31.  Fees and costs
    The fees and costs allowed by law for services rendered under this article shall be a part of the amount due on the judgments or orders therein involved.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-32.  Remedy against principal or surety
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect any remedy against, or  to make liable or release, any principal or surety on a bond heretofore or hereafter made or given.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-33.    Judgment; effect on real estate  
     2A:16-33. Where an appeal is taken from a municipal court in a civil action to the Superior Court, the judgment of the court on appeal shall not be binding on real estate unless an order is or has been entered in the minutes of the Superior Court directing the judgment to be recorded. From the time of the entry of the order, the judgment binds and shall bind all real estate of the judgment debtor in the State.  

    Such order may be entered at any time without notice. When entered, the judgment shall be recorded and indexed as other judgments of the court.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.36.  

2A:16-36.  Effect of docketing in superior court
    A judgment duly docketed in the superior court shall, from the time it is docketed, operate as a judgment obtained in the superior court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-41.  Requisites of assignment to entitle it to record
    An assignment of a judgment, to be entitled to record, shall be in writing,  and acknowledged or proved as conveyances of real estate are required to be  acknowledged or proved for the purposes of recording.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-42.  Record of assignment as notice
    The record of an assignment of a judgment shall, from the time the assignment is left for record, be notice to all persons concerned that such judgment is so assigned, except that a sheriff or other officer having in his hands an execution delivered to him by a person who at the time of the delivery  was the owner of the judgment, shall not be liable to an assignee of the  judgment unless the officer has notice of such assignment or fails to return  such execution at the time when it is returnable.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-44.    Postponement of lien of judgment  
     2A:16-44. All postponements of the lien of judgments appearing of record in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court shall contain a full description of the property as to which the judgment lien is proposed to be postponed, together with the book and page of the record of the judgment to be postponed.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.37.  

2A:16-45.  Court order of satisfaction;  moneys paid into court in satisfaction
    When a judgment is satisfied or the court in which a judgment is rendered or  finally docketed allows moneys to be paid into court in satisfaction of a judgment, the court may direct the clerk to enter satisfaction on the record. Any such payment into court shall not affect the right of any party to appeal or to apply for relief from the judgment or for a new trial.

    When moneys are paid into court in satisfaction of a judgment or order, any  interest in the judgment or order, or claim thereon, including the lien for  costs and compensation, if any, of the attorney for the party recovering the  judgment or order, shall be transferred to the moneys paid into court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-46.  Acknowledgment of satisfaction or warrant to satisfy required
    When a party in whose favor a judgment is entered or docketed, any assignee  of record, anyone entitled to receive satisfaction, or the legal representative  of a deceased party or a guardian, shall have received satisfaction thereof, he  or his attorney shall either enter an acknowledgment of satisfaction on the  record of the judgment, or shall deliver to the party making satisfaction or  his representative, guardian or attorney or to the clerk of the court in which  the judgment is entered or docketed, a warrant directing and authorizing the  clerk to satisfy the same of record.  Any such warrant shall set forth the book  and page wherein the judgment is recorded or docketed.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-47.  Entry of satisfaction by clerk
    Upon the filing of the warrant, the clerk shall forthwith enter satisfaction  on the record.  All satisfactions entered in a county clerk's office shall be  in the margin of the record of the judgment.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-48.    Acknowledgement of satisfaction on record when execution is returned satisfied  
     2A:16-48. When the sheriff or other officer returns, satisfied, execution issued on any judgment recovered or docketed in the Superior Court, Law Division, the clerk of the court issuing the execution shall enter "cancelled by execution returned, satisfied." Upon request the clerk shall tax the fee duly received by him as part of the execution fees.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.38.  

2A:16-49.  Effect of entry of satisfaction on lien of attorney
    The provisions of this article as to the entry of satisfaction of a judgment  shall not be deemed to deprive an attorney at law of a lien which he may have  on the judgment.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-49.1.  Application;  hearing;  order;  cancellation and discharge; effect on lien;  notice of application;  set-off
    At any time after 1 year has elapsed, since a bankrupt was discharged from his debts, pursuant to the acts of Congress relating to bankruptcy, he may apply, upon proof of his discharge, to the court in which a judgment was rendered against him, or to the court of which it has become a judgment by docketing it, or filing a transcript thereof, for an order directing the judgment to be canceled and discharged of record.  If it appears upon the hearing that he has been discharged from the payment of that judgment or the debt upon which such judgment was recovered, an order shall be made directing said judgment to be canceled and discharged of record;  and thereupon the clerk  of said court shall cancel and discharge the same by entering on the record or  in the margin of the record of judgment, that the same is canceled and  discharged by order of the court, giving the date of entry of the order of  discharge.  Where the judgment was a lien on real property owned by the bankrupt prior to the time he was adjudged a bankrupt, and not subject to be discharged or released under the provisions of the Bankruptcy Act, the lien thereof upon said real estate shall not be affected by said order and may be enforced, but in all other respects the judgment shall be of no force or validity, nor shall the same be a lien on real property acquired by him subsequent to his discharge in bankruptcy. Notice of the application, accompanied with copies of the papers upon which it is made, must be served upon the judgment creditor, or his attorney of record in said judgment, in the manner prescribed in R.R. 4:5-1, et cetera, of The Revision of The Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey (1953);  provided, however, nothing herein contained shall prevent said judgment notwithstanding such discharge of record from being used as a set-off in any action in which it otherwise could be used.

     L.1967, c. 151, s. 1, eff. July 10, 1967.

2A:16-50.   "Person"  defined
    As used in this article,  "person"  includes any person, partnership, joint  stock company, unincorporated association or society, and municipal or other  corporation of any character.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:16-51.  Construction and citation of article
    This article is declared to be remedial.  Its purpose is to settle and afford relief from uncertainty and insecurity with respect to rights, status and other legal relations.  It shall be liberally construed and administered, and shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to make uniform the law of those states which enact it, and to harmonize, as far as possible, with federal laws, rules and regulations on the subject of declaratory judgments.  It may be cited as the uniform declaratory judgments law.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:16-52.  Declaration of rights, status and other legal relations
    All courts of record in this state shall, within their respective jurisdictions, have power to declare rights, status and other legal relations, whether or not further relief is or could be claimed;  and no action or proceeding shall be open to objection on the ground that a declaratory judgment  is demanded.

    The enumeration in other sections of this article of the questions determinable and rights declarable in a proceeding brought under the provisions  of this article does not limit or restrict the exercise of the general powers  conferred by this section in a proceeding for declaratory relief, in which a  judgment will terminate the controversy or remove an uncertainty.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:16-53.  Questions determinable and rights declarable
    A person interested under a deed, will, written contract or other writing constituting a contract, or whose rights, status or other legal relations are affected by a statute, municipal ordinance, contract or franchise, may have determined any question of construction or validity arising under the instrument, statute, ordinance, contract or franchise and obtain a declaration of rights, status or other legal relations thereunder.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:16-54.  Contract construed
    A contract may be construed either before or after a breach thereof.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:16-55  Declaration of rights or legal relations of interested parties in relation to estate, wills and other writings.
 
 	2A:16-55. A person interested as or through an executor, administrator, trustee, guardian, receiver, assignee for the benefit of creditors, or other fiduciary, creditor, devisee, legatee, heir, next of kin, or cestui que trust, in the administration of a trust or the estate of a decedent, a minor, a person who is mentally incapacitated, a person who is insolvent, or other person, may have a declaration of rights or legal relations in respect thereto, to:
 
	a.	Ascertain any class of creditors, devisees, legatees, heirs, next of kin, or others; or
 
	b.	Direct the executor, administrator, trustee, guardian, receiver, assignee for the benefit of creditors, or other fiduciary to do or abstain from doing any particular act in his fiduciary capacity; or
 
	c.	Determine any question arising in the administration of the estate, trust, or guardianship, including the construction of wills and other writings.
 
	amended 2013, c.103, s.6.

2A:16-56.  Parties interested as parties to proceedings
    When declaratory relief is sought, all persons having or claiming any interest which would be affected by the declaration shall be made parties to the proceeding.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-57.  Persons not parties not prejudiced by declaration
    No declaratory judgment shall prejudice the rights of persons not parties to  the proceeding.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-58.  Determination of issues of fact
    When a proceeding under this article involves the determination of an issue  of fact, such issue may be tried and determined in the same manner as issues of  fact are determined in other actions in the court in which the proceeding is  pending.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-59.  Declaratory judgment;  form and effect
    A declaratory judgment may be either affirmative or negative in form and effect, and shall have the force and effect of a final judgment.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-60.  Further relief
    Further relief based on a declaratory judgment may be granted whenever necessary or proper, by application to a court having jurisdiction to grant the  relief.  If the application is deemed sufficient, the court shall, on reasonable notice, require any adverse party whose rights have been adjudicated  by the declaratory judgment to show cause why further relief should not be  granted forthwith.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-61.  Declaratory judgment refused
    The court may refuse to render or enter a declaratory judgment, when, if rendered or entered, it would not terminate the uncertainty or controversy giving rise to the proceeding.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-62.  Review of orders and judgments
    All orders and judgments under the provisions of this article may be reviewed as other orders and judgments.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:16-63.  Short title
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Structured Settlement Protection Act."

	L.2001,c.139,s.1.

2A:16-64.  Definitions relative to structured settlements
	2.	For the purposes of this act:

	"Annuity issuer" means an insurer that has issued a contract to fund periodic payments under a structured settlement.

	"Dependents" includes a payee's spouse and minor children and all other persons for whom the payee is legally obligated to provide support, including alimony.

	"Discounted present value" means the present value of future payments determined by discounting those payments to the present using the most recently published applicable federal rate for determining the present value of an annuity, as issued by the United States Internal Revenue Service.

	"Gross advance amount" means the sum payable to the payee or for the payee's account as consideration for a transfer of structured settlement payment rights before any reductions for transfer expenses or other deductions to be made from that consideration.

	"Independent professional advice" means advice of an attorney, certified public accountant, actuary or other licensed professional adviser.

	"Interested parties" means, with respect to any structured settlement, the payee, any beneficiary irrevocably designated under the annuity contract to receive payments following the payee's death, the annuity issuer, the structured settlement obligor, and any other party that has continuing rights or obligations under the structured settlement.

	"Net advance amount" means the gross advance amount less the aggregate amount of the actual and estimated transfer expenses required to be disclosed under subsection e. of section 3 of this act.

	"Payee" means an individual who is receiving tax free payments under a structured settlement and proposes to make a transfer of payment rights thereunder.

	"Periodic payments" includes both recurring payments and scheduled future lump sum payments.

	"Qualified assignment agreement" means an agreement providing for a qualified assignment within the meaning of 26 U.S.C. s.130.

	"Responsible administrative authority" means, with respect to a structured settlement, any government authority vested by law with exclusive jurisdiction over the settled claim resolved by the structured settlement.

	"Settled claim" means the original tort claim or workers' compensation claim resolved by a structured settlement.

	"Structured settlement" means an arrangement for periodic payment of damages for personal injuries or sickness established by settlement or judgment in resolution of a tort claim or for periodic payments in settlement of a workers' compensation claim.

	"Structured settlement agreement" means the agreement, judgment, stipulation or release embodying the terms of a structured settlement.

	"Structured settlement obligor" means, with respect to any structured settlement, the party that has the continuing obligation to make periodic payments to the payee under a structured settlement agreement or a qualified assignment agreement.

	"Structured settlement payment rights" means rights to receive periodic payments under a structured settlement, whether from the structured settlement obligor or the annuity issuer, if:

	(1)	the payee is domiciled in, or the domicile or principal place of business of the structured settlement obligor or the annuity issuer is located in, this State; or

	(2)	the structured settlement agreement was approved by a court or responsible administrative authority in this State; or

	(3)	the structured settlement agreement is expressly governed by the laws of this State.

	"Terms of the structured settlement" include, with respect to any structured settlement, the terms of the structured settlement agreement, the annuity contract, any qualified assignment agreement and any order or other approval of any court or responsible administrative authority or other government authority that authorized or approved the structured settlement.

	"Transfer" means any sale, assignment, pledge, hypothecation or other alienation or encumbrance of structured settlement payment rights made by a payee for consideration; except that the term "transfer" does not include the creation or perfection of a security interest in structured settlement payment rights under a blanket security agreement entered into with an insured depository institution, in the absence of any action to redirect the structured settlement payments to the insured depository institution, or an agent or successor in interest thereof, or otherwise to enforce the blanket security interest against the structured settlement payment rights.

	"Transfer agreement" means the agreement providing for a transfer of structured settlement payment rights.

	"Transfer expenses" means all expenses of a transfer that are required under the transfer agreement to be paid by the payee or deducted from the gross advance amount, including, without limitation, court filing fees, attorneys' fees, escrow fees, lien recordation fees, judgment and lien search fees, finders' fees, commissions, and other payments to a broker or other intermediary; "transfer expenses" does not include preexisting obligations of the payee payable for the payee's account from the proceeds of a transfer.

	"Transferee" means a party acquiring or proposing to acquire structured settlement payment rights through a transfer.

	L.2001,c.139,s.2.

2A:16-65.  Provision of separate disclosure statement to payee, contents
	3.	Not less than three days prior to the date on which a payee signs a transfer agreement, the transferee shall provide to the payee a separate disclosure statement, in bold type no smaller than 14 points, setting forth:

	a.	the amounts and due dates of the structured settlement payments to be transferred;

	b.	the aggregate amount of the payments;

	c.	the discounted present value of the payments to be transferred, which shall be identified as the "calculation of current value of the transferred structured settlement payments under federal standards for valuing annuities" and the amount of the applicable federal rate used in calculating the discounted present value;

	d.	the gross advance amount;

	e.	an itemized listing of all applicable transfer expenses, other than attorneys' fees and related disbursements payable in connection with the transferee's application for approval of the transfer, and the transferee's best estimate of the amount of any of those fees and disbursements;

	f.	the net advance amount;

	g.	the amount of any penalties or liquidated damages payable by the payee in the event of any breach of the transfer agreement by the payee; and

	h.	a statement that the payee has the right to cancel the transfer agreement, without penalty or further obligation, not later than the third business day after the date the agreement is signed by the payee.

	L.2001,c.139,s.3.

2A:16-66.  Approval required for payment
	4.	No direct or indirect transfer of structured settlement payment rights shall be effective and no structured settlement obligor or annuity issuer shall be required to make any payment directly or indirectly to any transferee of structured settlement payment rights unless the transfer has been approved in advance in a final court order or order of a responsible administrative authority based on express findings by the court or responsible administrative authority that:

	a.	the transfer is in the best interest of the payee, taking into account the welfare and support of the payee's dependents;

	b.	the payee has been advised in writing by the transferee to seek independent professional advice regarding the transfer and has either received the advice or knowingly waived the right to seek that advice in writing; and

	c.	the transfer does not contravene any applicable statute or the order of any court or other government authority.

	L.2001,c.139,s.4.

2A:16-67.  Procedures following transfer
	5.	Following a transfer of structured settlement payment rights under this act:

	a.	The structured settlement obligor and the annuity issuer shall, as to all parties except the transferee, be discharged and released from any and all liability for the transferred payments;

	b.	The transferee shall be liable to the structured settlement obligor and the annuity issuer:

	(1)	if the transfer contravenes the terms of the structured settlement, for any taxes incurred by those parties as a consequence of the transfer; and

	(2)	for any other liabilities or costs, including reasonable costs and attorneys' fees, arising from compliance by those parties with the order of the court or responsible administrative authority or arising as a consequence of the transferee's failure to comply with this act;

	c.	Neither the annuity issuer nor the structured settlement obligor shall be required to divide any periodic payment between the payee and any transferee or assignee or between two or more transferees or assignees; and

	d.	Any further transfer of structured settlement payment rights by the payee shall be made in compliance with all of the requirements of this act.

	L.2001,c.139,s.5.

2A:16-68.  Application for approval of transfer, procedure
	6.  a.  An application under this act to a court or responsible administrative authority for approval of a transfer of structured settlement payment rights shall be made by the transferee and may be brought in the jurisdiction in which the payee resides, in the jurisdiction in which the structured settlement obligor or the annuity issuer maintains its principal place of business, or in any court or before any responsible administrative authority which approved the structured settlement agreement.

	b.	Not less than 20 days prior to the scheduled hearing on any application for approval of a transfer of structured settlement payment rights under section 4 of this act, the transferee shall file with the court or responsible administrative authority and serve on all interested parties a notice of the proposed transfer and the application for its authorization, including with the notice:

	(1)	a copy of the transferee's application;

	(2)	a copy of the transfer agreement;

	(3)	a copy of the disclosure statement required under section 3 of this act;

	(4)	a listing of each of the payee's dependents, together with each dependent's age;

	(5)	notification that any interested party is entitled to support, oppose or otherwise respond to the transferee's application, either in person or by counsel, by submitting written comments to the court or responsible administrative authority or by participating in the hearing; and

	(6)	notification of the time and place of the hearing and notification of the manner in which, and the time by which, written responses to the application shall be filed, which shall be not less than 15 days after service of the transferee's notice, in order to be considered by the court or responsible administrative authority.

	L.2001,c.139,s.6.

2A:16-69.  Provisions of act not waivable; controlling law; prohibitions
	7.  a.  The provisions of this act shall not be waived by any payee.

	b.	Any transfer agreement entered into on or after the effective date of this act by a payee who resides in this State shall provide that disputes under the transfer agreement, including any claim that the payee has breached the agreement, shall be determined in and under the laws of this State.  No transfer agreement shall authorize the transferee or any other party to confess judgment or consent to entry of judgment against the payee.

	c.	No transfer of structured settlement payment rights shall extend to any payments that are life-contingent unless, prior to the date on which the payee signs the transfer agreement, the transferee has established and has agreed to maintain procedures reasonably satisfactory to the annuity issuer and the structured settlement obligor for: (1) periodically confirming the payee's survival; and (2) giving the annuity issuer and the structured settlement obligor prompt written notice in the event of the payee's death.

	d.	No payee who proposes to make a transfer of structured settlement payment rights shall incur any penalty, forfeit any application fee or other payment, or otherwise incur any liability to the proposed transferee or any assignee based on any failure of the transfer to satisfy the conditions of this act.

	e.	Nothing contained in this act shall be construed to authorize any transfer of structured settlement payment rights in contravention of any law or to imply that any transfer under a transfer agreement entered into prior to the effective date of this act is valid or invalid.

	f.	Compliance with the requirements set forth in section 3 of this act and fulfillment of the conditions set forth in section 4 of this act shall be solely the responsibility of the transferee in any transfer of structured settlement payment rights, and neither the structured settlement obligor nor the annuity issuer shall bear any responsibility for, or any liability arising from, non-compliance with those requirements or failure to fulfill those conditions.

	L.2001,c.139,s.7.

2A:17-1.  Sequence of execution;  against goods and chattels and real estate
    In every writ of execution which shall be issued against real estate, the sheriff or other officer to whom such writ may be directed shall be commanded that he cause to be made, of the goods and chattels in his county of the party against whom such execution issues, the debt, damages and costs or sums of money mentioned in such execution;  and that, if sufficient goods and chattels of such party cannot be found in his county, he cause the whole or the residue,  as the case may require, of such debt, damages and costs or sum of money to be  made of the real estate whereof such party was seized on the day when such real  estate became liable to such debt, damages and costs or sum of money,  specifying the day particularly, or at any time afterwards, in the hands of any  person then having the same.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-2.  Record of execution against real estate
    Every writ of execution which shall be sued forth against real estate shall,  before its delivery to the sheriff or other officer, be recorded in a book to  be kept for that purpose by the clerk of the court out of which the same was  issued.  Such record so made shall be as good evidence as the writ itself.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-3.  Issue of execution without revival of judgment
    Execution may issue, without a revival of the judgment, at any time within 20 years after its entry.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-4.  Several executions to different counties on judgment rendered or docketed in superior court
    Upon all judgments recovered or docketed in the superior court, executions may issue at the same time to any county.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-5.  One sale under executions issued out of superior court levied at same time;  liability as trespasser
    If under more than 1 execution issued to different counties pursuant to section 2A:17-4 of this title, property is under levy at the same time, no sale  of the property of the person against whom such executions have issued shall be  made under more than 1 of such executions, except to satisfy a deficiency  remaining after a prior sale.

    The court may, for good cause, stay the proceedings on any 1 or more of such  executions, direct under which execution a sale shall be first made or order  the proceeds of any sale to be paid into court.

    If a sale shall be made contrary to the provisions of this section, the party at whose instance the executions have issued and his attorney shall be liable as trespassers to the adverse party for all damages he may sustain thereby.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-6.  Dispute as to application of proceeds of executions out of different courts
    In a controversy between execution creditors as to the application of money  realized from the sale of the property of a judgment debtor under executions  issued out of different courts, the superior court shall in a summary action  hear and decide the entire controversy.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-7.     Execution on judgment of Superior Court on appeal from municipal court  
     2A:17-7.  Execution on a judgment of the Superior Court on appeal from a municipal court may issue immediately on the entry of the judgment.  

     	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.39.  

2A:17-8.  No execution on judgment in action on judgment appealed from pending determination of appeal
    If a party against whom a judgment has been rendered appeals therefrom and the party in whose favor the judgment has been rendered brings an action on the  judgment and recovers, execution shall not issue on the second judgment until  the appeal from the first judgment has been determined.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-9.  Statement of money collected, etc., returned and filed with execution
    The sheriff or officer to whom an execution is delivered shall, when he returns the execution and without making a charge therefor, return and file therewith, in the office of the clerk of the court out of which the execution issued, a verified statement of the amount of money, if any and the time when collected, the balance, if any due on the execution and the items of his bill of costs or execution fees.  The statement shall be conclusive only against the  sheriff or officer making it, and, until returned and filed, no costs or fees  on the execution shall be collectible from plaintiff in execution.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-10.  Time when execution effective
    No writ of execution shall bind the property or the goods of the person against whom such writ is sued forth, but from the time that such writ shall be  delivered to the sheriff, under-sheriff, coroner or other officer, his deputy  or agent, to be executed.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-11.  Indorsement on writs of year and day of receipt thereof by officer
    In order to show the time when writs of execution against the goods only or  against the goods and chattels and the real estate are delivered to the sheriff, under-sheriff, coroner or other officer, his deputy or agent, to be executed, such officer, his deputy or agent, shall, upon the receipt of any such writ, indorse thereon, without fee for so doing, the time, the day of the month and year when he received the same.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-12.  Priorities between executions against goods and chattels of same  person issued on same day
    If 2 or more writs of execution shall be delivered against the goods and chattels of the same person on the same day, the one first delivered shall be first executed and satisfied;  provided, however, that if one of any such writs  derives from a court order for suitable support and maintenance of a wife,  child or children it shall be first executed and satisfied, notwithstanding the  prior delivery on the same day of any other such writ of execution.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1969, c. 292, s. 1, eff. Jan. 15, 1970.

2A:17-13.  Priorities among executions against real estate of same person
    Where several writs of execution shall be issued against the goods and chattels and real estate of the same person, and sufficient cannot be found to satisfy all the sums commanded to be made, the like priority and preference shall be given in such cases as is given by section 2A:17-12 of this title in writs of execution against the goods only, and all disputes respecting the same  shall be adjudged and determined accordingly.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-14.  Title of purchaser of personalty prior to actual levy but after delivery of writ to officer
    The title of a purchaser who in good faith has purchased goods and chattels  from an execution defendant and has paid for them prior to the actual levy of  an execution thereon, without notice thereof, shall not be divested because the  execution was delivered before the purchase was made.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-15.  Money
    Money belonging to a defendant in execution may be levied on and returned by  virtue of an execution as so much money collected, without exposing the same to  sale.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-16.  Shares of stock
    Shares of stock in any corporation, incorporated under authority of this state, another state, the United States or another country, belonging to an execution defendant, may be taken and sold by virtue of an execution in the same manner as goods and chattels, except that a levy upon such shares shall be  made subject to the provisions of section 14:8-39 of the title Corporations,  General, of the Revised Statutes.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-17.    Real estate liable to execution.
     2A:17-17. All real estate shall be liable to be levied upon and sold by executions to be issued on judgments obtained in any court of record in this State, except the Superior Court, Law Division, Special Civil Part, for the payment and satisfaction of the debt, damages, sum of money and costs so recovered or to be recovered; but no real estate of any testator or intestate shall be sold or in anywise affected by any judgment or execution against executors or administrators. No judgment obtained for the payment and satisfaction of any employment wage tax, including penalties, shall be enforced pursuant to this section.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1981,c.548,s.1; 1991,c.91,s.40.  

2A:17-17.1  Short title.
	1.  This act shall be known and may be cited as the “New Jersey Veterans and Military Spouses Asset Protection Act.”

L.2025, c.326, s.1.

2A:17-17.2  Findings, declarations.
	2.	The Legislature finds and declares that:
 
	a.	Veterans, active duty service members, and families of veterans and service members make extraordinary sacrifices in service to the State and this country.
 
	b.	Many veterans and veterans’ families face disproportionate financial hardship, including exposure to predatory lending, fraud, and the loss of hard-earned property due to creditor actions.
 
	c.	The State currently does not provide a homestead exemption, leaving veterans and their families uniquely vulnerable to home loss in the event of a bankruptcy.
 
	d.	Providing enhanced creditor protections, including a homestead protection for up to two properties owned by veterans, is necessary to preserve stability, reward service, and strengthen communities.
 
	e.	This act is deemed remedial in nature, and therefore shall be liberally construed to effectuate its purpose of safeguarding veterans, service members, and military spouses.
 
L.2025, c.326, s.2.

2A:17-17.3  Definitions.
	3.	As used in this act:
 
	“Military spouse” means the spouse or surviving spouse of a veteran or service member.
 
	“Primary residence” means the dwelling house, including the land, where the veteran, service member, or military spouse resides.
 
	“Secondary residence” means one additional dwelling house, including the land, owned by the veteran, service member, or military spouse, which may be used as a seasonal, family, or retirement home.
 
	“Service member” means a person currently serving in any branch of the armed forces of the United States, including the National Guard and reserve components.
 
	“Veteran” means a person honorably discharged from any branch of the armed forces of the United States, including the National Guard and reserve components.
 
L.2025, c.326, s.3.

2A:17-17.4  Exemptions for primary, secondary residences of veterans, service members, military spouses.
	4.	a.  Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the primary and secondary residences of a veteran, service member, or military spouse shall be exempt from levy, execution, attachment, or forced sale for the payment of debts, judgments, or other claims or creditors.
 
	b.	The exemption provided pursuant to subsection a. of this section shall apply without a limitation of value for both the primary and secondary residences, provided that ownership of both properties is properly recorded with the county clerk.
 
	c.	Subsection a. of this section shall not apply to:
 
	(1)	mortgages or voluntary liens placed upon the property;
 
	(2)	taxes, assessments, or obligations owed to federal, State, or local government 
entities; and 
 
	(3)	judgments arising from willful misconduct, fraud, or criminal activity of the debtor.
 
	d.	If the primary or secondary residence is held by a veteran or service member jointly with a military spouse, the exemption shall extend fully to both parties.
 
	e.	Upon the death of a veteran or service member, the exemption for both residences shall continue for the surviving military spouse, provided the surviving military spouse maintains ownership of the residences.
 
L.2025, c.326, s.4.

2A:17-17.5  Benefits, retirement, pensions protections for veterans, service members, military spouses.
	5.	a. The retirement accounts, pensions, disability benefits, and veterans’ benefits of veterans, service members, and military spouses shall be exempt from creditor claims.
 
	b.	Motor vehicles owned by veterans, service members, and military spouses shall be exempt from creditor claims up to a fair market value of $30,000, not to exceed one vehicle per household.
 
	c.	Subsection b. of this section shall not apply to:
 
	(1)	voluntary liens placed upon the motor vehicle;
 
	(2)	taxes, assessments, or obligations owed to federal, State, or local government 
entities; and 
 
	(3)	judgments arising from willful misconduct, fraud, or criminal activity of the debtor.
 
	d.	As used in this section, “motor vehicle” shall mean the same as defined pursuant to R.S.39:1-1.
 
L.2025, c.326, s.5.

2A:17-17.6  Violations.
	6. a. Any attempted levy, execution, or sale in violation of this act shall be void and unenforceable.
 
	b.	The protections under this act are in addition to any rights provided under federal law, including the “Servicemembers Civil Relief Act,” 50 U.S.C. s.3901 et seq.
 
L.2025, c.326, s.6.

2A:17-18.  Proprietary rights and shares
    All proprieties, rights, share and shares of propriety and rights to unlocated lands shall be liable to levy and sale under an execution issued on a  judgment for the payment of debt, damages and costs or sum of money thereby recovered, as other real estate is liable to be levied upon and sold, but no such rights or shares shall be levied upon and sold except by execution issued out of the superior court.

    If the rights or shares are within the western division, the writ shall be directed to the sheriff of Burlington county;  if within the eastern division, to the sheriff of Middlesex county.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-19.  Amount;  exceptions
    Goods and chattels, shares of stock or interests in any corporation and personal property of every kind, not exceeding in value, exclusive of wearing apparel, $1,000.00, and all wearing apparel, the property of a debtor shall be reserved, both before and after his death, for his use or that of his family or  his estate, and shall not be liable to be seized or taken by virtue of any execution or civil process whatever, issued out of any court of this State.

    Nothing herein contained shall be deemed or held to protect from sale under  execution or other process any goods, chattels or property, for the purchase  whereof the debt or demand for which the judgment on which such execution or  process was issued, shall have been contracted, or to apply to process issued  for the collection of taxes or assessments.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1973, c. 162, s. 1, eff. June 7, 1973.

2A:17-20.  Inventory of personal property subject to levy
    The sheriff or other officer having an execution or civil process against a  defendant entitled to the exemption given by this article shall make a careful  and particular inventory of the personal property of every kind and description  of the defendant which shall be subject to levy.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-21.  Appraisers;  appointment
    After making the levy and the inventory, the sheriff or other officer shall  appoint in writing 3 discreet and judicious persons of his county, indifferent  between the parties to the execution to make a just and true appraisement of  the personal property levied on.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-22.  Oath of appraisers
    The appraisers, before acting under their appointment, shall be severally sworn faithfully, honestly and impartially to appraise the property levied on, according to the true and intrinsic value thereof, without reference to what the same might be supposed to bring at a sale under the execution or process.

    The oaths of the appraisers may be administered by the sheriff or other officer of the county or by any person authorized to administer oaths, and shall be indorsed on the appointment, and, with the appointment, shall be filed  in the office of the county clerk of that county.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-23.  Appraisement made
    The appraisers shall appoint a time and place where they will make their appraisement, and shall cause at least 5 days' notice in writing thereof to be given to the execution plaintiff or his attorney, at which time and place they shall, in the presence of the execution plaintiff or his attorney, if either see fit to attend, proceed with the appraisement, and set down in writing a particular account of the articles and things appraised, with their respective values annexed, and sign the same.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-24.  Procedure after valuation;  selection by execution defendant; sale of residue
    If the value of the property as found by the appraisement does not exceed $500, the sheriff or other officer shall allow the same to remain in the possession of the execution defendant for the use of himself and family.

    If the value exceeds $500, the execution defendant may select from the inventory articles to the amount of $500 to be reserved for the use of himself and his family, and shall annex to the inventory a written statement thereof, signed by himself.  The residue of the property shall be sold by the sheriff or  other officer under the execution or process in payment, or towards payment of  such execution or process.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-25.  Inventory, appraisement and selection annexed to and returned with writ
    The sheriff or other officer shall, in each case, annex his inventory and the account made by the appraisers, and the execution debtor's statement of his  selection, if any, to the execution or process and shall return the execution  or process to the court from which it issued.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-26.  Claim and set-off of exemption when executions issue to several counties
    When several executions into different counties shall issue on the same judgment, the proceedings to set off the property under this article for the benefit of the family of the execution defendant shall be had in the county in which his family resides, and not in any other county, except for the deficiency of his personal property in the former county in order to make the amount reserved by law.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-27.  Selection of exemption by wife or family or appraisers
    If an execution defendant shall be absent from his place of residence when the appraisement by the appraisers is completed, and cannot readily be found, or refuses to make selection from the personal property inventoried and appraised as provided by this article, such selection may be made by the wife or family of such defendant, or by the appraisers, and the statement annexed to  and returned with the execution shall be signed accordingly.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-28.  Selection of exemption on death of execution defendant
    If an execution defendant dies after execution issued, and a levy and sale of personal property be made thereafter, the exemption selection to be reserved  for the use of his family shall be made by the person or persons entitled to  make such selection by section 3A:8-7 of the title Administration of  Estates--Decedents and Others.  If the property reserved for the benefit of the  family of the decedent shall be set off under the provisions of said section  3A:8-7, the property so set off shall also be the property exempted from sale  under execution.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-28.1  Holocaust reparations payments, exemption from claims, levy, execution, attachment.
 
 	1.	Except for an income withholding order issued pursuant to the "New Jersey Child Support Program Improvement Act," P.L.1998, c.1 (C.2A:17-56.7a et al.), monetary reparations payments designated for or received by a Holocaust survivor of National Socialist (Nazi) persecution from any governmental source or victim assistance source shall be exempt from all claims of creditors and from levy, execution, attachment, or other legal process.
 
	L.2015, c.124, s.1.

2A:17-29.    Notice to levying officer; stay of sale; jury to try claim  
     2A:17-29. When, by virtue of an execution issued out of any court of this State, goods or chattels are levied on or taken into possession by a sheriff or other authorized officer, and claim is made thereto by a person other than the execution defendant, by notice in writing delivered to the officer executing the writ, the officer shall immediately delay his sale thereunder for 10 days, to enable the claimant to institute an action to establish the claim in said court. The action shall proceed in a summary manner and shall be tried by jury, unless a jury be waived by the parties to the action.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.41.  

2A:17-30.  Verdict of jury;  effect
    The sheriff or other officer, upon complying with the judgment entered in the summary action, shall be protected from any action for taking and seizing or delivering such property claimed to the claimant.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-31.  Disposal of property claimed according to judgment
    If the property to which claim has been made is found to belong to the claimant, the sheriff shall proceed no further with the execution as to that property;  but if found to belong to the same defendant he shall make disposal thereof as directed by the execution.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-32.  Indemnity to sheriff by creditor against demand of claimant
    If the execution creditor indemnifies the sheriff making the levy against the demand of the claimant, further proceedings in the claimant's action shall be suspended and the sale proceeded with as directed by the execution.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-33.  Advertisement of sale of goods and chattels;  posting
    No sale of goods or chattels shall be made by virtue of any execution without previous notice of the time and place of the intended sale, given by the officer making the levy, by advertisements, signed by the officer and posted at least 5 days before the time appointed for the sale in the office of the sheriff of the county or counties where the property is situate. The notice need not be posted at any other place.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-34.  Advertisement of sale of real estate to state amount of judgment  or order and street numbers of real estate
    All advertisements for the sale of real estate by virtue of executions issued out of any court of this state shall state the approximate amount of the  judgment or order sought to be satisfied by the sale.  When practicable, the  advertisements shall state the street numbers of the real estate to be sold.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-35.  Notice of time and place of sale of proprietary rights
    The sheriff making a sale under execution of the proprietary rights or shares mentioned in section 2A:17-18 of this title shall give notice, by advertisements, signed by himself, and put up in his office and by an advertisement in one of the newspapers published in this state, of the time and  place of exposing such rights or shares to sale, at least 2 months before the  time appointed for selling the same.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-36  Adjournments of sale of real estate.
	2A:17-36.	Adjournments of sale of real estate.  Notwithstanding any other law or court rule to the contrary, a sheriff or other officer selling real estate by virtue of an execution may make  five adjournments of the sale, two at the request of the lender  , two at the request of the debtor, and one if both the lender and debtor agree to an adjournment, and no more, to any time, not exceeding 30 calendar days for each adjournment.  However, a court of competent jurisdiction may, for cause, order further adjournments.
 
	amended 1995, c.244, s.14; 2019, c.71, s.2.

2A:17-37.  Unauthorized adjournments;  amercement of officer
    If a sale of real estate under process of execution shall be adjourned oftener or for a longer time than allowed by section 2A:17-36 of this title, without permission in writing, previously obtained of the party at whose instance the writ of execution was issued, the sheriff or other officer shall be liable to the amount of the debt, or damages and costs, or sum or sums of money mentioned in such writ, with interest, and for the recovery thereof may be amerced and proceeded against in the manner prescribed by law for neglect of  duty in other cases on writs of execution.

    If, however, the sheriff or other officer shall, after 2 adjournments as authorized by said section 2A:17-36, sell the real estate, and bring the whole amount of the proceeds of such sale, after deducting his lawful fees, into the court from which such execution issued, at any time before the entry of such amercement against him as aforesaid, such sheriff or other officer shall be exonerated from all liability to such amercement.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-38  Statement of execution sales, disposition of revenues.
	2A:17-38. a. When a sheriff or other officer makes a sale by virtue of an execution or executions to the sheriff or officer directed, the sheriff or officer shall, within 30 days thereafter, make and file, with his bill of costs or execution fees, in the office of the clerk of the court out of which the execution or executions issued, a true statement and calculation, in order of time, of the execution or executions by virtue of which the sale was made, the amount or amounts due thereon, respectively, at the time of the sale, the time or times of sale and the amount of the sales.  
 
	b. (1) When calculating the amount due thereon, as described in subsection a. of this section, the sheriff or officer shall additionally collect $350 per sale to be utilized by the fund within the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency established in section 6 of P.L.2021, c.34 (C.55:14K-99).
 
	(2)	The revenues obtained from these increased amounts, after deduction of any actual administrative costs incurred by the sheriff or officer in carrying out the provisions of this subsection, shall be transmitted no later than the first day of each quarter by the sheriff or officer to the fund with an accounting of collections and foreclosure actions during the corresponding quarter.
 
	c.	The statement shall be certified under the hand of the officer making and filing it, and shall be conclusive against the officer only.  If there be more sales than one, the statement shall be made and filed within 30 days after the final sale.
 
	amended 2021, c.34, s.9.

2A:17-39.  Sale of real estate free of lien of judgments or recognizances on  which executions not issued
    Whereas, other judgments, and recognizances, besides those, or some of those, by virtue whereof the sale aforesaid was made, might affect the real estate so sold, if no provision be made to remedy the same, and whereas, the persons who have not taken, or will not take out executions upon their judgments, or recognizances, ought not to hinder or prevent such as do take out  executions from having the proper effect and fruits thereof, therefore, in any  such case, the purchaser, his heirs and assigns, shall hold the lands, tenements, hereditaments, and real estate by him or her purchased as aforesaid,  free and clear of all other judgments and recognizances, whatsoever, on or by  virtue of which no execution has been taken out and executed on the real estate  so purchased.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-40.  Deed to purchaser of real estate;  recital of execution
    A sheriff or other officer selling real estate by virtue of an execution to  him directed, shall make to the purchaser thereof a deed of the real estate  sold, which shall recite the execution by virtue of which the real estate  therein described was sold.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-41.  Title of purchaser
    Said deed shall transfer to and vest in the purchaser as good and perfect an  estate to the premises therein described as the execution debtor was seized of  or entitled to at or before the judgment for the enforcement of which the  execution issued, as fully to all intents and purposes as if the execution  defendant had sold such real estate to such purchaser, and had received the  consideration money and signed, sealed and delivered a deed for the same.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-42.  Variances between deed and execution or execution and judgment
    The deed mentioned in section 2A:17-40 of this title, shall be good and valid and received in evidence as such, notwithstanding any variance between the recitals in such deed and the execution or executions by virtue of which the real estate was sold, and notwithstanding any variance between such execution or executions and the judgment or judgments upon which the execution or executions were issued.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-43.  Amendments to cure variances considered made
    Any court of this state in which the record or exemplification of any judgment or execution is offered in evidence in support of any deed or conveyance made by a sheriff or other officer pursuant to an execution directed  to him, shall consider the judgment or execution as amended in any particulars  as to which they could have been, by rules of law or practice, amended at any  time by the court in which the judgment was rendered or out of which the  execution was issued, and the judgment or execution shall have the same force  and effect as if it had been so amended.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-44.  Reversal of judgment or execution;  effect as to purchaser of real estate sold
    If any judgment or execution, the execution having been recorded as required  by law, by virtue whereof a sale shall be made of real estate, shall be  reversed, such reversal shall only operate against the respondent on review,  his heirs, executors and administrators, to compel compensation to be made to  the party aggrieved to the full value of the real estate so sold, and shall not  be given in evidence, or be of any force or avail against any bona fide  purchaser under such judgment or execution;  but such purchaser, his heirs and  assigns, shall hold the real estate so bona fide purchased, notwithstanding  such reversal, if it be after such purchase.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-45.  Sale by sheriff or coroner for time being of property levied upon  but not sold;  special order
    Whenever any sheriff or coroner, or other person to whom any writ of execution is directed levies on the goods and chattels or on the real estate of  the party named therein, and such sheriff, coroner or other person dies or becomes disabled by law to discharge the duties of his office or appointment, or removes himself out of the jurisdiction of the state, and continues to reside thereout, without discharging the duties of his office or appointment, by a sale of the property or estate so levied on, then, or in either of such cases, the court, in which judgment is or shall be had, may proceed in a summary manner to order the sheriff or coroner, for the time being, of the county where the levy was made, to sell the property or estate so levied on, or  so much thereof as may be sufficient to satisfy the whole or the residue of the  moneys due on such execution.  Thereupon the sheriff or coroner shall make the  sale, and shall be entitled to the same fees for services done, and liable to  all the penalties and consequences of law for neglect of duty, all as if the  execution had been originally directed to him.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-46.  Effect of sales under execution and conveyances by sheriffs or coroners for the time being
    Any sale to be made by a sheriff or coroner for the time being, under authority of section 2A:17-45 of this title, of any estate, real or personal, and any conveyance to be made by such sheriff or coroner of any real estate so sold, shall be as good and effectual in the law, as if the writ or writs of execution on which such property or estate was levied, had been originally directed to such sheriff or coroner.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-47.  Sales made prior to May 14, 1938, under execution, decree, order  or judgment, validated
    L.1938, c. 171, p. 382, entitled  "An act validating the sale of certain lands, tenements, hereditaments or real estate made under any decree, judgment or order of any court of this state, or any execution or other process issued thereon,"  effective May 14, 1938, saved from repeal.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-48.  Deed by sheriff after expiration of term of office to real estate  sold under execution during term of office
    If any real estate, levied upon by virtue of any valid writ of execution by  any sheriff, shall have been or shall be sold by him under such levy during the  term of his office, but shall not have been conveyed by deed by such sheriff  during the term of his office, or if conveyed, the deed conveying the same  shall have been lost before the record thereof, and the purchaser thereof shall  have entered into and remained in possession of such real estate pursuant to  such sale and purchase, such sheriff shall have full power, after the  expiration of his term of office, to execute and deliver to the purchaser from  him of any such real estate, a good and sufficient deed. If for any cause such  sheriff is unable to execute and deliver his deed, the sheriff then in office  is authorized and empowered to make, execute and deliver a good and sufficient  deed to effectuate such conveyance.  Either of said deeds shall have the same  force and effect as if the sheriff first-mentioned had executed and delivered  the same during his term of office.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-49.  Deed to real estate sold under execution on death or disability of master of the superior court, sheriff or coroner
    If any master of the superior court or the sheriff or coroner of any county  who has made or shall make sale of any real estate by virtue of an execution  against the same shall abscond or depart from the state or be disqualified by  law or shall die or have died, or in any way become incapable of making a deed  or conveyance for the same, the court out of which such execution issued, upon  satisfactory proof that such sale has been fairly and legally made, may appoint  another master of the superior court or the then sheriff or coroner of the  county, who shall have full power on tender of the purchase-money, or if the  purchase-money or any part of it has been paid, then on proof of such payment  and on tender of the residue if any there be, to execute and deliver to such  purchaser or his legal representative a deed of the real estate so sold.  The  deed shall be as good and valid and have the same force and effect as if the  master, sheriff or coroner who made such sale had executed and delivered a deed  for the same in due form of law.  The moneys received on such deed shall be paid to the person entitled thereto by law.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-50  Order to issue wage execution; application; jurisdiction.

	2A:17-50. a. When a judgment has been recovered in the Superior Court, and where any wages, debts, earnings, salary, income from trust funds, or profits are due and owing to the judgment debtor, or thereafter become due and owing to him, to the amount of $48.00 or more a week, the judgment creditor may, on notice to the judgment debtor unless the court otherwise orders, apply to the court in which the judgment was recovered, or to the court having jurisdiction of the same, and upon satisfactory proofs, by affidavit or otherwise, of such facts, the court shall grant an order directing that an execution issue against the wages, debts, earnings, salary, income from trust funds, or profits of the judgment debtor. 

	b.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection a. or any other law to the contrary, when a wage execution application is filed by the State arising out of a determination by a State department or agency that a person owes the department or agency a debt as defined in section 1 of P.L.2005, c.124 (C.2A:16-11.1), such application may be filed with the Office of Administrative Law rather than with the Superior Court. 

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1969, c.92, s.1; 1991, c.91, s.42; 2005, c.124, s.7.

2A:17-51.  Effect of execution
    On presentation of the execution mentioned in section 2A:17-50 of this title  by the officer to whom delivered, for collection to the person or persons from  whom such wages, debts, earnings, salary, income from trust funds or profits  are due and owing, or thereafter become due and owing to the judgment debtor,  such execution shall become a lien and a continuing levy upon the wages, debts,  earnings, salary, income from trust funds or profits due or to become due to  such judgment debtor to the amount specified therein.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-52  Number of executions issued and levied at same time; priority.

	2A:17-52. Number of executions issued and levied at same time. 

	a.	Only one execution against the wages, debts, earnings, salary, income from trust funds or profits of such judgment debtor shall be satisfied at one time, and where more than one execution shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this article against the same judgment debtor, they shall be satisfied in the order of priority in which such executions are presented to the person or persons from whom such wages, debts, earnings, salary, income from trust funds or profits are due and owing, irrespective of the fact that such executions shall be issued out of different courts; provided, however, that where more than one such execution shall be presented to any such person on the same day and one of such executions derives from a court order for suitable support and maintenance of a wife, child or children it shall be first satisfied, notwithstanding the prior presentation on the same day of any other such execution.

	b.	Notwithstanding subsection a., any wage execution applications filed by the State after the effective date of P.L.2005, c.124, including those arising out of a determination by a State department or agency that a person owes the department or agency a debt as defined in section 1 of P.L.2005, c.124 (C.2A:16-11.1), shall have priority over any other wage execution filed on or after the effective date of this act except as follows:

	(1)	the execution set forth in this subsection shall not have priority over any execution that derives from a court order for suitable support and maintenance of a wife, child or children;

	(2)	the execution set forth in this subsection shall not have priority over any execution otherwise required to have priority pursuant to any other law.


 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1969, c.292, s.2; 2005, c.124, s.9.

2A:17-53.  Payments by persons indebted to debtor
    Any person, agent, treasurer or other fiduciary officer of a private or public municipal corporation, including any county, the State, or other governmental agency, to whom an execution mentioned in section 2A:17-50 of this  Title is presented, and who shall at such time be indebted to the judgment  debtor named in such execution, or who shall become indebted to such judgment  debtor in the future, and while such execution shall remain a lien upon such  indebtedness, shall pay over to the officer presenting the same, such amount of  such indebtedness as such execution shall prescribe, less 5%, which amount  shall be on account of compensation to such person, agent, treasurer or other  fiduciary officer, for expense and services in payment of the execution,  deductible from each payment made, until such execution shall be wholly  satisfied.  Such payment, together with the amount of said compensation, shall  be credited to the account of the judgment debtor in payment of such execution  and shall be a bar to any action for such payment, together with the amount of  said compensation, by any such judgment debtor.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1970, c. 278, s. 1, eff. Dec. 3, 1970.

2A:17-54.  Failure to make payments
    Failure or refusal to make the payments required by section 2A:17-53 of this  title shall render such person, agent or officer so failing or refusing liable  to an action therefor by the judgment creditor named in the execution. Any  amount recovered by the judgment creditor in such an action shall be applied to  the payment of the execution.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-55  Modification of execution.

	2A:17-55.  Either party may apply at any time to the court or, in the case of executions pursuant to subsection b. of N.J.S.2A:17-50, to an Administrative Law Judge from which an execution mentioned in N.J.S. 2A:17-50 shall issue, upon such notice to the other party as such court shall direct, for a modification of such execution.  Upon the hearing, such court or Administrative Law Judge may make such modification of such execution as shall be deemed just.  Such execution as so modified shall continue in full force and effect until fully paid and satisfied, or until further modified as herein provided.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 2005, c.124, s.10.

2A:17-56  Limitation on amount specified in execution.

	2A:17-56. a. In no case shall the amount specified in an execution issued out of any court against the wages, debts, earnings, salary, income from trust funds or profits due and owing, or which may thereafter become due and owing to a judgment debtor, exceed 10%, unless the income of such debtor shall exceed 250 % of the poverty level for an individual taking into account the size of the individual's family, in which case the court out of which the execution shall issue may order a larger percentage.

	b.	Notwithstanding subsection a. or any other law to the contrary, for all wage execution applications filed by the State pursuant to subsection b. of N.J.S.2A:17-50 after the effective date of P.L.2005, c.124 (C.2A:16-11.1 et al.), the State may seek a wage execution of up to 25% of the debtor's gross earnings, provided that after the execution the debtor's income will not be less than 250 % of the poverty level for an individual taking into account the size of the individual's family. 

	Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to violate any provision of federal law. 

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1970, c.287, ss.1,3; 2005, c.124, s.11.

2A:17-56.1a.  Docketing of order in any court;  force and effect
    An order directing that an execution issue against the defendant's wages pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1977, c. 292 (C. 2A:17-56.1) may be docketed in any other court and from the time of its docketing it shall have the same force  and operation as an order of the court in which it is docketed.

     L.1981, c. 203, s. 3, eff. July 9, 1981.

2A:17-56.6.  Time of remission of wages by employer
    An employer shall remit wages levied upon by a judgment or order of support  within 10 days of the first wage payment after receipt of the judgment or  order.

     L.1981, c. 203, s. 4, eff. July 9, 1981.

2A:17-56.7a  Short title.

	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Child Support Program Improvement Act."

	L.1998,c.1,s.1.

2A:17-56.7b  Findings, declarations relative to child support reform.

	2.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	Title III of the federal "Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996," Pub.L.104-193, provides New Jersey with the authority and guidance to structure and administer an effective and efficient child support program that is accessible to all the citizens of this State needing its services;

	b.	Work and the timely payment of child support promote the best interests of all families with children;

	c.	The expeditious establishment of paternity and child support obligations is integral to the development of a safety net for participants in the Work First New Jersey program established pursuant to P.L.1997, c.38 (C.44:10-55 et seq.) and their children.  With the implementation of the Work First New Jersey program and its time-limited benefits, the establishment of child support orders and the collection of child support are essential to the ability of families to  achieve and maintain self-sufficiency;

	d.	The early establishment of paternity and child support orders creates a basis for individual security and family stability, and fosters an understanding of personal responsibility in children and teenagers;

	e.	The efficient establishment of paternity and support obligations, and the effective enforcement and collection of child support obligations pursuant to the provisions of Pub.L.104-193, will maximize the federal funding available to New Jersey for these services; and

	f.	The provisions of this act incorporate and expand the fundamental concepts of P.L.1981, c.417 (C.2A:17-56.8 et seq.) and comply with the federal initiatives embodied in Pub.L.104-193.

	L.1998,c.1,s.2.

2A:17-56.8  Enforcement of child support orders.

	2.	Every complaint, notice or pleading for the entry or modification of a support order and every court order which includes child support shall include a written notice to the obligor stating that the child support provision of the order shall, and the health care coverage provision may, as appropriate, be enforced by an income withholding upon the current or future income due from the obligor's employer or successor employers and upon the unemployment compensation benefits due the obligor and against debts, income, trust funds, profits or income from any other source due the obligor except as provided in section 3 of P.L.1981, c.417 (C.2A:17-56.9).  The written notice shall also state that the driver's license and professional or occupational licenses, or recreational or sporting license in accordance with P.L.1996, c.7 (C.2A:17-56.41 et seq.)held or applied for by the obligor may be denied, suspended or revoked if: the child support arrearage is equal to or exceeds the amount of child support payable for six months; the obligor fails to provide health care coverage for the children as ordered by the court for six months; or the obligor fails to respond to a subpoena relating to a paternity or child support proceeding; or a warrant for the obligor's arrest has been issued by the court due to failure to pay child support as ordered, failure to appear at a hearing to establish paternity or child support, or failure to appear at a hearing to enforce a child support order and said warrant remains outstanding.  The written notice shall also state that the amount of a child support order and the provisions for health care coverage may be reviewed and updated when there has been a change in circumstances or in accordance with section 5 of P.L.1990, c.92 (C.2A:17-56.9a).

	The court shall ensure that in the case of each obligor against whom a support order is or has been issued or modified, the obligor's income shall be withheld to comply with the order.  An amount shall be withheld to pay the support obligation and it shall include an amount to be applied toward liquidation of arrearages reduced to judgments, payments for paternity testing procedures and provisions for health care coverage when applicable.  These provisions shall also be applicable to all orders issued on or before the effective date of P.L.1985, c.278 (C.2A:17-56.16 et seq.).

	A support provision contained in an order or judgment issued by the court shall be paid by income withholding unless the order or judgment specifically provides for an alternative payment arrangement to which the parties agree in writing or the obligor or obligee demonstrates and the court finds good cause for establishing an alternative arrangement.

	L.1981,c.417,s.2; amended 1985, c.53; 1985, c.278, s.2; 1990, c.92, s.1; 1995, c.58, s.2; 1996, c.7, s.1; 1998, c.1, s.18.

2A:17-56.9  Income withholding.

	3.	For support obligations that are payable through the Probation Division, the Probation Division shall mail the notice of immediate withholding to the obligor's payor if the payor is known. If the obligor's source of income is unknown at the time the Probation Division receives the support order, the Probation Division shall mail the notice to the payor within the time frame required pursuant to federal law. If an alternative payment arrangement has been ordered as provided in section 2 of P.L.1981, c.417 (C.2A:17-56.8) or a support order entered prior to October 1, 1996, the income withholding shall be initiated by the Probation Division when the obligor has failed to make the required child support payment and has arrearages accrued equal to the amount of the support payable for 14 days, or without regard to an arrearage or an alternative agreement if the obligee, for good cause, or the obligor requests that withholding be initiated.  Subject to the provisions of P.L.1981, c.417 (C.2A:17-56.8 et seq.), an income withholding shall be initiated by the Probation Division and shall take effect without amendment to the support order or further court or quasi-judicial action and without regard to any alternative arrangements entered into by the parties or ordered by the court.

	The total amount of income to be withheld shall not exceed the maximum amount permitted under section 303 (b) of the federal Consumer Credit Protection Act (15 U.S.C. s. 1673 (b)).  The income withholding shall be carried out in full compliance with all procedural due process requirements. The Administrative Office of the Courts shall establish procedures for promptly terminating the withholding when necessary and for promptly refunding amounts which have been improperly withheld.

	The Probation Division shall extend the income withholding system to include withholding from income derived within the State in cases where the applicable support order was issued in another state.

	When an income withholding order has been issued in this State, it shall promptly be forwarded to the obligor's principal place of employment pursuant to P.L.1998, c.2 (C.2A:4-30.65 et seq.) or to the appropriate child support agency in the payor's state in the form prescribed by the federal Office of Child Support Enforcement.  All procedural due process requirements of the state Title IV-D agency where the obligor has income shall apply to the income withholding.

	L.1981,c.417,s.3; amended 1985, c.278, s.3; 1990, c.92, s.2; 1998, c.1, s.19.

2A:17-56.9a  Review of child support payments; adjustment or determination; challenge.

	5.	At least once every three years, unless the State has developed an automated cost-of-living adjustment program for child support payments, the parties subject to a Title IV-D support order shall be provided notice of their right to request a review, which shall be conducted in accordance with the rules promulgated by the State IV-D agency in consultation with the Supreme Court. Such review shall take into account any changes in the financial situation or related circumstances of both parties and whether the order of child support is in full compliance with the child support guidelines. 

	Upon completing the review and if a change in the amount of child support is recommended, the State IV-D agency or designee shall so notify the obligor and obligee in writing of the child support amount that is recommended.  The obligor and obligee shall be afforded not less than 30 days after such notification to file with the State IV-D agency and the court a challenge to such proposed adjustment or determination.  If proof exists that the obligor and obligee have  been provided with at least 30-days' notice of the proposed adjustment, the court shall adjust the child support amount as proposed by the department if either party does not challenge the recommended award within the prescribed time or fails to show good cause why the adjustment should not occur.

	In accordance with section 351 of Pub.L.104-193, a proof or showing of a change in circumstances shall not be required prior to initiation of a review or for the adjustment of an order under the three-year review process; however, a proof or showing of a substantial change in circumstances shall be required prior to the initiation of a review or for the adjustment of an order outside the three-year review process.

	L.1990,c.92,s.5; amended 1998, c.1, s.20.

2A:17-56.9b. Rules, regulations  
     a.   The Commissioner of Human Services shall, in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), adopt and promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the implementation of this act.  

    b.   The Supreme Court shall promulgate rules and procedures as may be necessary for the implementation of this act by the courts and probation departments.  

    L.1990,c.92,s.6.  

2A:17-56.10  Notice to obligor; contest of withholding.

	4. a. If an income withholding initiated by the Probation Division is required pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1981, c.417 (C.2A:17-56.9), the Probation Division shall notify the obligor of the income withholding by regular mail to the obligor's last known address.  The notice to the obligor shall be mailed at the same time as the notice to the payor, and shall inform the obligor that the withholding has commenced in accordance with section 314 of Pub.L.104-193.  The notice to the obligor shall also include all of the information regarding the withholding that is included in the notice to the payor.  An obligor may contest a withholding only on the basis of mistake of fact.  The notice to the obligor shall include but need not be limited to:  the amount to be withheld, including an amount to be applied toward liquidation of arrearages; a statement that the withholding applies to current and subsequent sources of income; the methods available for contesting the withholding on the grounds that the withholding is not proper because of mistake of fact; the period within which the Probation Division may be contacted in order to contest the withholding; and the procedures to follow if the obligor desires to contest the withholding on the grounds that the withholding or the amount thereof is improper due to a mistake of fact.

	If an obligor contests the proposed withholding, the Probation Division shall schedule a hearing or review within 20 days after receiving notice of contest of the withholding.  If it is determined that the withholding is to continue, the Probation Division shall provide notice to the obligor.  Notice to the obligor shall include all of the information that is included in the notice to the payor in section 5 of P.L.1981, c.417 (C.2A:17-56.11).  The Probation Division shall notify the obligor of the results of the hearing or review within five days of the date of the hearing or review.

	b.	If the court enters an order modifying alimony, maintenance or child support, the Probation Division shall amend the income withholding amount accordingly.  This income withholding shall have priority over any other withholdings and garnishments without regard to the dates that the other income withholdings or garnishments were issued.

	c.	An income withholding made under P.L.1981, c.417 (C.2A:17-56.8 et seq.) shall continue until terminated by a court.

	d.	Where there is more than one support order for withholding against a single obligor, the payor shall withhold the payments to fully comply with the court orders on a pro rata basis to the extent that the total amount withheld from the obligor's income does not exceed the limits allowed under section 303(b) of the federal Consumer Credit Protection Act (15 U.S.C. s. 1673(b)). Payors may combine withheld amounts in a single payment for each appropriate probation department requesting withholding and separately identify the portion of the payment which is attributable to each obligor unless submitted pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1981, c.417 (C.2A:17-56.13) or through the use of electronic funds transfer.

	L.1981,c.417,s.4;  amended 1985, c.278, s.4; 1998, c.1, s.21.

2A:17-56.11.  Notice to payor; binding
	5.  a.  An income withholding made under P.L.1981, c.417 (C.2A:17-56.8 et seq.) and provisions for health care coverage shall be binding upon the payor and successor payors immediately after service upon the payor by the Probation Division of a copy of the income withholding and an order for the provision of health care coverage, by regular mail.  The payor is to pay the withheld amount to the Probation Division at the same time the obligor is paid.  The payor shall implement withholding and the provisions for health care coverage no later than the first pay period that ends immediately after the date the notice was postmarked, except that the payor is not required to alter regular pay cycles to comply with the withholding.  For each payment, other than payment received from the unemployment compensation fund, the payor may receive $1.00, which shall be deducted from the obligor's income in addition to the amount of the support order to compensate the payor for the administrative expense of processing the withholding.

	Notice to the payor shall include, but not be limited to, instructions for the provisions for health care coverage, the amount to be withheld from the obligor's income and a statement that the total amount withheld for support and other purposes may not be in excess of the maximum amount permitted under section 303 (b) of the federal Consumer Credit Protection Act (15 U.S.C.s.1673 (b)); that the payor shall send the amount to the Probation Division at the same time the obligor is paid, unless the Probation Division directs that payment be made to another individual or entity; that the payor may deduct and retain a fee of $1.00 in addition to the amount of the support order except when the payment is received from the unemployment compensation fund; that withholding is binding on the payor until further notice by the Probation Division; that, in accordance with section 6 of P.L.1981, c.417 (C.2A:17-56.12), the payor is subject to a fine and civil damages as determined by the court for discharging an obligor from employment, refusing to employ, or taking disciplinary action against an obligor subject to an income withholding because of the withholding or any obligation which it imposes upon the payor; that the payor is subject to a fine as determined by the court for failure to withhold support from the obligor's income or pay the withheld amount to the Probation Division; that if the payor fails to take appropriate action with regard to the provisions for health care coverage or withhold wages in accordance with the provisions of the notice, the payor is liable for any medical expenses incurred by the children subject to the provisions for health care coverage and any amount up to the accumulated amount the payor should have withheld from the obligor's income; that the withholding shall have priority over any other legal process under State law against the same income; that the payor may combine withheld amounts from the obligor's income in a single payment to the Probation Division and separately identify the portion of the single payment which is attributable to each obligor unless submitted pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1981, c.417 (C.2A:17-56.13) or through electronic funds transfer; that if there is more than one support order for withholding against a single obligor, the payor shall withhold the payments on a pro rata basis to fully comply with the support orders, to the extent that the total amount withheld does not exceed the limits imposed under section 303 (b) of the federal Consumer Credit Protection Act (15 U.S.C. s.1673 (b)); that the payor shall implement withholding no later than the first pay period that ends immediately after the date the notice was postmarked, except that the payor is not required to alter regular pay cycles to comply with the withholding; and that the payor shall notify the Probation Division promptly upon the termination of the obligor's employment benefits and provide the obligor's last known address and the name and address of the obligor's new payor, if known.

	A payor served with an income withholding notice shall be liable to the obligee for failure to deduct the amounts specified.  The obligee or the Probation Division may commence a proceeding against the payor for accrued deductions, together with interest and reasonable attorney's fees.

	In accordance with section 314 of Pub.L.104-193, a payor who complies with an income withholding notice that is regular on its face shall be immune from civil liability for conduct in compliance with the notice.

	b.	When a payor receives an income withholding notice issued by another state, the payor shall apply the income withholding law of the state in which the obligor's principal place of employment is located in determining:

	(1)	the payor's fee for processing the income withholding;

	(2)	the maximum amount permitted to be withheld from the obligor's income;

	(3)	the time periods within which the payor must implement the income withholding order and forward the child support payment;

	(4)	the priorities for withholding and allocating income withheld for multiple obligees; and

	(5)	any withholding terms or conditions not specified in the support order or notice.

	c.	If an obligor is injured and eligible for workers' compensation under chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes or other disability benefits, the payor shall forward a copy of the income withholding to the insurance carrier at the same time an obligor's claim for workers' compensation is submitted to the Division of Workers' Compensation in the Department of Labor.  The income withholding shall be binding upon the insurance carrier and the insurance carrier shall implement the income withholding pursuant to the provisions of this section.

	d.	The Probation Division shall use the National Medical Support Notice for medical support orders upon its adoption by federal regulation pursuant to the "Child Support Performance and Incentive Act of 1998,"  Pub.L.105-200.

	L.1981,c.417,s.5; amended 1985, c.278, s.5; 1989, c.215; 1990, c.92, s.3; 1995, c.58, s.3; 1998, c.1, s.22; 2000, c.81, s.2; 2001, c.188, s.1.

2A:17-56.11a.  Responsibilities of employer relative to medical support of employee's child
	1. 	When an obligor is eligible for health benefits plan coverage which includes dependents and is available through an employer in this State, and the obligor is required by a court or administrative order to provide medical support coverage for his child, the employer who is the payor shall:

	a. 	Permit the obligor to enroll his child under the health benefits plan as a dependent, without regard to any enrollment season restrictions;

	b. 	Permit the child's other parent, or the Division of Medical Assistance and Health Services as the State Medicaid agency or the Division of Family Development as the State IV-D agency, in the Department of Human Services, to enroll the child under the health benefits plan if the obligor, who is the covered person, fails to enroll the child;

	c. 	Not terminate coverage of the child unless:

	(1) 	the obligor provides the payor with satisfactory written evidence that the court or administrative order is no longer in effect, or the child is or will be enrolled in a comparable health benefits plan whose coverage will be effective on the date of the termination of coverage, or

	(2) 	the payor is no longer providing or making available to its employees health benefits plan coverage which includes dependents; and

	d.	Withhold from the obligor's compensation the obligor's share, if any, of premiums for health benefits plan coverage for the obligor and the obligor's dependent and pay the withheld amount to the health benefits plan carrier or administrator, as appropriate, subject to federal regulations.  The amount withheld shall not exceed the maximum amount permitted to be withheld under section 303(b) of the federal "Consumer Credit Protection Act," 15 U.S.C. 1673(b).

	L.1995,c.287,s.1.

2A:17-56.11b.  Income withholding provisions extended to cover medical support coverage
	1.	The income withholding provisions of P.L.1981, c.417 (C.2A:17-56.7 et seq.) shall be extended to include a withholding of income from the party responsible for maintaining medical support coverage for a child under a child support order issued pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.2A:34-23 when the child is eligible for medical assistance pursuant to P.L.1968, c.413 (C.30:4D-1 et seq.) and the party responsible for maintaining medical support coverage has received payment from a third party for the cost of health care services provided to the child but has not reimbursed the obligee or the health care provider who provided the services for the amount of the payment.  A payment received on or after April 1, 1995 shall be subject to the provisions of this section.

	The income withholding shall be subject to the following conditions:  a. the amount of income withheld shall be to the extent necessary to reimburse the Division of Medical Assistance and Health Services in the Department of Human Services for the costs it incurred in covering the health care services for which the party responsible for maintaining medical support coverage received the payment; and b. the income withholding to reimburse the division shall be subordinate in priority to any other withholding under a child support order.

	The Division of Medical Assistance and Health Services in the Department of Human Services, in consultation with the Administrative Office of the Courts, may initiate procedures for the withholding of income pursuant to this section.

	As used in this section, "third party" means a third party as defined in section 3 of P.L.1968, c.413 (C.30:4D-3).

	L.1995,c.290,s.1.

2A:17-56.12. No discharge or discipline; suit by obligor  
     The payor may not use an income withholding as a basis for the discharge of any obligor or for any disciplinary action against the obligor.  A payor who discharges or disciplines an obligor in violation of this act or who discriminates in hiring because of an income withholding or a potential withholding is a disorderly person. Any obligor claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful discharge may initiate suit in Superior Court for damages and reinstatement of employment.  In any action, the prevailing party may be awarded reasonable attorney's fees; provided however, that no attorney's fees shall be awarded to the respondent unless there is a determination that the action was brought in bad faith.  In addition to any other relief or affirmative action provided by law, the payor may be liable for twofold compensatory damages.  Compensatory damages shall include the costs of proving the discharge, out-of-pocket expenses, and lost income.  If the payor fails to withhold the amount of the order, the payor is liable for amounts up to the accumulated amount the payor should have withheld.  Payors shall notify the probation department promptly of the termination of the obligor's employment and provide the obligor's last known address and the name and address of the obligor's new payor, if known.  

    L.1981, c.417, s.6.  Amended by L.1985, c.278, s.6, eff. Oct. 1, 1985.  

2A:17-56.13  Payments made through probation division.

	7.	Until such time as a State disbursement unit is established pursuant to section 14 of P.L.1998, c.1 (C.2A:17-56.63), in every award for alimony, maintenance or child support payments the judgment or order shall provide that payments be made through the Probation Division of the county in which the obligor resides, unless the court, for good cause shown, otherwise orders.  Upon entry of the judgment or order, the parties shall provide the court and the Probation Division with their Social Security numbers, residential and mailing addresses, telephone numbers, driver's license numbers, and the name, address and telephone number of their employers.  Each judgment or order shall require that the obligor and obligee notify the Probation Division of any change of payor or change of address within 10 days of the change.  Failure to provide this information shall be considered a violation of this order. 

	The order shall also inform the obligor that the address provided to the Probation Division shall be the address of record for subsequent support enforcement actions and that service of legal documents at that address shall be effective for the purpose of meeting due process requirements.

	For the purposes of enforcing a support provision, the court may deem procedural due process requirements for notice and service of process to be met with respect to a party thereto upon delivery of written notice to the most recent residential or employer address filed with the Probation Division for that party.  If a party fails to respond to a notice and no proof is available that the party received the notice, the Probation Division shall document to the court that it has made a diligent effort to locate the party by making inquiries that may include, but are not limited to: the United States Postal Service, the Division of Motor Vehicles in the Department of Transportation, the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury and the Departments of Labor and Corrections.  The Probation Division shall provide an affidavit to the court presenting such documentation of its diligent effort, which certifies its inability to locate the party, before any adverse action is taken based upon the party's failure to respond to the notice.  When an obligor changes employment within the State while income withholding is in effect, the Probation Division shall notify the new payor that the withholding is binding on the new payor.  When the Probation Division is unable to locate the obligor's current payor in order to effectuate an income withholding under P.L.1981, c.417 (C.2A:17-56.8 et seq.), the Probation Division is authorized to utilize any other procedure authorized by law to obtain this information. 

	L.1981,c.417,s.7; amended 1985, c.278, s.7; 1998, c.1, s.23.

2A:17-56.13a. Alimony, maintenance, child support payments; electronic funds transfer, credit card  
     a.   Every probation department may establish a system to accept alimony, maintenance or child support payments through electronic funds transfer, credit card, or any other method deemed feasible by the department.  

    b.   The Supreme Court of the State of New Jersey shall adopt Rules of Court appropriate or necessary to effectuate the purpose of this act.  

    L.1990,c.53,s.1.  

2A:17-56.14. Filing of affidavit; application for payments  
     An obligee who has not established a IV-D case through the probation department shall file an affidavit when applying for the income withholding, stating that the payments not made for support have accrued arrearages in an amount equal to the amount of support payable for 14 days.  The probation department shall administer the withholding in accordance with procedures specified for keeping adequate records to document, track, and monitor support payments or establish or permit the establishment of alternative procedures for the collection and distribution of amounts withheld by an entity other than a designated public agency.  Alimony, maintenance or child support payments not presently made through the probation department shall be so made upon application of either party unless the other party upon application to the court shows good cause to the contrary.  

    A monitoring fee of $25.00 annually shall be applied upon the request of either the obligor or obligee for the payment of support through the probation department, regardless of whether or not arrearages exist or withholding procedures have been instituted.  The probation department shall monitor all amounts paid and the dates of payments and record them separately.  The court and the probation department shall follow the procedures established in this act.  

    L.1981,c.417,s.8; amended 1985,c.278,s.8; 1990,c.92,s.4.  

2A:17-56.16.  Tax setoff for support, indebtedness cases 
	13. 	The Administrative Office of the Courts shall promulgate rules and regulations concerning procedures for determining which support cases, and which cases of indebtedness in accordance with section 1 of P.L.1995, c.290 (C.2A:17-56.11b), are appropriate for application of tax setoff, for verifying the accuracy of the amounts referred for setoff, notifying the State Department of the Treasury of any child support and other indebtedness subject to section 1 of P.L.1981, c.239 (C.54A:9-8.1) and changes thereto, and any other procedures necessary to comply with Pub.L. 98-378.

	L.1985,c.278,s.13; amended 1995,c.290,s.2.

2A:17-56.20  Late fees, interest.

	17.  a.  In enforcing all existing and future orders for support, and notwithstanding other provisions to the contrary, the State IV-D agency, without a new order, shall have the authority to assess interest or late payment fees on any support order not paid within 30 days of the due date.

	b.	The late payment fee or interest shall be determined by the State IV-D agency within amounts specified by the federal Department of Health and Human Services. 

	c.	The fee or interest shall accrue as arrearages accumulate and shall not be reduced upon partial payment of arrears.  The fee or interest may be collected only after the full amount of overdue support is paid and all State requirements for notice to the obligor have been met. 

	d.	The collection of the fee or interest shall not directly or indirectly reduce the amount of current or overdue support paid to the obligee to whom it is owed. 

	e.	The late payment fee or interest shall be uniformly applied in all cases administered under the State IV-D program, including public assistance, nonpublic assistance, and resource family cases. 

	L.1985,c.278,s.17; amended 2004, c.130, s.8.

2A:17-56.21  Information provided to credit reporting agencies.

	18. a. The State IV-D agency shall have the authority to make available the name of any delinquent obligor and the amount of overdue support owed by the obligor to credit reporting agencies, subject to the conditions set forth in this section and privacy safeguards established by the commissioner.  This information shall be provided only to an entity that has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the State IV-D agency that the entity is a credit reporting agency.

	b.	In all Title IV-D cases where the obligor is in arrears, the information shall be made available to credit reporting agencies.

	c.	The State IV-D agency may establish a fee for all requests which will be uniformly applied in all Title IV-D cases.  Any fee charged shall be limited to the actual cost of providing the information.

	d.	Information with respect to a delinquent obligor shall be reported to credit reporting agencies only after the obligor has been afforded all procedural due process required under State law including notice and a reasonable opportunity to contest the accuracy of the information.

	e.	The State IV-D agency shall comply with all applicable procedural due process requirements before releasing information and may request information on an obligor from a credit reporting agency only after noticing the obligor of the State IV-D agency's intent to request the information.

	L.1985,c.278,s.18; amended 1998, c.1, s.24.

2A:17-56.22  Fees for application, collection of child support.
 
	19. a. The State IV-D agency shall have the authority to charge an application fee to individuals not receiving Temporary Assistance for Needy Families who apply for IV-D services. 
 
	(1)	The application fee shall be uniformly applied on a Statewide basis and shall be a flat dollar amount not to exceed $25 or other amount as may be appropriate for any fiscal year to reflect administrative costs. 
 
	(2)	The fee shall be collected directly from the individual who applied for IV-D services. 
 
	(3)	The State IV-D agency shall determine by regulation the distribution of the fees collected. 
 
	b.	In addition to the application fee, the State IV-D agency shall charge a $25 annual fee for the collection of child support for IV-D services in those cases in which the State has collected at least $500 on behalf of an individual receiving support for a child who has never received Temporary Assistance for Needy Families. 
 
	The State IV-D agency shall have the authority to pay the fee using federal incentive dollars as available, and when not available, the State IV-D agency shall exercise its option under the federal "Deficit Reduction Act of 2005," Pub.L.109-171 and its implementing regulations to collect the fee from the non-custodial parent.
 
	L.1985, c.278, s.19; amended 2008, c.101, s.1.

2A:17-56.23. Expedition of child support cases 
    The Supreme Court shall adopt by court rule a system for expediting child support cases as required by Pub.L.  98-378 (42 U.S.C. s. 601 et seq.). 

   L. 1985, c. 278, s. 20, eff. Oct. 1, 1985. 

2A:17-56.23a  Enforcement of child support orders as judgments; prospective modification of orders.

	1.	Any payment or installment of an order for child support, or those portions of an order which are allocated for child support, whether ordered in this State or in another state, shall be fully enforceable and entitled as a judgment to full faith and credit and shall be a judgment by operation of law on and after the date it is due.  For obligors who reside or own property in this State, such judgments, once docketed with the Clerk of the Superior Court, shall have the same force and effect, be enforced in the same manner and be subject to the same priorities as a civil money judgment entered by the court.  The State shall accord full faith and credit to child support judgments or liens of other states, whether arising by operation of law or having been entered by a court or administrative agency, when a Title IV-D agency, a party, or other entity seeking to enforce such a judgment or lien in this State files a Notice of Interstate Lien, in the form prescribed by the federal Office of Child Support Enforcement, and supporting documents with the Clerk of the Superior Court.  An action to domesticate a foreign child support judgment or lien shall be consistent with the "Uniform Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act," P.L.1997, c.204 (C.2A:49A-25 et seq.).  Liens against real and personal property shall be subject to the same enforcement procedures as other civil money judgments except that no judicial notice or hearing shall be required to enforce the lien.  No payment or installment of an order for child support, or those portions of an order which are allocated for child support established prior to or subsequent to the effective date of P.L.1993, c.45 (C.2A:17-56.23a), shall be retroactively modified by the court except with respect to the period during which there is a pending application for modification, but only from the date the notice of motion was mailed either directly or through the appropriate agent.  The written notice will state that a change of circumstances has occurred and a motion for modification of the order will be filed within 45 days.  In the event a motion is not filed within the 45-day period, modification shall be permitted only from the date the motion is filed with the court.

	The non-modification provision of this section is intended to be curative and shall apply to all orders entered before, on and after the effective date of P.L.1993, c.45 (C.2A:17-56.23a).

	L.1988,c.111,s.1; amended 1993, c.45; 1998, c.1, s.25.

2A:17-56.23b.  Judgment for child support lien against net proceeds of settlement; priority
	1. a. A judgment for child support entered pursuant to P.L.1988, c.111 (C.2A:17-56.23a) and docketed with the Clerk of the Superior Court shall be a lien against the net proceeds of any settlement negotiated prior or subsequent to the filing of a lawsuit, civil judgment, civil arbitration award, inheritance or workers' compensation award.  The lien shall have priority over all other levies and garnishments against the net proceeds of any settlement negotiated prior or subsequent to the filing of a lawsuit, civil judgment, civil arbitration award, inheritance or workers' compensation award unless otherwise provided by the Superior Court, Chancery Division, Family Part.  The lien shall not have priority over levies to recover unpaid income taxes owed to the State.  The lien shall stay the distribution of the net proceeds to the prevailing party or beneficiary until the child support judgment is satisfied.

	As used in this act "net proceeds" means any amount of money, in excess of $2,000, payable to the prevailing party or beneficiary after attorney fees, witness fees, court costs, fees for health care providers, payments to the Medicaid program under section 6 of P.L.1979, c.365 (C.30:4D-7.1), reimbursement to the Division of Employment Security in the Department of Labor, the employer or employer's  insurance carrier for temporary disability benefits that may have been paid pending the outcome of a workers' compensation claim as provided by section 1 of P.L.1950, c.174 (C.34:15-57.1), reimbursement to an employer or the employer's workers' compensation insurance carrier as provided in R.S.34:15-40, and other costs related to the lawsuit, inheritance or settlement are deducted from the award, proceeds or estate; "prevailing party" or "beneficiary" shall not include a partnership, corporation, limited liability partnership, financial institution, government entity or minor child; and "agent" means an authorized representative of the prevailing party or beneficiary, a union representative, an executor or administrator of a decedent's estate, an arbitrator or any other person or entity if such person or entity is responsible for the distribution of net proceeds to a prevailing party or beneficiary.

	b.	Before distributing any net proceeds of a settlement, judgment, inheritance or award to the prevailing party or beneficiary:

	(1)	the prevailing party or beneficiary shall provide the attorney, insurance company or agent responsible for the final distribution of such funds with a certification that includes the prevailing party's or beneficiary's full name, mailing address, date of birth and Social Security number; and

	(2)	the attorney representing the prevailing party or beneficiary shall initiate a search of child support judgments, through a private judgment search company that maintains information on child support judgments, to determine if the prevailing party or beneficiary is a child support judgment debtor.

	If the prevailing party or beneficiary is not represented by an attorney, the judgment search shall be initiated by the opposing attorney, insurance company or agent before the proceeds are distributed to the prevailing party or beneficiary. In the case of a workers' compensation action, the Administrative Office of the Courts shall, at least once every 60 days, transmit information on child support judgment debtors to the Division of Workers' Compensation in the Department of Labor.  The information shall include the debtor's name, Social Security number, the amount of the child support judgment, the Probation Division case number and the Probation Division office to which the judgment is payable.  The Division of Workers' Compensation shall match the data received on child support judgment debtors against the information it maintains for individuals who have filed workers' compensation claims with the division.  When a match is identified, the Division of Workers' Compensation shall notify the appropriate judge of compensation of the child support judgment before the decision, award, determination, judgment or order approving the settlement is rendered.  The judge of compensation shall incorporate in the decision, award, determination, judgment or order approving the settlement, an order requiring the employer or the employer's insurance carrier to contact the Probation Division to satisfy the child support judgment out of the net proceeds of the workers' compensation award, order or settlement before any such monies are paid to the employee.  The Division of Workers' Compensation shall be immune from any civil liability that may arise from any information provided by the division or any order issued by a judge of compensation relating to a child support judgment, in accordance with this section.  In the case of judgments or settlements resulting from a labor arbitration involving employees of a school board or school district, a judgment search shall be initiated by the school board or district prior to the release of any net proceeds to the employees and only if there is an income withholding for child support active against the employee in the records of the school board or district. In the case of an inheritance, the executor or administrator of the decedent's estate shall initiate the judgment search.  The judgment search company shall provide a certification to the attorney, insurance company, agent or party initiating the lawsuit identifying whether or not the prevailing party or beneficiary is a child support judgment debtor.

	In the case of net proceeds that are to be paid through a structured settlement or other payment plan, the attorney, insurance company or agent shall be required to conduct the child support judgment search only at the time of settlement or prior to the distribution of the first payment under the plan.  If a child support judgment is identified, the attorney, insurance company or agent shall provide the Probation Division with a copy of the structured settlement or payment plan within 30 days of identifying the child support judgment.

	If there are no attorneys representing either party in a civil lawsuit, the party bringing the lawsuit shall initiate the judgment search and shall be required to file the certification with the court at least 10 working days prior to the trial or with the stipulation that the certification shall be filed at the time of the settlement or dismissal of the lawsuit.

	For monies deposited with the court, no distribution of funds shall be made until the attorney, prevailing party or beneficiary provides the Clerk of the Superior Court with a copy of the certification showing that the prevailing party or beneficiary is not a child support judgment debtor.

	The fee for a judgment search which is required by this section shall not exceed $10 for each name of a child support judgment debtor that is searched. The fee for a judgment search is chargeable against the net proceeds as a cost of the settlement, judgment, inheritance or award.

	c.	If the certification shows that the prevailing party or beneficiary is not a child support judgment debtor, the net proceeds may be paid to the prevailing party or beneficiary immediately.  If the certification shows that the prevailing party or beneficiary is a child support judgment debtor, the attorney, insurance company or agent that initiated the search shall contact the Probation Division of the Superior Court to arrange for the satisfaction of the child support judgment. The attorney, insurance company or agent shall notify the prevailing party or beneficiary of the intent to satisfy the child support judgment prior to the disbursement of any funds to the prevailing party or beneficiary.  Upon receipt of a warrant of satisfaction for the child support judgment, the attorney, insurance company or agent shall pay the balance of the settlement, judgment, award or inheritance to the prevailing party or beneficiary.  If the net proceeds are less than the amount of the child support judgment, the entire amount of the net proceeds shall be paid to the Probation Division as partial satisfaction of the judgment.

	If there are no attorneys representing either party in a civil lawsuit and the certification filed with the court shows that the prevailing party or beneficiary is a child support judgment debtor, the court shall order that the opposing party pay the amount of the child support judgment to the Probation Division before any funds are paid to the prevailing party or beneficiary.  The court shall also insure that any judgment related to the lawsuit docketed with the Clerk of the Superior Court reflect the Probation Division's superior claim to such funds.

	d.	An attorney, insurance company or agent shall not be liable for distributing net proceeds to the prevailing party or beneficiary based on the results of a judgment certification showing the prevailing party or beneficiary is not the debtor of a child support judgment, if it is later shown that the prevailing party or beneficiary provided inaccurate personal information on the initial certification to the attorney, the insurer or agent.

	e.	An attorney, insurance company or agent who, in accordance with this act, satisfies a child support judgment from the net proceeds of a settlement, judgment, inheritance or award, shall not be liable for payments which otherwise would have been made pursuant to subsection a. of this section which were not so identified to the attorney, insurance company or agent at the time of satisfaction.

	f.	An attorney, insurance company or agent who, in accordance with this act, satisfies a child support judgment from the net proceeds of a settlement, judgment, inheritance or award,  shall not be liable to the prevailing party or beneficiary or to that party's creditors.

	g.	An attorney shall not be required to challenge a child support judgment unless retained by the prevailing party or beneficiary to do so.

	h.	A private judgment search company is prohibited from using any information provided by an attorney, insurance company or agent in accordance with this act for any purpose other than: (1) determining if the prevailing party or beneficiary is the debtor of a child support judgment; and (2) preparing a certification as required pursuant to subsection b. of this section.

	i.	To the extent feasible and permitted by the Rules of Court, the Administrative Office of the Courts may share information on a child support judgment debtor with an insurance carrier for the sole purpose of complying with the provisions of P.L.2000, c.81 (C.2A:17-56.23b et al.).

	L.2000,c.81, s.1.

2A:17-56.24. Monitoring program; report 
    a.   The probation department in each county shall monitor the overall implementation of the State's child support enforcement program pursuant to Part D of subchapter IV of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. s. 651 et seq.), to ensure compliance with the provisions of this amendatory and supplementary act by collecting and maintaining individual and aggregate case statistics as required by the Administrative Office of the Courts. 

   b.   The probation department in each county shall provide aggregate statistical reports of case statistics monthly to the State IV-D agency and the Administrative Office of the Courts. 

   c.   The State IV-D agency shall compile the monthly statistical reports submitted by the probation departments and report to the Legislature on the agency's assessment of the effectiveness of this amendatory and supplementary act in enforcing support orders, 18 months after the effective date of this amendatory and supplementary act. 

   L. 1985, c. 278, s. 21, eff. Oct. 1, 1985. 

2A:17-56.25. Rules, regulations 
    The Department of Human Services shall promulgate rules and regulations pursuant to its rule-making authority under the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L. 1968, c. 410 (C. 52:14B-1 et seq.) in order to effectuate the purposes of this act. 

   L. 1985, c. 278, s. 22, eff. Oct. 1, 1985. 

2A:17-56.27. Short title  
    1.   This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Child Support Collection Reform Act."  

   L.1993,c.110,s.1.  

2A:17-56.28. Findings, declarations  
    2.   The Legislature finds and declares that:

  

   a.   There is a direct correlation between children receiving AFDC benefits and non-payment of child support obligations.  

   b.   Based on the 1992 Kids Count Report for New Jersey evidencing the increased number of children on welfare and living in poverty, it is necessary to make child support collections a major priority and expedite these collections through more efficient means.  

   c.   The number of AFDC cases and the number of those cases that can benefit from expedited and more efficient child support collection is about 31,500.  

   d.   It is the intent of this legislation that the State establish a pilot project whereby private collection agencies would be responsible for collecting outstanding child support in order to study the possibility that this method of collection may be the more effective way for the State to deal with the problem of delinquent child support.  

   L.1993,c.110,s.2.  

2A:17-56.29. Pilot project for collection of child support arrearages by private collection agency  
    3. a. The Commissioner of Human Services shall establish a pilot project in three counties whereby the  county probation department shall enter into a contract with a private collection agency for the purpose of collecting from an obligor, any arrearage of child support owed to a custodial parent that has not been paid for the past six months.  Cases forwarded to the private collection agency shall include those whose arrearages have been outstanding for at least 18 months, but not more than 10% of the cases shall be delinquent for more than 18 months.  

   b.   The obligor parent shall be responsible for payment of the private collection agency fee, which fee shall be a percentage of the amount collected in the contract.  

   c.   Once an obligor parent becomes current on his child support payment and has established a regular payment schedule for at least four months, the case shall be referred back to the county probation department.  

   d.   The county probation department shall be required to provide a listing of all outstanding cases of child support to the private collection agency under contract to collect the arrearage. Any arrearage collected by the private collection agency shall be forwarded to the county probation department for disbursement to the custodial parent.  The disbursement shall not exceed 10 calendar days from the date of receipt by the probation department.  The contract shall be made and awarded pursuant to the provisions of the "Local Public Contracts Law," P.L.1971, c.198 (C.40A:11-1 et seq.).  

   L.1993,c.110,s.3.  

2A:17-56.30. Establishment, monitoring, evaluation of pilot project  
    4.   The pilot project shall be established in Camden, Essex and Hudson counties.  The commissioner shall monitor and evaluate the pilot project during the first year after its establishment and determine whether the use of private collection agencies should be used throughout the State. The commissioner shall also evaluate the feasibility of establishing a centralized data base which would coordinate the activities of the Department of Human Services and the Administrative Office of the Courts.  

   L.1993,c.110,s.4.  

2A:17-56.31. Adoption of standards  
    5.   The Administrative Office of the Courts, in consultation with the Department of Human Services, shall adopt standards concerning the qualifications and responsibilities of private collection agencies that may enter into contracts with the probation departments and the contract provisions, including maximum fees that can be charged.  The contracts shall comply with all applicable federal program requirements.  

   L.1993,c.110,s.5.  

2A:17-56.32. Application for waivers  
    6.   The Department of Human Services shall apply for any waivers from the federal government which are necessary for approval and implementation of this act.  

   L.1993,c.110,s.6.  

2A:17-56.33. Annual report to Governor, Legislature  
    7.   The Department of Human Services, in conjunction with the Administrative Office of the Courts, shall submit an annual report to the Governor and the Legislature by December 31 of each year about the pilot project.  This report shall contain, but not be limited to:  

   a.   The number of cases referred by the probation departments to the collection agency;  

   b.   The dollar amount of each outstanding case;

  

   c.   The number of cases in which an arrearage was collected and the dollar amount collected;  

   d.   The number of uncollected cases and the dollar amount represented by those cases; and  

   e.   An assessment of the success of the pilot project and the feasibility of establishing the use of private collection agencies Statewide.  

   L.1993,c.110,s.7.  

2A:17-56.34  Information about putative fathers, child support obligors.

	1.	The Probation Division, the State IV-D agency and its designees, subject to privacy safeguards, shall be authorized to receive information concerning putative fathers and child support obligors from the following sources through electronic or other appropriate means:

	a.	To the extent permitted by R.S.54:50-9, records of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury containing information concerning an obligor's income or assets;

	b.	Direct, on-line access to the Division of Motor Vehicles' records, including, where possible, interface between automated systems;

	c.	Any record, paper, document or entity deemed by the Probation Division, the State IV-D agency or its designee to be a potential source of information concerning an obligor's income or assets.  In order to obtain information pursuant to this subsection, the Probation Division and the State IV-D agency shall have the authority, as designated by the Commissioner of the Department of Human Services, to compel the production of books, papers, accounts, records and documents by subpoena.  The subpoena shall be served by certified and regular mail on the person or entity in possession of the information or record that is sought and such service shall be considered consistent with procedural due process requirements.  In all other respects, a subpoena issued under this section shall be subject to the same procedures as a subpoena issued by other agencies of this State.  Actions relating to a subpoena issued under this section shall be heard in the court;

	d.	State lottery prize payments in excess of $600 made by the Department of the Treasury;

	e.	Record of a judgment or settlement of any civil action where a party is entitled to receive a monetary award made by the court or an inheritance; and

	f.	Record of an out-of-court settlement.

	L.1995,c.322,s.1;  amended 1998, c.1, s.26.

2A:17-56.35  Public utility, cable television companies as source; exemption for long distance carriers.

	2. a. If the State IV-D agency and its designees are unable to obtain information pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1995, c.322 (C.2A:17-56.34), then the agency and its designees may seek verifying information from public utility and cable television companies as required by Pub.L.104-193.  Such information shall be limited to identifying information necessary to establish the name and address, or residency, if different from the address, of putative fathers and child support obligors.

	b.	A public utility or cable television company shall not be liable for damages for any civil action which may result from complying with the provisions of P.L.1995, c.322 (C.2A:17-56.34 et seq.).

	c.	A long distance carrier shall be exempt from the provisions of P.L.1995, c.322 (C.2A:17-56.34 et seq.).

	L.1995,c.322,s.2;  amended 1998, c.1, s.27.

2A:17-56.36.	Rules, regulations
	4.	The Commissioner of Human Services shall, in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), and in conjunction with the Supreme Court, the Division of Motor Vehicles, the Administrative Office of the Courts and the Department of the Treasury , adopt and promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the implementation of this act, including, but not limited to: the protection of the confidential use of the information concerning putative fathers and child support obligors to safeguard against the unauthorized use, disclosure or publication of the information; and, the establishment of penalties for those cases in which the information is improperly used, disclosed or published beyond the purposes of this act. 

	L.1995,c.322,s.4.

2A:17-56.41  Consequences of obligor's noncompliance; revocation hearing.
 	3. a. If the child support arrearage equals or exceeds the amount of child support payable for six months or court-ordered health care coverage for the child is not provided for six months, or the obligor fails to respond to a subpoena relating to a paternity or child support action, or a child support-related warrant exists, and the obligor is found to possess a license in the State and all appropriate enforcement methods to collect the child support arrearage have been exhausted, the Probation Division shall send a written notice to the obligor, by certified and regular mail, return receipt requested, at the obligor's last-known address or place of business or employment, advising the obligor that the obligor's license may be revoked or suspended unless, within 30 days of the postmark date of the notice, the obligor pays the full amount of the child support arrearage, or provides proof that health care coverage for the child has been obtained, or responds to a subpoena, or makes a written request for a court hearing to the Probation Division.  If a child support- related warrant for the obligor exists, the professional, occupational, recreational or sporting license revocation or suspension shall be terminated if the obligor pays the full amount of the child support arrearage, provides proof that health care coverage for the child has been obtained as required by the court order, or surrenders to the county sheriff or the Probation Division.
 
	b.	If the obligor fails to take one of the actions in subsection a. of this section within 30 days of the postmark date of the notice and there is proof that service on the obligor was effective, the Probation Division shall file a certification with the court setting forth the obligor's non-compliance with the support order and the obligor's failure to respond to the written notice of the potential license suspension or revocation.  If, based on the papers filed by the Probation Division, the court is satisfied that service on the obligor was effective as set forth in this section, it shall without need for further due process or hearing, enter a court order suspending or revoking all licenses held by the obligor.  Upon the entry of the order, the Probation Division shall forward a copy to the obligor and all appropriate licensing authorities.
 
	For the purposes of this section, the court may deem procedural due process requirements for notice and service of process to be met with respect to a party thereto upon delivery of written notice to the most recent residential or employer address filed with the Probation Division for that party.  If a party fails to respond to a notice and no proof is available that the party received the notice, the Probation Division shall document to the court that it has made a diligent effort to locate the party by making inquiries that may include, but are not limited to: the United States Postal Service, the Division of Motor Vehicles in the Department of Transportation, the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury and the Departments of Labor and Corrections.  The Probation Division shall provide an affidavit to the court presenting such documentation of its diligent effort, which certifies its inability to locate the party, before any adverse action is taken based upon the party's failure to respond to the notice.
 
	c.	If the obligor requests a hearing, the Probation Division shall file a petition for a judicial hearing in accordance with section 5 of P.L.1996, c.7 (C.2A:17-56.43).  The hearing shall occur within 45 days of the obligor's request.  If, at or prior to the hearing, the obligor pays the full amount of the child support arrearage or provides health care coverage as ordered, or responds to the subpoena or surrenders to the county sheriff or the Probation Division, the license revocation process shall be terminated.  No license revocation action shall be initiated if the Probation Division has received notice that the obligor has pending a motion to modify the child support order if that motion was filed prior to the date that the notice of the license suspension or revocation was sent by the Probation Division.  The court shall consider the Probation Division's petition to revoke or suspend a license in accordance with section 5 of P.L.1996, c.7 (C.2A:17-56.43).
 
	L.1996, c.7, s.3; amended 1998, c.1, s.28; 2019, c.276, s.2.

2A:17-56.42.	  Payments made through Probation Division
	4. 	Child support payments not presently made through the Probation Division shall be so made, upon the application of the obligee to the Probation Division and prior to the application of the provisions of this act.

	L.1996,c.7,s.4.

2A:17-56.43  Suspension, revocation of license.

	5.	The court shall suspend or revoke a license if it finds that: a. all appropriate enforcement methods have been exhausted, b. the obligor is the holder of a license, c. the requisite child support arrearage amount exists, health care coverage has not been provided as ordered pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1996, c.7 (C.2A:17-56.41), or there has been no response to a subpoena, d. no motion to modify the child support order, filed prior to the date that the notice of the license suspension or revocation was sent by the Probation Division, is pending before the court, and e. there is no equitable reason, such as involuntary unemployment, disability, or compliance with a court-ordered plan for the periodic payment of the child support arrearage amount, for the obligor's non-compliance with the child support order.

	If the court is satisfied that these conditions exist, it shall first consider suspending or revoking a driver's license prior to a professional license.  If the obligor fails to appear at the hearing after being properly served with notice, the court shall order the suspension or revocation of all licenses held by the obligor.  In the case of a driver's license, if the court finds that the license revocation or suspension will result in a significant hardship to the obligor, to the obligor's legal dependents under 18 years of age living in the obligor's household, to the obligor's employees, or to persons, businesses or entities to whom the obligor provides goods or services, the court may allow the obligor to pay 25% of the past-due child support amount within three working days of the hearing, establish a payment schedule to satisfy the remainder of the arrearages within one year, and require that the obligor comply with any current child support obligation.  If the obligor agrees to this arrangement, no suspension or revocation of any licenses shall be ordered.  Compliance with the payment agreement shall be monitored by the Probation Division.  If the obligor has good cause for not complying with the payment agreement within the time permitted, the obligor shall immediately file a motion with the court and the Probation Division requesting an extension of the payment plan.  The court may extend the payment plan if it is satisfied that the obligor has made a good faith effort to comply with the plan and is unable to satisfy the full amount of past-due support within the time permitted due to circumstances beyond the obligor's control.  In no case shall a payment plan extend beyond the date the dependent child reaches the age of 18.  If the obligor fails to comply with the court-ordered payment schedule, the court shall, upon receipt of a certification of non-compliance from the obligee or Probation Division, and without further hearing, order the immediate revocation or suspension of all licenses held by the obligor.  If required by existing law or regulation, the court shall order that the obligor surrender the license to the issuing authority within 30 days of the date of the order.

	L.1996,c.7,s.5; amended 1998, c.1, s.29.

2A:17-56.44  Suspension, revocation procedures.

	6. a. The Probation Division shall provide the licensing authority with a copy of the order requiring the suspension or revocation of a license.  Upon receipt of an order requiring the suspension or revocation of a license, the licensing authority shall immediately notify the licensee of the effective date of the suspension or revocation, which shall be 20 days after the postmark of the notice, direct the licensee to refrain from engaging in the activity associated with the license, surrender any license as required by law, and inform the licensee that the license shall not be reinstated until the court or Probation Division certifies that the conditions which resulted in the suspension or revocation are satisfied.  The Probation Division and the State IV-D agency in association with the affected licensing authorities may develop electronic or magnetic tape data transfers to notify licensing authorities of restrictions, suspensions, revocations and reinstatements.  No liability shall be imposed on a licensing authority for suspending or revoking a license if the action is in response to a court order issued in accordance with P.L.1996, c.7(C.2A:17-56.41 et seq.).  Licensing authorities shall not have jurisdiction to modify, remand, reverse, vacate or stay a court order to restrict, suspend or revoke a license for non-payment of child support.

	b.	If a licensee, upon receipt of the notice of suspension or revocation from the licensing authority, disputes that he is an obligor, the licensee shall notify the licensing authority and the Probation Division by registered mail within 20 days of the postmark of the notice and request a hearing.  Upon receipt of the licensee's request for a hearing, the Probation Division shall determine if the licensee is an obligor.  If the Probation Division determines that the licensee is an obligor, the Probation Division shall file a petition for a judicial hearing on the issue of whether the licensee is an obligor.  The hearing shall occur within 30 days.  If the Probation Division determines that the licensee is not an obligor, the Probation Division shall so notify the licensee and the licensing authority.  The licensing authority shall not suspend or revoke a person's license, if the licensing authority received proper notice of the licensee's request for a hearing pursuant to this subsection, until the court finds that the licensee is an obligor. The Probation Division shall notify the licensing authority of the court's finding.  Upon receipt of the court's finding that the licensee is an obligor, the licensing authority shall immediately suspend or revoke the obligor's license without additional review or hearing.

	c.	The revocation or suspension of a license ordered by the court in accordance with P.L.1996, c.7 (C.2A:17-56.41 et seq.) shall continue until the Probation Division or the obligor files with the licensing authority a certified court order restoring the license.

	d.	Each licensing authority shall require license applicants to certify on the license application form, under penalty of perjury, that the applicant does not have a child support obligation, the applicant does have such an obligation but the arrearage amount does not equal or exceed the amount of child support payable for six months and any court-ordered health care coverage has been provided for the past six months, the applicant has not failed to respond to a subpoena relating to a paternity or child support proceeding, or the applicant is not the subject of a child-support related warrant.  A license shall not be granted to an obligor who applies for a license if there is an arrearage equal to or exceeding the amount of child support payable for six months, the applicant has not provided court-ordered health care coverage during the past six months or the applicant has failed to respond to a subpoena relating to a paternity or child support proceeding or is the subject of a child support-related warrant.  The application form shall state that making a false statement may subject the applicant to contempt of court.  It shall also state that if the applicant's certification is found to be false, the licensing authority shall take disciplinary action including, but not limited to, immediate revocation or suspension of the license.

	e.	For all licenses issued or renewed in the State after the effective date of P.L.1996, c.7(C.2A:17-56.41 et seq.), the licensing authority shall record the full name, mailing address, Social Security number and date of birth of the applicant or licensee.  All affected licensing authorities shall cooperate and enter into agreements with the Probation Division and the State IV-D agency to exchange information to effectuate the purposes of P.L.1996, c.7(C.2A:17-56.41 et seq.).  The Division of Motor Vehicles in the Department of Transportation and other appropriate licensing agencies shall amend their regulations and public notices to permit Social Security numbers collected by those agencies to be used for child support enforcement purposes.  License information obtained through data matches with licensing authorities shall be maintained on the State case registry in the Department of Human Services for future use.

	L.1996,c.7,s.6; amended 1998, c.1, s.30.

2A:17-56.45.	  Payment of fees
	7. 	The obligor shall pay all fees associated with the revocation, suspension or reinstatement of a license.  Any fees paid by the obligor to the licensing authority to issue, renew or maintain a license shall not be refunded if the license is suspended or revoked in accordance with P.L.1996, c.7 (C.2A:17-56.40 et al.).

	L.1996,c.7,s.7.


2A:17-56.46.	  Information on driver's license suspension to insurers
	8.	Information regarding driver's licenses suspended or revoked in accordance with P.L.1996, c.7 (C.2A:17-56.40 et al.)  shall be made available by the Division of Motor Vehicles to insurance companies that issue motor vehicle policies.  Insurance companies are prohibited from increasing a policyholder's rates solely because a license was suspended or revoked in accordance with P.L.1996, c.7 (C.2A:17-56.40 et al.).

	L.1996,c.7,s.8.


2A:17-56.47.	  Due process, service
	9. 	All actions taken to suspend or revoke a license in accordance with P.L.1996, c.7  (C.2A:17-56.40 et al.) shall be carried out in full compliance with due process laws and the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey.  Service of process shall be made in accordance with applicable New Jersey court rules and statutes.  For the purposes of P.L.1996, c.7  (C.2A:17-56.40 et al.), service of process may be effected by an employee of the Probation Division.

	L.1996,c.7,s.9.

2A:17-56.48.	  Cooperative agreements
	10.	The State IV-D agency shall enter into cooperative agreements for federal IV-D funding with the Department of Law and Public Safety and any other appropriate licensing authority that is responsible for administering license suspensions and revocations in accordance with P.L.1996, c.7 (C.2A:17-56.40 et al.) to the extent that the costs are eligible for federal financial participation under section 451 of Title IV, Part D of the federal Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.651 et seq.).

	L.1996,c.7,s.10.

2A:17-56.49  Applicability of act.
 
	11.	The license revocation provisions of P.L.1996, c.7 (C.2A:17-56.41 et seq.) apply to all orders issued before or after the effective date of P.L.1996, c.7 (C.2A:17-56.41 et seq.).  All child support arrearage and health care coverage provisions in existence on or before the effective date of P.L.1996, c.7 (C.2A:17-56.41 et seq.) shall be included in determining whether a case is eligible for enforcement in accordance with P.L.1996, c.7 (C.2A:17-56.41 et seq.).  P.L.1996, c.7 (C.2A:17-56.41 et seq.) applies to all child support obligations ordered by any state, territory or district of the United States that are being enforced by the Probation Division, that are payable directly to the obligee, or have been registered in this State in accordance with the "Uniform Interstate Family Support Act," originally enacted as P.L.1998, c.2 (C.2A:4-30.65 et seq.), and repealed and replaced by P.L.2016, c.1 (C.2A:4-30.124 et al.).
 
	L.1996, c.7, s.11; amended 1998, c.1, s.31; 2016, c.1, s.79.

2A:17-56.50.	  Annual report
	12.	The Administrative Office of the Courts shall submit an annual report to the Governor and the Legislature regarding the number and type of licenses suspended or revoked in accordance with P.L.1996, c.7  (C.2A:17-56.40 et al.) and the total amount of child support collected due to P.L.1996, c.7  (C. 2A:17-56.40 et al.).

	L.1996,c.7,s.12.

2A:17-56.51.	  Rules, procedures, regulations
	13.	The Supreme Court may adopt rules and procedures for the implementation and administration of  P.L.1996, c.7 (C.2A:17-56.40 et al.).  The State IV-D agency and licensing authorities may adopt regulations to implement P.L.1996, c.7 (C.2A:17-56.40 et al.) pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).

	L.1996,c.7,s.13.

2A:17-56.52  Definitions relative to child support reform.
	3.	As used in P.L.1998, c.1 (C.2A:17-56.7a et al.), P.L.1981, c.417 (C.2A:17-56.8 et al.), P.L.1988, c.111 (C.2A:17-56.23a), sections 13, 17 through 20 and 22 of P.L.1985, c.278 (C.2A:17-56.16, 2A:17-56.20 through 2A:17-56.23, and 2A:17-56.25), P.L.1990, c.53 (C.2A:17-56.13a), sections 5 and 6 of P.L.1990, c.92 (C.2A:17-56.9a and 2A:17-56.9b), P.L.1995, c.287 (C.2A:17-56.11a), P.L.1995, c.290 (C.2A:17-56.11b), P.L.1995, c.322 (C.2A:17-56.34 et seq.) and P.L.1996, c.7 (C.2A:17-56.41 et seq.):

	"Account" means a demand deposit account, checking or negotiable order of withdrawal account, savings account, time deposit account, or money market mutual fund account.  "Account" also includes an equity securities account if permitted under federal law.
 
	"Administrative enforcement" means the use of high volume automated data processing to search various State data bases, including, but not limited to, license records, employment service data and State new hire registries, to determine whether information is available in response to a request made by another jurisdiction to enforce a support order.
 
	"Appropriate enforcement methods" means mechanisms such as income withholding, withholding of civil lawsuits, and execution of the assets of the obligor which can result in immediate payment of the child support arrearage when available.  In appropriate cases, the license revocation process may be used as an alternative to Rule 5:7-5 of the court rules.
 
	"Arrearage" means the amount of unpaid support as determined by a court order or an administrative order from a state for support of a child or of a child and the custodial parent.
 
	"Child" means a person, whether over or under the age of majority, who is or is alleged to be owed a duty of child support by that person's parent or who is or is alleged to be the beneficiary of a support order directed to the parent.
 
	"Child support" means the amount required to be paid under a judgment, decree, or order, whether temporary, final or subject to modification, issued by the Superior Court, Chancery Division, Family Part or a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction of another state, for the support and maintenance of a child, or the support and maintenance of a child and the parent with whom the child is living, which provides monetary support, health care coverage, any arrearage or reimbursement, and which may include other related costs and fees, interest and penalties, income withholding, attorney's fees and other relief.
 
	"Child support related warrant" means an outstanding warrant for the arrest of a child support obligor or putative father issued by the court for failure to pay child support as ordered, failure to appear at a hearing to establish paternity or child support, or failure to appear at a hearing to enforce a child support order.
 
	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Human Services.
 
	"Court" means the Superior Court, Chancery Division, Family Part.
 
	"Court order" means an order of the court or an order from an administrative or judicial tribunal in another state that is competent to enter or modify orders for paternity or child support.
 
	"Court rules" means the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey.
 
	"Credit reporting agency" means a nationally recognized credit reporting agency as approved by the commissioner and defined in the federal Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. s. 1681a(f)) as any entity which, for monetary fees, dues, or on a cooperative nonprofit basis, regularly engages in whole or in part in the practice of assembling or evaluating consumer credit information or other information on consumers for the purpose of furnishing reports to third parties and which uses any means or facility of interstate commerce for the purpose of preparing or furnishing consumer reports. 
 
	"Custodial parent" means the parent or other person who has legal and physical custody of a child for the majority of the time. The custodial parent is responsible for the day-to-day decisions related to the child and for providing the basic needs of the child on a daily basis.  The custodial parent is the person to whom child support is payable.  In shared parenting situations, the custodial parent is known as the Parent of Primary Residence.
 
	"Default order" means a court order entered due to a party's failure to answer a complaint or motion or to appear at a court proceeding as required, after being properly served with notice.
 
	"Department" means the Department of Human Services.
 
	"Employee" means an individual who is an employee within the meaning of chapter 24 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. Employee does not include an employee of a federal or state agency performing intelligence or counter-intelligence functions, if the head of such agency has determined that reporting could endanger the safety of the employee or compromise an ongoing investigation or intelligence mission.
 
	"Employer" has the meaning given the term in section 3401(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and includes any governmental entity and labor organization.
 
	"Financial institution" means: a depository institution as defined in 12 U.S.C. s.1813(c); an institution affiliated party as defined in 12 U.S.C. s.1813(u); a federal or State credit union as defined in 12 U.S.C. s.1752, including an institution affiliated party of a credit union as defined in 12 U.S.C. s.1786(r); a benefit association, insurance company, safe deposit company, money market mutual fund, or similar entity authorized to do business in this State. "Financial institution" also includes an investment and loan corporation if permitted under federal law.
 
	"Health care coverage" means cash medical support, health insurance, dental insurance, eye care, pharmaceutical assistance and other types of medical support which are ordered by the court to maintain the health coverage of a child.
 
	"Income" for the purposes of enforcing a support order, means, but is not limited to, commissions, salaries, earnings, wages, rent monies, unemployment compensation, workers' compensation, any legal or equitable interest or entitlement owed that was acquired by a cause of action, suit, claim or counterclaim, insurance benefits, claims, accounts, assets of estates, inheritances, trusts, federal or State income tax refunds, homestead rebates, State lottery prizes, casino and racetrack winnings, annuities, retirement benefits, veteran's benefits, union benefits, or any other earnings or other periodic entitlements to money from any source and any other property subject to withholding for child support pursuant to State law. 
 
	For the purposes of establishing a support order, income is defined pursuant to the child support guidelines in Appendix IX of the court rules.
 
	"Labor organization" means a labor organization as defined in paragraph (5) of section 2 of the federal "National Labor Relations Act" (29 U.S.C. s.152) and includes any entity used by the organization and an employer to carry out the requirements of paragraph (3) of subsection (f) of section 8 of that act (29 U.S.C. s.158(f)(3)) or an agreement between the organization and the employer.
 
	"License" means any license, registration or certificate issued by the State or its agencies or boards that is directly necessary to provide a product or service for compensation, to operate a motor vehicle, or for recreational or sporting purposes.
 
	"Licensing authority" means any department, division, board, agency or other instrumentality of State government that issues a license, registration, certificate or other authorization to provide goods or services for compensation, to operate a motor vehicle, or for recreational or sporting purposes.
 
	"Non-custodial parent" means the parent who does not have physical custody of the child on a day-to-day basis. In shared parenting situations, the non-custodial parent is known as the Parent of Alternate Residence.
 
	"Obligee" means an individual to whom a duty of support is or is alleged to be owed or in whose favor a support order has been issued or a judgment determining parentage has been rendered; a state or political subdivision to which the rights under a duty of support or support order have been assigned or which has independent claims based on financial assistance provided to an individual obligee; or an individual seeking a judgment determining parentage of the individual's child or providing for the support of a child.
 
	"Obligor" means an individual, or the estate of a decedent, who owes or is alleged to owe a duty of support, who is alleged but has not been adjudicated to be a parent of a child, or who is liable under a support order.
 
	"Payor" means an employer or individual or entity that disburses or is in possession of income or assets payable to an obligor. 
 
	"Probation Division" means the Probation Division of the Superior Court, Chancery Division, Family Part.
 
	"RURESA" means the "Revised Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act (1968)," adopted in New Jersey as P.L.1981, c.243 (C.2A:4-30.24 et seq.).
 
	"Spousal support" means a legally enforceable obligation assessed against a person for the support of a spouse or former spouse.
 
	"State case registry" means the automated system maintained by the State IV-D agency that contains federally required information on child support cases.
 
	"State IV-D agency" means the Department of Human Services.
 
	"Support guidelines" means the set of presumptive standards for determining the amount of child support as established by the court in Appendix IX of the court rules.
 
	"Support order" means a judgment, decree, or order, whether temporary, final or subject to modification, for the benefit of a child, a spouse or a former spouse, which provides for monetary support, health care coverage, arrearages or reimbursement, and may include related costs and fees, interest, income withholding, attorney's fees and other relief. 
 
	A support order shall be issued by the court or a court or administrative agency of another state.
 
	"TANF" means the "Temporary Assistance to Needy Families" program established pursuant to Title IV-A of the federal Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. s.601 et seq.).  TANF includes the Work First New Jersey program for dependent children and their parents established pursuant to P.L.1997, c.38 (C.44:10-55 et seq.).
 
	"Title IV-D" means Title IV-D of the federal Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. s.651 et seq.). 
 
	"Title IV-D case" means a case under Title IV-A or Title XIX of the federal Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. s.601 et seq.) that involves an assignment of support rights, an appropriate referral under Title IV-E of the federal Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. s.670 et seq.), a non-public assistance case in which an application for Title IV-D services has been filed and a fee paid, as appropriate, with the department, or an interstate case referred to the department by another jurisdiction.
 
	"UIFSA" means the "Uniform Interstate Family Support Act," P.L.2016, c.1 (C.2A:4-30.124 et al.), to be adopted by each state to replace RURESA pursuant to Pub.L.104-193 and the former "Uniform Interstate Family Support Act," P.L.1998, c.2 (C.2A:4-30.65 through 2A:4-30.123).
 
	L.1998, c.1, s.3; amended 2016, c.1, s.80.

2A:17-56.53  Actions permitted by department to establish paternity, support orders; imposition of civil penalty.

	4.	Subject to safeguards on privacy and information security, prescribed pursuant to subsection b. of section 11 of P.L.1998, c.1 (C.2A:17-56.60), and appropriate procedural due process requirements including, as appropriate, notice, the opportunity to contest and notice of the right to appeal to the court, the department is authorized to take the following actions relating to the establishment of paternity or to the establishment, modification or enforcement of support orders, without the necessity of obtaining an order from the court, and to recognize and enforce the authority of state agencies of other states to take the following actions: 

	a.	Require genetic testing for the purpose of paternity establishment;

	b. (1) Subpoena any financial or other information needed for the establishment, modification or enforcement of a support order; and

	(2)	impose a civil penalty for failure to respond to a subpoena which shall not exceed: $25 per violation, or, if the failure to respond is the result of a conspiracy between the entity and the non-custodial parent not to supply the required information or to supply inaccurate or incomplete information, $500.  Payment of the penalty may not be required, however, if in response to the imposition of the penalty, the person or entity complies immediately with the subpoena.  All penalties assessed under this section shall be payable to the State Treasurer and may be recovered in a summary proceeding pursuant to "the penalty enforcement law," N.J.S.2A:58-1 et seq.;

	c. (1) Request that any entity including for-profit, nonprofit and government employers, respond promptly to a request by the department or any out-of-State IV-D agency for information on the employment, compensation and benefits of any individual employed by the entity as an employee or contractor; and

	(2)	impose a civil penalty for failure to respond to any request which shall not exceed: $25 per violation, or, if failure to respond is the result of a conspiracy between the entity and the non-custodial parent not to supply the required information or to supply inaccurate or incomplete information, $500. Payment of the penalty may not be required, however, if in response to the imposition of the penalty, the person or entity complies immediately with the subpoena.  All penalties assessed under this section shall be paid to the State Treasurer and may be recovered in a summary proceeding pursuant to "the penalty enforcement law," N.J.S.2A:58-1 et seq.;

	d.	Subject to the nonliability of entities that afford access, to obtain access, including automated access when feasible, to information contained in the following records:

	(1)	records of other State and local government agencies which include, but are not limited to:

	(a)	records of the Bureau of Vital Statistics in the Department of Health and Senior Services, and other agencies that collect vital statistics, including marriage, death and birth records;

	(b)	records of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, and local tax and revenue records including address, employer, income and assets;

	(c)	records concerning real and titled personal property;

	(d)	records of occupational, professional, recreational and sporting licenses and records concerning the ownership and control of corporations, partnerships and other business entities;

	(e)	records of the Department of Labor, including wage, unemployment, disability and workers compensation records;

	(f)	records of agencies administering public assistance programs;

	(g)	records of the Division of Motor Vehicles in the Department of Transportation, including, but not limited to, motor vehicle and commercial license and registration records; and

	(h)	records of the Department of Corrections, including records related to State-sentenced inmates and parolees; and

	(2)	records held by private entities with respect to individuals who owe or are owed support, or against or with respect to whom a support obligation is sought, including information on the assets and liabilities of individuals held by financial institutions and the names and addresses of the individuals and the names and addresses of the employers of the individuals appearing in customer records of public utilities and cable television companies, pursuant to a subpoena authorized under subsection b. of this section;

	e.	Order income withholding in accordance with the provisions of State and federal law;

	f. 	Direct the obligor or payor to change the payee pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1981, c.417 (C.2A:17-56.13) in cases where support is subject to an assignment or an application for Title IV-D services has been filed;

	g.	Secure assets to satisfy arrearages by:

	(1)	intercepting or seizing periodic or lump sum payments from: State or local agencies, including unemployment compensation, workers' compensation or other benefits; judgments, settlements and awards; inheritances; and lotteries;

	(2)	developing a bank information matching program and attaching and seizing assets of the obligor held in financial institutions located in this State in accordance with the provisions of P.L.1998, c.1 (C.2A:17-56.7a et al.);

	(3)	attaching public and private retirement funds as permitted under State law; and 

	(4)	imposing a lien and initiating an execution or levy to force the sale of property and distribution of proceeds in accordance with N.J.S.2A:17-1 through N.J.S.2A:17-4, N.J.S.2A:17-57 through N.J.S.2A:17-76 and applicable court rules;

	h.	Require each party subject to a paternity or child support proceeding to file with the court and the State case registry upon the entry of an order and to update, as appropriate, information on the location and the identity of the party, including, but not limited to: Social Security number, telephone number, driver's license number, residential and mailing addresses, and the name, address, and telephone number of the party's employer; and

	i.	Unless otherwise ordered by the court in individual cases, increase the amount of monthly support payments to include amounts for arrearages in accordance with schedules approved by the court.

	L.1998,c.1,s.4.

2A:17-56.54  Procedural due process requirements for enforcement of support provision.

	5.	For the purposes of enforcing a support provision in an order or judgment, procedural due process requirements may be deemed to have been met with respect to the party upon delivery of written notice to that party's most recent residential or employer address on file with the department, if there is a sufficient showing that diligent efforts have been made to locate the party by making inquiries that may include, but are not limited to, the United States Postal Service, Division of Motor Vehicles in the Department of Transportation, the Department of Labor, the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury and the Department of Corrections.  A certification documenting unsuccessful efforts to locate a party shall be provided to the court before any adverse action is taken based on failure of the party to respond to a notice.  For the purposes of establishing or modifying the child support provision of a court order or judgment, service of process shall be consistent with court rules or applicable statutes.

	L.1998,c.1,s.5.

2A:17-56.55  Determination of cooperation; notification.

	6.	In accordance with regulations adopted by the commissioner, the department shall make the determination as to whether an individual who has applied for or is receiving public assistance or assistance under the State Medicaid program pursuant to P.L.1968, c.413 (C.30:4D-1 et seq.) or the Title IV-E program is cooperating in good faith in establishing the paternity of, or in establishing, modifying or enforcing a support order for any child of the individual by providing the name of the non-custodial parent and such other information as may be required for this purpose.  The determination shall be made subject to good cause and other exemptions as specified by the commissioner, by regulation.

	The department shall notify the individual and appropriate State or county entities administering TANF and appropriate State or county entities administering the State Medicaid program of each determination, and if noncooperation is determined, the basis therefor.

	L.1998,c.1,s.6.

2A:17-56.56  Payment of past-due support for child receiving TANF assistance.

	7.	In any case in which an obligor owes past-due child support with respect to a child receiving assistance under a State program funded under TANF, the department is authorized to petition the court to issue an order that requires the obligor: to pay the support in accordance with a plan approved by the court; or to participate in work activities as ordered by the court, if the obligor is subject to such a plan and is not incapacitated. A petition for participation in a work activity shall include a request to adjust the amount of the order in accordance with support guidelines and the plan.

	L.1998,c.1,s.7.

2A:17-56.57  Information provided by financial institutions on non-custodial parents.

	8. a. Each financial institution doing business in the State shall provide information to the department on all non-custodial parents who maintain an account at the financial institution and who owe past due child support that equals or exceeds the amount of support payable for three months and for which no regular payments are being made.

	b.	In order to provide the information required pursuant to subsection a. of this section, a financial institution shall enter into an agreement and, at its option:

	(1)	identify non-custodial parents by comparing records maintained by the financial institution with records provided by the department by name, address of record and either Social Security number, tax identification number or other identifying information;

	(2)	submit to the department a report that includes the name, address of record and either Social Security number, tax identification number or other identifying information of each individual maintaining an account at the financial institution as shown on its records of that account; or

	(3)	enter into an agreement with the department to provide the name, address of record and either Social Security number, tax identification number or other identifying information in a form and by a method mutually agreeable to the financial institution and the department.

	c.	The department shall enter into a cooperative agreement with financial institutions doing business in this State to provide the information required pursuant to subsection a. of this section on a quarterly basis, by electronic or magnetic media, mail, facsimile or any automated data exchange method or other means authorized by the department.  The department shall establish, by regulation, and pay a reasonable fee for the data match provided for in this subsection.  To the extent consistent with federal law, the department shall reimburse a financial institution for actual costs that are reasonably and efficiently incurred in conducting the data match provided for in this section.

	d.	In response to a notice of lien or levy, a financial institution shall encumber or surrender, as the case may be, assets held by the financial institution on behalf of any noncustodial parent who is subject to a child support lien pursuant to 42 U.S.C. s.666(a)(4). To the extent consistent with federal law, the encumbrance or surrender shall be subject to any right to any fees and penalties or set-off the financial institution may have against the assets under State law.

	The assets shall be held and not distributed to any party until the contest period provided for in subsection f. of this section has expired or while an action on these assets is pending in court.

	e.	Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, a financial institution that is directed to levy upon, block, freeze or encumber an account pursuant to the provisions of this section, is entitled to: (1) collect or deduct from the account its reasonable and normally scheduled processing fee for a levy; and (2) collect or deduct its normally scheduled account activity fee to maintain the account for any period the account is blocked, frozen or encumbered.  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to preclude a financial institution from exercising its right to charge back or recoup a deposit to an account.

	f.	Notwithstanding any other provision of federal or State law to the contrary, a financial institution shall not be liable under any federal or State law to any person for any disclosure of information to the department for the purpose of establishing, modifying or enforcing a child support obligation of an individual, or for encumbering, holding, refusing to release to the obligor or surrendering any assets held by the financial institution, in response to a notice of lien or levy issued by the department, or for any other action taken in good faith to comply with the requirements of this section, regardless of whether the action was authorized or described pursuant to this section. The department shall provide notice of the intent to levy an account and an opportunity to contest the levy within 30 days of the date of the notice, in accordance with regulations adopted by the commissioner.  A financial institution shall not be required to give notice to an account holder or customer that the financial institution has provided information or taken any action pursuant to the provisions of this section.  The financial institution shall not be liable for failure to provide the notice.

	g.	In obtaining a financial record of an individual from a financial institution, the department may only disclose the financial information for the purpose of, and to the extent necessary to establish, modify or enforce a child support obligation of the individual.

	h.	If any officer or employee of the department knowingly, or by reason of negligence, discloses a financial record of an individual in violation of subsection g. of this section, the injured individual may bring a civil action for damages against the officer or employee. Unauthorized release of information shall also be cause for administrative discipline of any employee who engages in an unauthorized release. In the case of willful unauthorized release of information, such action by an employee shall be cause for termination of employment.

	i.	No liability shall arise under this section with respect to any disclosure which results from a good faith but erroneous interpretation.

	j.	No financial institution-affiliated party shall be required to provide information required by this section if the financial institution with which the party is affiliated has otherwise provided the required information.

	k.	The amount subject to levy in a joint account, as defined in section 2 of P.L.1979, c.491 (C.17:16I-2), shall be in accordance with the provisions of section 4 of P.L.1979, c.491 (C.17:16I-4).

	L.1998,c.1,s.8.

2A:17-56.58  Establishment, maintenance of State case registry.

	9. a.  The department shall establish and maintain a State case registry.  The department shall regularly monitor cases in the registry with respect to which services are being provided under the State Title IV-D plan. The registry shall include information on:

	(1)	the amount and frequency of support owed and other amounts due or overdue under the support order, including arrearages, interest or late payment penalties and fees;

	(2)	any amounts described in paragraph (1) of this subsection that have been collected;

	(3)	the distribution of collected amounts;

	(4)	the date of birth of any child for whom the support order requires support;

	(5)	the amount of any lien imposed;

	(6)	information on administrative actions and administrative and judicial proceedings and court orders relating to paternity and support;

	(7)	information obtained from comparison with federal, State, or local sources of information; and

	(8)	any other relevant information.

	b.	Beginning October 1, 1998, the court shall transmit to the State case registry a copy of every judgment or order that includes a provision for child support.

	L.1998,c.1,s.9.

2A:17-56.59  Availability of information to federal, state agencies.

	10.	All federal and state agencies conducting activities pursuant to the requirements of Title IV-D, shall have access directly or through the department to any system used by the Division of Motor Vehicles in the Department of Transportation and law enforcement agencies in the State to locate an individual.  The information shall be made available to the department through electronic means when feasible.

	L.1998,c.1,s.10.

2A:17-56.60  Access to, use of social security numbers.

	11. a. Subject to safeguards on privacy and information security provided for in this section: 

	(1)	The Social Security number of an applicant for any professional or occupational license, recreational or sporting license, driver's license, or marriage license shall be recorded on the application;

	(2)	The Social Security number shall be placed in the record relating to: a divorce decree; support order in a divorce decree; support order and paternity determination or acknowledgment; and on a death certificate; and

	(3)	The Social Security number shall be made available to the department through electronic means when feasible.

	b.	The use or disclosure of information concerning applicants or recipients of support enforcement services is limited to purposes directly connected with:

	(1)	the administration of the State plan or program approved under part A, B, D, E, or F of Title IV or under Title I, X, XIV, XVI, XIX or XX of the federal Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.s.301 et seq.) or the supplemental security income program established under Title XVI of the federal Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.s.301 et seq.);

	(2)	any investigations, prosecution or criminal or civil proceeding conducted in connection with the administration of any such plan or program;

	(3)	the administration of any other federal or federally assisted program which provides assistance, in cash or in kind, or services, directly to individuals on the basis of need; and

	(4)	reporting to an appropriate agency or official, information on known or suspected instances of physical or mental injury, sexual abuse or exploitation, or negligent treatment or maltreatment of a child who is the subject of a child support enforcement activity under circumstances which indicate that the child's health or welfare is threatened thereby.

	The department is prohibited from disclosing to any committee or federal, State or local legislative body any information that identifies by name or address any such applicant or recipient.

	L.1998,c.1,s.11.

2A:17-56.61  Reports from employers, labor organizations; noncompliance; penalties.
	12.	a.  All employers, labor organizations, or other entities doing business in the State, which employ or contract with any person for financial compensation, including technology platforms used for ride-sharing, delivery, or other services, shall report to the department or its designee as follows:
 
	(1)	the hiring of, or contracting with, any person who works in this State and to whom the employer pays or anticipates paying earnings, or any other financial compensation, including earnings reported on a Form 1099;
 
	(2)	the re-hiring or return to work of any employee who is laid off, furloughed, separated, granted a leave without pay, or terminated from employment in this State; and
 
	(3)	any other employee hired by the employer to work in the State who was not previously employed by the employer; or was previously employed by the employer but has been separated from the prior employment for at least 60 consecutive days.
 
	b.	An employer or other entity, which employs or contracts with any person pursuant to subsection a. of this section, shall submit the information required in this subsection within 20 days of the hiring, re-hiring, return to work, or contracting of the employee or person, except that an employer or other entity who transmits reports magnetically or electronically shall report every 15 days in accordance with rules adopted by the commissioner. The report shall contain:
 
	(1)	the employee's or a contracted person’s name, address, date of birth, and Social Security number; and 
 
	(2)	the employer's or entity’s name, address, and federal tax identification number.
 
	c.	An employer or entity who fails to report, as required in this section, shall be given a written warning by the department for the first violation and shall be subject to a civil penalty which shall not exceed: $25 per violation, or, if the failure to report is the result of a conspiracy between the employer and the employee, or the entity and the contracted person, to not supply the required report or to supply a false or incomplete report, $500.
 
	Payment of the penalty may not be required, however, if in response to the imposition of the penalty, the person or entity complies immediately with the new hire reporting requirements.  All penalties assessed under this section shall be payable to the State Treasurer and may be recovered in a summary proceeding pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	d.	The information provided pursuant to this section shall be shared with State agencies operating employment security and workers' compensation programs and with any other federal or State agency deemed appropriate by the commissioner.
 
	L.1998, c.1, s.12; amended 2013, c.169; 2025, c.361.

2A:17-56.62  Voidable transfers by child support judgment debtors.
 	13.	In any case in which the department knows of a transfer by a child support judgment debtor pursuant to the "Uniform Voidable Transactions Act," R.S.25:2-20 et seq., with respect to which a prima facie case is established, the department shall seek to void the transfer or obtain a settlement in the best interest of the child support creditor.
 
	L.1998, c.1, s.13; amended 2021, c.92, s.17.

2A:17-56.63  Establishment of State disbursement unit.

	14. a. The department shall be responsible for the establishment of a State disbursement unit, on or before October 1, 1999, for the collection and disbursement of payments under support orders in all Title IV-D cases, and in all non-Title IV-D cases in which the support order was initially issued in the State on or after January 1, 1994, and in which the income of the non-custodial parent is subject to income withholding.

	b.	The department shall provide employers with one location to which income withholding shall be sent.

	c.	The department shall use automated procedures, electronic processes and computer driven technology to the maximum extent feasible, for efficient and economical collection and disbursement of support payments.  All payments shall be disbursed in accordance with federal requirements.

	d.	On or before October 1, 1999, the department shall establish the capability to disburse child support payments by direct deposit, upon request of the payee,

	L.1998,c.1,s.14.

2A:17-56.64  Use of administrative enforcement.

	15. a. The department shall use administrative enforcement, to the same extent as used for intrastate cases, in response to a request made by another state to enforce a support order, and shall promptly report the results of the enforcement procedure to the requesting state.  The department shall respond to a request made by another state to enforce a support order through electronic means, when feasible.

	b.	The department may, by electronic or other means, transmit to another state a request for assistance in enforcing support orders through administrative enforcement.

	c.	The requesting state's request shall:

	(1)	include such information as will enable the state to which the request is transmitted to compare the information about the case to the information in the databases of the state; and

	(2)	constitute a certification by the requesting state:

	(a)	of the amount of support under an order that the payment of which is in arrears; and

	(b)	that the requesting state has complied with all procedural due process requirements applicable to each case.

	d.	If the department provides assistance to another state pursuant to this section with respect to a case, neither state shall consider the case to be transferred to the caseload of the other state.

	e.	The department shall maintain records of: the number of requests for assistance received by the State; the number of cases for which the State collected support in response to the request; and the amount of support collected.

	L.1998,c.1,s.15.

2A:17-56.65  Transfer of case between local county welfare agency and probation division.

	16.	The State IV-D agency and the court may transfer a case between local county welfare agency and Probation Division offices, respectively, without the need for additional filing by the petitioner or service of process upon the respondent to retain jurisdiction over the parties.  Notice shall be provided to the parties advising of the transfer.

	L.1998,c.1,s.16.

2A:17-56.66  Regulations.

	17. a. The commissioner, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), shall adopt regulations to effectuate the purposes of this act and to comply with the requirements of Pub.L.104-193; except that, notwithstanding any provision of P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) to the contrary, the commissioner may adopt, immediately upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, such regulations as the commissioner deems necessary to implement the provisions of this act, which regulations shall be effective for a period not to exceed six months and may, thereafter, be amended, adopted or readopted by the commissioner in accordance with the requirements of P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).

	b.	The Attorney General and the Commissioners of Environmental Protection, Labor, Banking and Insurance, Health and Senior Services, Corrections, Transportation and Community Affairs may, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), adopt regulations, as appropriate, to effectuate the purposes of this act and to comply with the requirements of Pub.L.104-193; except that, notwithstanding any provision of P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) to the contrary, the Attorney General and the respective commissioners may adopt, immediately upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law such regulations as the Attorney General or the respective commissioners deem necessary to implement the provisions of this act, which regulations shall be effective for a period not to exceed six months and may thereafter, be amended, adopted or readopted by the Attorney General or respective commissioners in accordance with the requirements of P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).

	L.1998,c.1,s.17.

2A:17-56.67  Termination of obligation to pay child support, medical support.
 	1. a. Unless otherwise provided in a court order, judgment, or court-approved preexisting agreement, the obligation to pay current child support or provide medical support, or both for a child shall terminate by operation of law without order by the court on the date that a child marries, dies, or enters the military service.  In addition, a child support obligation shall terminate by operation of law without order by the court when a child reaches 19 years of age unless:
 
	(1)	another age for the termination of the obligation to pay child support, which shall not extend beyond the date the child reaches 23 years of age, is specified in a court order or judgment;
 
	(2)	the child suffers from a severe mental or physical incapacity that causes the child to be financially dependent on a parent, in consideration of the factors set forth in N.J.S.2A:34-23, and the continuation of the obligation to pay support for that child is specified in a court order or judgment;
 
	(3)	a written request seeking the continuation of child support services is submitted to the court by a custodial parent prior to the child reaching the age of 19 in accordance with subsection b. of this section and such request is approved by the court; or
 
	(4)	the child receiving support is in an out-of-home placement through the Division of Child Protection and Permanency in the Department of Children and Families.
 
	b. (1) In response to a notice of proposed termination of child support issued in accordance with subsection d. of this section, a custodial parent may submit a written request, on a form and within timeframes promulgated by the Administrative Office of the Courts, with supporting documentation to the court, including a projected future date when support will terminate, seeking the continuation of child support services beyond the date the child reaches 19 years of age in the following circumstances:
 
	(a)	the child is still enrolled in high school or other secondary educational program;
 
	(b)	the child is a student in a post-secondary education program and is enrolled for the number of hours or courses the school considers to be full-time attendance during some part of the academic year; or
 
	(c)	the child has a physical or mental disability, as determined by a federal or State government agency, that existed prior to the child reaching the age of 19 and requires continued child support. 
 
	(2)	A custodial parent may file a motion with the court seeking to extend the obligation to pay child support beyond the date the child reaches 19 years of age due to exceptional circumstances as may be approved by the court.
 
	c.	The Probation Division of the Superior Court shall review the request form and supporting documentation submitted by the custodial parent and shall make a recommendation to the court as to whether to continue the child support beyond the date a child reaches 19 years of age pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection b. of this section. If sufficient proof has been provided, the child support obligation shall not be terminated by operation of law when the child reaches the age of 19, and the court shall issue an order establishing the date of child support termination.  A copy of the court order shall be provided to both parents of the child.  A parent responsible for paying child support who disagrees with the court's decision to continue child support beyond the date the child reaches 19 years of age or who otherwise desires to modify or terminate the child support obligation may, at any time, file a motion with the court seeking relief from that obligation.
 
	d.	For child support orders that are administered by the Probation Division of the Superior Court, the Probation Division and the State IV-D agency shall cooperatively provide both parents with at least two written notices of a proposed termination of child support, which shall include information and the request form to facilitate the continuation of child support beyond the date the child reaches 19 years of age.  The first notice shall be sent to the last known address of the parties at least 180 days prior to the proposed termination date, and the second notice shall be sent to the last known address of the parties at least 90 days prior to the proposed termination date.  The second notice shall not be required whenever a custodial parent's request for continuation is pending or a new date of child support termination has been established. To the extent feasible, the Probation Division and the State IV-D agency shall cooperatively provide additional notice to the parents by text message, telephone message, or other electronic means. In addition, all orders and judgments that include a child support obligation entered after the effective date of P.L.2015, c.223 (C.2A:17-56.67 et seq.) shall contain information regarding the termination of child support obligations as provided in P.L.2015, c.223 (C.2A:17-56.67 et seq.).  Failure of a party to provide a current mailing address shall not prevent the termination of the obligation.
 
	e.	Except for child support services provided pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection a. of this section for a child who suffers from a severe mental or physical incapacity that causes the child to be financially dependent on a parent, the obligation to pay child support shall terminate by operation of law when a child reaches 23 years of age.  The Probation Division of the Superior Court and the State IV-D agency shall cooperatively provide both parents with a written notice of termination sent to the last known address of the parties at least 90 days prior to the termination date and, to the extent feasible, the Probation Division and the State IV-D agency shall cooperatively provide additional notice to the parents by text message, telephone message, or other electronic means. 
 
	f.	Nothing in this section shall be construed to:
 
	(1)	prevent a child who is beyond 23 years of age from seeking a court order requiring the payment of other forms of financial maintenance or reimbursement from a parent as authorized by law to the extent that such financial maintenance or reimbursement is not payable or enforceable as child support as defined in section 3 of P.L.1998, c.1 (C.2A:17-56.52); 
 
	(2)	prevent the court, upon application of a parent or child, from converting, due to exceptional circumstances including, but not limited to, a mental or physical disability, a child support obligation to another form of financial maintenance for a child who has reached the age of 23;
 
	(3)	prevent the court, upon application of a parent or child, from ordering the continuation of the child support obligation or the continuation of Title IV-D services, or both, for a child with a severe physical or mental incapacity that causes the child to be financially dependent upon a parent and consistent with paragraph (2) of subsection a. of this section.  The parental obligation to provide support for the child shall continue until the court finds that the child is relieved of the incapacity or is no longer financially dependent on the parent.  In assessing the financial obligation of the parent, the court shall consider the factors set forth in N.J.S.2A:34-23; or
 
	(4)	require the Probation Division of the Superior Court to provide any establishment, monitoring, or enforcement of financial maintenance or reimbursement orders.
 
	L.2015, c.223, s.1; amended 2019, c.453, s.1.

2A:17-56.68  Child support order to remain in effect for other children; adjustment.
 	2. a. Whenever there is an unallocated child support order for two or more children and the obligation to pay child support for one of the children is terminated by operation of law pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2015, c.223 (C.2A:17-56.67), the amount of the child support obligation in effect immediately prior to the date of the termination shall remain in effect for the other children.  Either party may file an application with the court to adjust the remaining child support amount to reflect the reduction in the number of dependent children.  For the purposes of this section, "unallocated" means a child support amount for the benefit of multiple children that does not specify the amount of child support for each child.
 
	b.	Whenever there is an allocated child support order for two or more children and the obligation to pay child support for one of the children is terminated by operation of law pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2015, c.223 (C.2A:17-56.67), the amount of the child support obligation shall be adjusted to reflect only the amount allotted for the remaining child or children. Either party may file an application with the court to adjust the remaining child support amount to reflect the reduction in the number of dependent children.  For the purposes of this section, "allocated" means a child support amount for the benefit of multiple children that specifies the amount of support for each child as ordered by the court.
 
	L.2015, c.223,s.2.

2A:17-56.69  Arrearages due and enforceable.
 
	3.	If a child support obligation is terminated by operation of law pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2015, c.223 (C.2A:17-56.67), any arrearages that have accrued prior to the date of the termination shall remain due and enforceable. If the person responsible for paying child support for a child owes child support arrearages at the time a child support obligation is terminated and there are no other children being supported under the same order, the amount to be paid to satisfy the arrearage shall be the sum of the recurring child support obligation in effect immediately prior to the effective date of the termination plus any arrears repayment obligation in effect immediately prior to the effective date of the termination, unless otherwise ordered by the court.
 
	For child support orders that are being administered by the Probation Division of the Superior Court, the Probation Division shall continue to enforce and collect the arrearages until they are paid in full or the court, in accordance with State and federal law and regulations and the Rules of Court, as applicable, terminates the Probation Division's supervision of the support order.
 
	L.2015, c.223,s.3.

2A:17-56.70  Inapplicability of act relative to provisions of foreign jurisdictions.
 	4.	The provisions of P.L.2015, c.223 (C.2A:17-56.67 et seq.) shall not apply to child support provisions contained in orders or judgments entered by a foreign jurisdiction and registered in New Jersey for modification or enforcement pursuant to the "Uniform Interstate Family Support Act," P.L.1998, c.2 (C.2A:4-30.65 et seq.) or any succeeding law that is substantially similar, or a law or procedure substantially similar to the "Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act," originally adopted in New Jersey as P.L.1952, c.197 (C.2A:4-30.1 et seq.) but subsequently repealed, or the "Revised Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act," originally adopted in New Jersey as P.L.1981, c.243 (C.2A:4-30.24 et seq.) but also subsequently repealed.
 
	L.2015, c.223,s.4.

2A:17-56.71  Inapplicability of act.
 	5.	Nothing in P.L.2015, c.223 (C.2A:17-56.67 et seq.) shall:

	a.	require or relieve a parent from paying support or other costs while a child is enrolled full-time in a post-secondary education program;
 
	b.	prohibit the State IV-D agency or the Probation Division of the Superior Court from seeking to close a Title IV-D case or terminate its supervision of a child support order in accordance with procedures as provided under State or federal law and regulations or the Rules of Court;
 
	c.	prohibit any party from filing an application with the court seeking the termination of an order to pay child support for any cause other than those provided under P.L.2015, c.223 (C.2A:17-56.67 et seq.); 
 
	d.	prohibit the parties from consenting to a specific termination date for child support that does not exceed the date a child reaches 23 years of age, or to any other financial arrangements for a child that are not designated as child support, subject to the approval of the court;
 
	e.	prohibit the parties from consenting to any other financial arrangements for a non-disabled child 23 years of age or older that are not enforceable by the State IV-D agency or the Probation Division of the Superior Court; or
 
	f.	prohibit the State IV-D agency or the Probation Division of the Superior Court from:
 
	(1)	providing full Title IV-D child support services for the duration of the obligation to pay child support or provide medical support or both for a child under the circumstances set forth in subsection a. or b. of section 1 of P.L.2015, c.223 (C.2A:17-56.67); or 
 
	(2)	requiring the completion of a Title IV-D application in every case where a party is seeking full Title IV-D child support services and no application is on file, or an application is not required under law.
 
	L.2015, c.223, s.5; amended 2019, c.453, s.2.

2A:17-56.72  Construction of act.
 	6.	Nothing in P.L.2015, c.223 (C.2A:17-56.67 et seq.) shall be construed to prevent a parent who is responsible for paying child support from petitioning the court for the termination of child support for good cause prior to the child reaching 19 years of age, or from petitioning the court to contest the extension of child support for a child beyond the date the child reaches 19 years of age, as provided in P.L.2015, c.223 (C.2A:17-56.67 et seq.).
 
	L.2015, c.223,s.6.

2A:17-56.73 Preparation, availability of information.
 	7.	The Administrative Office of the Courts and the State IV-D agency shall cooperatively prepare and make available to the public information regarding the termination of child support obligations pursuant to P.L.2015, c.223 (C.2A:17-56.67 et seq.), including but not limited to: how parents may establish an alternative termination age or event; how support may be extended beyond the age of 19 under certain circumstances; and how parents may contest the continuation or termination of support as provided in P.L.2015, c.223 (C.2A:17-56.67 et seq.).
 
	L.2015, c.223,s.7.

2A:17-56.74  Rules of Court.
 	8.	The Supreme Court may adopt Rules of Court appropriate or necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act. 
 
	L.2015, c.223,s.8.

2A:17-56.75  Rules, regulations.
 	9.	The Commissioner of Human Services may adopt rules and regulations pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) to effectuate the purposes of this act.
 
	L.2015, c.223,s.9.

2A:17-57.  Definition;  construction of article
    As used in this article,  "rights and credits"  include all rights and credits which may be taken by writ of attachment against nonresident debtors, and also rights and credits of an equitable nature, except such income and property as is reserved or exempt by law, but wages, debts, earnings, salaries,  income from trust funds and profits due and owing to a defendant in execution  to the amount of less than $48.00 a week shall not be liable to be seized or  taken by virtue of any execution, civil process or order directing payments to  be made in installments.  If they amount to $48.00 or more a week, not more  than 10% thereof may be so seized or taken, unless they exceed the sum of  $7,500.00 per annum, in which case the court may order a larger percentage.

    Nothing contained in this article or article 7 shall be construed as impairing the rights of an execution creditor under other provisions of this chapter or any law of this State relating to executions, or as against any trust which was created by or the fund held in trust has proceeded from the defendant in execution.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1969, c. 92, s. 2;  L.1970, c. 287, s. 2.

2A:17-58.  Manner of levying and taking
    Rights and credits shall be levied upon and taken as property is taken under  writs of attachment against nonresident debtors.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-59.    Rights and credits taken and sold  
     2A:17-59. Rights and credits of a defendant in execution, or within his custody or control as a representative if he is sued in a representative capacity, may be levied upon, taken and sold or collected by virtue of such execution, where the judgment is entered or docketed in the Superior Court.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.43.  

2A:17-60.  Sales;  leave of court
    Rights and credits levied upon shall not be sold without leave of the court.

    Sales of rights in real estate taken hereunder shall be made in the manner provided by law for judicial sales of real estate.

    Sales of rights and credits in the nature of personal property shall be made  in the manner provided by law for judicial sales of chattels.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-61.  Liquidation of rights and credits by levying officer
    In lieu of a sale, the officer levying the execution may, in his own name as  such officer, liquidate such rights and credits by collection, or, with the  assent of the judgment creditor and subject to the provisions of this article,  in any other manner.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-62.  Action or other proceeding to liquidate by levying officer
    For the purpose of liquidation the officer levying the execution shall, at the request of the judgment creditor, sue or take proper judicial proceedings, in his own name as such officer, to obtain such recovery or relief as defendant  or a receiver of defendant would be entitled to.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-63.  Order to garnishee to pay debt
    After a levy upon a debt due or accruing to the judgment debtor from a third  person, herein called the garnishee, the court may upon notice to the garnishee  and the judgment debtor, and if the garnishee admits the debt, direct the debt,  to an amount not exceeding the sum sufficient to satisfy the execution, to be  paid to the officer holding the execution or to the receiver appointed by the  court, either in 1 payment or in installments as the court may deem just.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-64.    Order to debtor to pay in installments; modification  
     2A:17-64. If it is made to appear that the judgment debtor is entitled to, or is in receipt of, an income or any property or money or things in action, or rights and credits, including such income as is derived from federal, state, county, municipal or other governmental sources, but not income or property as is recovered or exempt by law, the Superior Court may direct the judgment debtor to make payments at stated periods in installments, and upon such terms and conditions as the court may direct, out of the same, on account of the unsatisfied judgment. Application may be made at any time on behalf of the judgment creditor, his executor, administrator or assignee, or the judgment debtor, to modify the terms of such order, and the court may make such modification.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.44.  

2A:17-65.    Order forbidding transfer or other disposition of property or money  
     2A:17-65. In aid of execution, the Superior Court upon proof by the oath of the party or his or its agent or attorney or of any other person, showing facts establishing that the judgment debtor has property or any person owes him or it, or holds money or property in possession or action in trust for him or it, or for his or its use over and above such property as is exempt or reserved by law, may make an order forbidding the payment of such debt, or the transfer of such property or money by or to such debtor, or any third person until the further order of the court. The term "property" shall include rights and credits as defined in article 8 of this title.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.45.  

2A:17-66.    Receiver; appointment  
     2A:17-66. In aid of execution, the Superior Court may, on application of either the judgment creditor or the defendant and in its discretion, order the appointment of a receiver of the property and things in action belonging or due to or held in trust for the judgment debtor as aforesaid, at the time of the recovery of the judgment or at any time thereafter. The court may, at any time and in its discretion, order the receiver to give bond for the faithful performance of his duties, in an amount and with such security as it may by order prescribe.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.46.  

2A:17-67.  Powers and duties of receiver
    The receiver so appointed shall be vested with the title to the said rights  and credits and shall have authority to receive and take into possession the  remaining property specified in section 2A:17-65 of this title.  The receiver  shall liquidate by sale or otherwise, pursuant to the order of the court, and  apply the same in payment of the judgment against the judgment debtor, the  costs of the proceedings thereon and his reasonable compensation, to be taxed  by the court, and pay the residue into the court in which the judgment was  recovered or docketed, for disposal according to law.

    The court shall order the judgment debtor to convey and deliver to such receiver all the property and rights in action and the evidence thereof. The receiver may sue or take proper judicial proceedings, in his own name as receiver, against any person to obtain such recovery or relief as defendant would be entitled to if no execution had issued.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-68.  Receiver subject to authority and orders of court
    The receiver shall be subject to the authority and orders of the court, from  time to time to be given by the court appointing him, and shall, on the fulfillment of his duties, or at other times when called upon, make report in writing to the court of his doings in the premises.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-69.  Execution against survivors on death of some
    If 1 or more of several parties against whom a judgment has passed dies after judgment, execution may issue against such parties as if no death had occurred.  The execution shall be operative only against the persons and property of the survivors.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-70.  Execution against executor, administrator, heir, devisee or terre  tenant
    No execution against an executor, administrator, heir, devisee or terre tenant shall issue against his own goods and chattels or real estate, unless there is a general judgment or order against him rendering the same liable. If a writ of execution shall be issued against an heir, devisee or terre tenant, the writ, unless the judgment or order is general as aforesaid, shall only command the sheriff or other officer that he cause to be made the debt, damages  and costs or sum of money mentioned in such writ of the real estate whereof the  ancestor, testator or decedent was seized on the day when such real estate  became liable as aforesaid, or at any time afterwards, or at the time of his  death, as the case may require.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-71.  Execution against estate of decedent without administration
    If a defendant, or 1 or more of several defendants against whom a judgment has passed, dies after judgment and the judgment is unsatisfied in whole or in part, then after 6 months after the death of such defendant, execution may, if the court shall, upon notice to all persons in interest, so order, issue against the goods and chattels and real estate of the decedent as if the death had not occurred.  If objection is made by any interested party, then no order for execution shall be made until 3 months after the date when notice of the existence of the judgment was first given to either the executor or administrator or person in interest.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-72.  Execution against taxing district
    When any execution shall be issued upon a judgment against any taxing district, and there shall be found no property sufficient to satisfy the same by levy, the officer shall serve a copy of his execution upon the county board of taxation having jurisdiction over such taxing district; and the county board shall proceed in the manner and the execution shall be paid as provided by sections 54:4-43 and 54:4-44 of the title Taxation of the Revised Statutes.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-73.  Execution against school district or regional school board
    Whenever an execution is issued against the board of education of a school district or a regional board of education of this state by any court of this state having authority to issue the same, upon a judgment against the board, and no property belonging to the district or regional board is found on which to levy and which is sufficient to satisfy the execution, the sheriff or other officer to whom the execution is directed shall serve a certified copy thereof upon the county board of taxation having jurisdiction over such school district  or regional board of education;  and the county board of taxation shall proceed  in the manner, and the execution shall be paid, as provided by sections 54:4-43  and 54:4-44 of the title Taxation of the Revised Statutes.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-74.  Execution against corporation;  names of directors and officers and schedule of property for execution officer
    Every agent or person having charge or control of any property of a corporation shall, upon request therefor by any officer having for service a writ of execution against it, furnish to such officer the names of the directors and officers of the corporation, and a schedule of all its property, including debts due or to become due to it so far as he has knowledge thereof.

    Any such agent or person who shall neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this section shall himself be liable to pay to the execution creditor the amount due on the execution, with costs.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-75.  Application of debts due to corporation in satisfaction of execution;  delivery and assignment to execution officer
    If any officer, holding an execution against a corporation, shall be unable  to find other property belonging to the corporation liable to execution, either  he or the judgment creditor may elect to satisfy such execution, in whole or in  part, by any debts due to the corporation, in which case the agent or person  having custody of any evidences of such debts shall deliver the same to the  officer holding the execution, for the use of the creditor.  Such a delivery,  with a transfer in writing to the officer, for the use of the creditor, and  notice to the debtor, shall be a valid assignment thereof.

    Any such agent or person who neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions of this section shall himself be liable to pay to the execution creditor the amount due upon the execution with costs.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-76.  Collection of and action on assigned debts by execution creditor
    When debts due to a corporation have been delivered, transferred and assigned to an officer holding an execution against the corporation, for the use of the execution creditor, pursuant to section 2A:17-75 of this title, the creditor may sue for and collect the same, subject to such equitable set-offs on the part of the debtor as in other assignments.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-77.  Against whom writ not to issue
    No capias ad satisfaciendum shall issue in a civil action or an action for a  penalty to take the body of:

    a.  A female;  or

     b.  An infant under the age of 16 years;  or

     c.  An infant above such age and under 21 years of age, if the court before  which application for the writ is made, after determining the infant's age and  the nature of the offense or action complained of, decides within its discretion that the writ shall not issue;  or

    d.  A defendant who has been arrested on a capias ad respondendum in an action on contract on the ground of fraud in the inception of the contract, and  as to whom it has been determined by the court at the trial that such fraud did  not exist.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-78.  Issue of writ on judgments founded on contract
    A capias ad satisfaciendum shall not issue on a judgment founded upon contract, express or implied, except:

    a.  Where an order to hold the defendant to bail has been issued and remains  in force;  or

    b.  When due proof is made to the court, establishing:

     1.  The facts on which an order to hold to bail could issue under the provisions of section 2A:15-42 of this title;  or

     2.  That defendant has rights or credits, money or effects in his own possession or the possession of some other person to his use, of the value of $50.00 or over, which he unlawfully refuses to apply in payment of the judgment  against him.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-79.  Issue of writ on judgments in tort actions
    In all cases in which the first process shall be a summons, the writ of capias ad satisfaciendum shall not be issued against a defendant upon any judgment in an action of tort for injuries to the person or damages to property, unless the court finds that such injuries or damages were caused by the willful or malicious act of the defendant and an order is made that such writ be issued.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-80.  Capias or other execution against prisoner escaping from prison
    If a person committed to prison by virtue of an execution escapes therefrom,  the creditor at whose suit the prisoner was charged in execution at the time of  the escape may retake the escaped prisoner by any new capias, or alias capias  ad satisfaciendum, or sue forth any other kind of execution on the judgment, as  if the body of the prisoner had never been taken in execution.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-81.  Execution against estate of execution debtor whose person was taken in execution
    An execution creditor, his executor or administrator, may, when an execution  debtor dies after execution has been issued against his person, but before the  judgment under which it issued has been satisfied, have new execution against  the goods and chattels and real estate of the execution debtor which he might  have had if such debtor had not died.

    Under the new execution, no real estate of such execution debtor shall be sold, which, at any time after the judgment against such debtor under which the  original execution issued, has been sold by him, bona fide, and of which the  proceeds of the sale have been either paid or secured to be paid to any of his  creditors, with their privity or consent, in discharge of his debts, or some  part thereof.  Nor shall there be sold under such execution any real estate of  the deceased debtor, which shall have been sold by reason of any other judgment  against him.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-82.  Contempt proceedings not affected
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to apply to proceedings as for contempt to enforce civil remedies.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:17-83.  Writ when defendant has made deposit in lieu of bail
    If plaintiff, in an action in which defendant has been held to bail and defendant has made a deposit of cash with the court in lieu of bail, recovers judgment for an amount in excess of the sum deposited, he shall have a capias ad satisfaciendum against defendant for the collection of the balance due on the judgment.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:18-27  Life of execution and return.

	2A:18-27. A writ of execution issued out of the Superior Court, Law Division, Special Civil Part shall remain valid and effective for the purpose of a levy, and shall be operative and effective against any goods and chattels levied upon, for two years from the date of its issuance, unless sooner satisfied. Thereafter it shall be void. The officer shall make a return to the clerk of the proceedings had by him on such writ forthwith after a satisfaction thereof, otherwise within two years.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991, c.91, s.49; 1999, c.80.

2A:18-29.    Liability of officer to judgment creditor for neglect or default in making execution  
     2A:18-29. If, by reason of the negligence of an officer in the performance of any of the duties imposed upon him respecting an execution for the Superior Court, Law Division, Special Civil Part, the execution creditor fails to recover the amount, or any part thereof, to which he is entitled under the execution, with costs, the officer shall be liable to the execution creditor therefor, recoverable in an action of contract, with double costs.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.50.  

2A:18-32.    Docketing judgments of the Special Civil Part  
     2A:18-32. Any final judgment of the Special Civil Part when not less than $10, including costs, remains due thereon, may be docketed by the party recovering the same, his executors, administrators or assigns, with the Clerk of the Superior Court in the manner and with the effect hereinafter provided. 

    Any judgment recovered in the Special Civil Part in an action against any heir or devisee of a decedent by creditors of the decedent may be general or special and it may be docketed with the Clerk of the Superior Court and execution issued thereon in the same manner as if the action had originally been instituted in the Law Division.  

    This section shall not apply to judgments recovered in the Special Civil Part in actions to enforce a mechanic's lien claim, which shall be docketed as required by the mechanic's lien law.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.48.  

2A:18-33.    Docketing of judgment pending determination of motion for new trial or appeal  
     2A:18-33. During the pendency of a motion for a new trial, or an appeal, a judgment of the Superior Court, Law Division, Special Civil Part may be docketed unless otherwise ordered by the trial or appellate court.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.51.  

2A:18-34.    Statement and affidavit filed with clerk; transcript entry of judgment  
     2A:18-34. The clerk of the Superior Court, shall require that there be filed in his office a statement, signed by the clerk of the Special Civil Part in which the judgment was entered containing:  

    a.   The name of the court,

      b.   The names of the parties to the action in which the judgment was rendered,

      c.   The name of the attorney, if any, of the party in whose favor the judgment was rendered,  

    d.   The amount and date of the judgment and

      e.   The date of issue and return of execution, if any,

      f.   Which statement shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the party, his attorney or agent, in whose favor the judgment was rendered that, at the time of the filing of the statement a certain stated amount, not less than $10, was still due on the judgment.  

    Upon the filing of such statement, the clerk of the Superior Court shall enter in his docket a transcript of the judgment in words at length, containing the Special Civil Part in which the judgment was rendered, the style of the action, the names in full of the parties to the action, the name of the attorney, if any, of the party in whose favor the judgment was rendered, the amount recovered with costs, the substance of the return of the officer serving the process, and the amount stated to be due in the affidavit.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.52.  

2A:18-35.    Issue and return of execution not necessary  
     2A:18-35. It shall not be necessary, before obtaining the statement mentioned in this article, that execution issue out of and be returned into the Superior Court, Law Division, Special Civil Part. The statement may be made and filed at any time after judgment entered in that court, with the same effect as if execution had been issued and returned. If, however, execution has issued, the statement shall not be made and filed before a return has been made to the execution.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.53.  

2A:18-36.    Clerks' dockets  
     2A:18-36. The clerk of the Superior Court shall provide and keep a docket, in which shall be entered, upon compliance with the provisions of this article, the judgments to be docketed pursuant to this article. The docket of the clerk of the Superior Court may be that one in which judgments of other courts are docketed.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.54.  

2A:18-37.    Indexes to dockets; dockets and indexes public records  
     2A:18-37. The clerk of the Superior Court shall make and keep a complete alphabetical index to the dockets required to be kept by this article.  

    The dockets and the indexes thereto shall be public records, to which all persons desiring to examine the same shall have access.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.55.  

2A:18-38.    Operation and effect of docketed judgment in general  
     2A:18-38. A judgment docketed in the Superior Court in the manner herein provided shall, from the time of its docketing, operate as though it were a judgment obtained in an action originally commenced in the Superior Court other than in the Special Civil Part.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.56.  

2A:18-39.    Satisfaction of docketed judgment; entry  
     2A:18-39. Satisfaction of a judgment docketed as herein provided may be entered in the same manner and upon the same evidence in which satisfaction of an original judgment of the Superior Court other than of the Special Civil Part.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.57.  

2A:18-40.    Execution out of Superior Court on docketed judgment  
     2A:18-40. Execution may issue on a judgment docketed as herein provided out of the Superior Court, with the same effect as to the real and personal property of the judgment debtor as if issued on a judgment originally obtained in the Superior Court other than in the Special Civil Part.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.58.  

2A:18-41.    Jurisdiction of Special Civil Part over docketed judgments  
     2A:18-41. After a judgment has been docketed as herein provided, no execution shall issue in the Special Civil Part. The Special Civil Part shall have original jurisdiction with respect to the granting of a new trial, the taking of an appeal or any other matter affecting the validity of the original judgment. Any order in connection with the validity of a judgment shall be filed in both the Superior Court and in the Special Civil Part.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1979,c.416; 1991,c.91,s.59.  

2A:18-42.    No execution on docketed judgments pending application for new trial or appeal  
     2A:18-42. If a judgment has been docketed before the grant of a new trial or an appeal taken, no execution shall issue thereon pending the final determination of such proceedings.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.60.  

2A:18-43.    New trial notwithstanding judgment docketed and execution issued  
     2A:18-43. If a judgment has been docketed and execution issued thereon before the grant of a new trial by the Special Civil Part, the Special Civil Part may nevertheless grant a new trial, and, if granted, no further proceedings shall be had on the execution pending the determination of the new trial.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.61.  

2A:18-44.    Revival of docketed judgment  
     2A:18-44. A judgment docketed as provided in this article may be revived by proceedings in the Superior Court in the same manner, in the like cases and with the like effect as if such judgment had been obtained in an action commenced in the Superior Court other than in the Special Civil Part.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.62.  

2A:18-45.  Entry in docket of determination on appeal
    If a judgment docketed as provided in this article is reviewed upon appeal,  and a duly certified transcript of the judgment of the court upon the appeal  shall be delivered to the clerk of the court wherein the judgment is docketed,  such clerk shall file the transcript in his office, and enter, in short form,  in the margin of the docket, opposite the entry of the judgment the substance  of the determination upon the appeal.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:18-51.    Tenancy created by agent; termination by owner; recovery of possession or rentals  
     2A:18-51. If real estate is leased by an agent of the owner thereof, in his own name or as agent, the owner, his assignee or grantee may terminate the tenancy as the agent might do. The owner or his duly authorized agent, assignee or grantee may institute and maintain proceedings to recover the possession or the rentals thereof in their own names or in the name of the former agent, in the same manner and with the same effect as though the real estate had been leased in their own names.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.63.  

2A:18-52.  Dismissal of action involving title of land
    If upon trial of a landlord and tenancy proceeding the plaintiff shall not be able to prove, by lease or other evidence, his right to the possession of the premises claimed by him without proving title to lands, tenements and hereditaments, the cause shall be dismissed, provided however that an assignee or grantee of a landlord may, at the trial or hearing, offer in evidence a deed  or other writing for the purpose of showing the assignment or grant by the  landlord.  Furthermore a deed or other writing may be received for the purpose  of showing the right to possession of the premises for the recovery of which  the proceedings are brought.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:18-53.    Removal of tenant in certain cases; jurisdiction  
     2A:18-53. Except for residential lessees and tenants included in section 2 of this act, any lessee or tenant at will or at sufferance, or for a part of a year, or for one or more years, of any houses, buildings, lands or tenements, and the assigns, undertenants or legal representatives of such tenant or lessee, may be removed from such premises by the Superior Court, Law Division, Special Civil Part in an action in the following cases:  

    a.   Where such person holds over and continues in possession of all or any part of the demised premises after the expiration of his term, and after demand made and written notice given by the landlord or his agent, for delivery of possession thereof. The notice shall be served either personally upon the tenant or such person in possession by giving him a copy thereof or by leaving a copy of the same at his usual place of abode with a member of his family above the age of 14 years.  

    b.   Where such person shall hold over after a default in the payment of rent, pursuant to the agreement under which the premises are held.  

    c.   Where such person (1) shall be so disorderly as to destroy the peace and quiet of the landlord or the other tenants or occupants living in said house or the neighborhood, or (2) shall willfully destroy, damage or injure the premises, or (3) shall constantly violate the landlord's rules and regulations governing said premises, provided, such rules have been accepted in writing by the tenant or are made a part of the lease; or (4) shall commit any breach or violation of any of the covenants or agreements in the nature thereof contained in the lease for the premises where a right of re-entry is reserved in the lease for a violation of such covenants or agreements, and shall hold over and continue in possession of the demised premises or any part thereof, after the landlord or his agent for that purpose has caused a written notice of the termination of said tenancy to be served upon said tenant, and a demand that said tenant remove from said premises within three days from the service of such notice. The notice shall specify the cause of the termination of the tenancy, and shall be served either personally upon the tenant or such person in possession by giving him a copy thereof, or by leaving a copy thereof at his usual place of abode with some member of his family above the age of 14 years.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1966,c.319; 1974,c.49,s.1; 1991,c.91,s.64.  

2A:18-54.  Notices and summons;  substituted service;  service by posting
    Where for any reason, any of the notices required by section 2A:18-53 of this title, cannot be served as provided in said section or a summons and complaint cannot be served as in other actions, such notices or summons and complaint may be served upon any person actually occupying the premises, either  personally or by leaving same with a member of his family above the age of 14  years, or when admission to the premises is denied or the tenant or occupant  and all members of his family above the age of 14 years are absent from the  premises, or there is no person actually occupying them, the officer or other  person may post or affix a copy of the same upon the door or other conspicuous  part of such premises.  Such posting shall be deemed to be lawful service.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:18-55.  Discontinuance upon payment into court of rent in arrears; receipt
    If, in actions instituted under paragraph  "b"  of section 2A:18-53 of this  title, the tenant or person in possession of the demised premises shall at any  time on or before entry of final judgment, pay to the clerk of the court the  rent claimed to be in default, together with the accrued costs of the  proceedings, all proceedings shall be stopped.  The receipt of the clerk shall  be evidence of such payment.

    The clerk shall forthwith pay all moneys so received to the landlord, his agent or assigns.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:18-56.  Proof of notice to quit prerequisite to judgment
    No judgment for possession in cases specified in paragraph  "a."  of section  2A:18-53 of this Title shall be ordered unless:

    a.  The tenancy, if a tenancy at will or from year to year, has been terminated by the giving of 3 months' notice to quit, which notice shall be deemed to be sufficient;  or

    b.  The tenancy, if a tenancy from month to month, has been terminated by the giving of 1 month's notice to quit, which notice shall be deemed to be sufficient;  or

    c.  The tenancy, if for a term other than at will, from year to year, or from month to month, has been terminated by the giving of one term's notice to quit, which notice shall be deemed to be sufficient;  and

      d.  It shall be shown to the satisfaction of the court by due proof that the notice herein required has been given.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1975, c. 136, s. 1, eff. July 7, 1975.

2A:18-57.  Judgment for possession;  warrant for removal;  issuance
    If no sufficient cause is shown to the contrary when the action comes on for  trial, the court shall issue its warrant to any officer of the court, commanding him to remove all persons from the premises, and to put the claimant  into full possession thereof, and to levy and make the costs out of the goods  and chattels of the person in possession.

    No warrant of removal shall issue until the expiration of 3 days after entry  of judgment for possession, except as provided for in chapter 42 of this  Title.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1979, c. 392, s. 1, eff. Feb. 6, 1980.

2A:18-58.  Execution of warrant;  use of force
    An officer, to whom a warrant is issued by virtue of this article, shall obey the command of and faithfully execute the same, and may, if necessary to the execution thereof, use such force as may be necessary.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:18-59.  Review;  landlord liable for unlawful proceedings
    Proceedings had by virtue of this article shall not be appealable except on  the ground of lack of jurisdiction.  The landlord, however, shall remain liable  in a civil action for unlawful proceedings under this article.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:18-59.1.  Terminally ill tenants  
     Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, the Superior Court may authorize and review one year stays of eviction during which the tenant shall be entitled to renew the lease at its term of expiration, subject to reasonable changes proposed to the tenant by the landlord in written notice, whenever:  

    a.   The tenant fulfills all the terms of the lease and removal is sought under subsection a. of N.J.S.2A:18-53 where a residential tenant holds over after written notice for delivery of possession; and  

    b.   The tenant has a terminal illness which illness has been certified by a licensed physician; and  

    c.   There is substantial likelihood that the tenant would be unable to search for, rent and move to a comparable alternative rental dwelling unit without serious medical harm; and  

    d.   The tenant has been a tenant of the landlord for a least two years prior to the issuance of the stay.  

    In reviewing a petition for a stay of eviction, the court shall specifically consider whether the granting of the stay of eviction would cause an undue hardship to the landlord because of the landlord's financial condition or any other factor relating to the landlord's ownership of the premises.  

    L.1983,c.446,s.1; amended 1991,c.91,s.65.  

2A:18-59.2.  Inapplicability of act to hotel, motel or guest house rented to  transient guest or seasonal tenant or to residential health care facility
    This act shall not apply to a hotel, motel or other guest house, or part thereof, rented to a transient guest or seasonal tenant, or a residential health care facility as defined in section 1 of P.L.1953, c. 212 (C.30:11A-1).

     L.1983, c. 446, s. 2, eff. Jan. 9, 1984.

2A:18-59.3  Eviction, foreclosure prohibited during certain emergency circumstances.
 	1. a. (1) Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, whenever a Public Health Emergency, pursuant to the "Emergency Health Powers Act," P.L.2005, c.222 (C.26:13-1 et seq.) has been declared by the Governor in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and is in effect, the Governor may issue an executive order to declare that a lessee, tenant, homeowner or any other person shall not be removed from a residential property as the result of an eviction or foreclosure proceeding.  This executive order shall remain in effect for no longer than two months following the end of the Public Health Emergency except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection.  
 
	(2) (a) For eviction actions based upon reasons other than nonpayment or habitual late payment of rent, or failure to pay a rent increase, Executive Order No. 106 of 2020 shall expire upon the effective date of P.L.2021, c.188 (C.52:27D-287.7 et al.). 
 
	(b)	For eviction actions based upon nonpayment or habitual late payment of rent, or failure to pay a rent increase, Executive Order No. 106 of 2020 shall expire on August 31, 2021, for any lessee or tenant who is not a very low-income, low-income, or moderate-income household.
 
	(c)	For eviction actions based upon nonpayment or habitual late payment of rent, or failure to pay a rent increase, Executive Order No. 106 of 2020 shall expire on December 31, 2021, for any lessee or tenant who is a very low-income, low-income, or moderate-income household.  Provided, however, that the protections conferred on such tenants by this section shall expire on August 31, 2021, to the extent that such tenants do not comply with the certification requirements of subsection d. of section 3 of P.L.2021, c.188 (C.52:27D-287.9).
 
	(d)	To the extent that it prohibits the removal from a residential property as a result of a foreclosure proceeding of any homeowner, Executive Order No. 106 of 2020 shall expire on November 15, 2021.
 
	(e)	The Governor shall have the ability to revoke or modify Executive Order No. 106 of 2020 prior to December 31, 2021 in a manner not inconsistent with the provisions of this section.
 
	(3)	Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (2) of this subsection, Executive Order No. 106 of 2020 may be extended pursuant to the procedures set forth in subsection b. of section 3 of P.L.2021, c.103, if there is substantial evidence that hospitalizations and deaths due to the COVID-19 pandemic are likely to recur or substantially worsen if an extension is not ordered.
 
	b.	Eviction and foreclosure proceedings may be initiated or continued during the time of an executive order issued pursuant to this section, but enforcement of all judgments for possession, warrants of removal, and writs of possession shall be stayed during this period if the Governor has issued an executive order prohibiting certain removals from residential property pursuant to subsection a. of this section, unless the court determines on its own motion or motion of the parties that enforcement is necessary in the interest of justice.  
 
	c.	Sheriffs, court officers, and their agents shall refrain from acting to remove individuals from residential properties through the eviction or foreclosure processes during the time of an executive order issued by the Governor prohibiting certain removals from residential property pursuant to subsection a. of this section, unless the court determines on its own motion or motion of the parties that removal is necessary in the interest of justice.  
 
	d.	As used in this section, "residential property" means any property rented or owned for residential purposes, including, but not limited to, any house, building, mobile home or land in a mobile home park, or tenement leased for residential purposes, but shall not include any hotel, motel, or other guest house, or part thereof, rented to a transient guest or seasonal tenant, or a residential health care facility.
 
	L.2020, c.1, s.1; amended 2021, c.188, s.6.

2A:18-60.    Removal of proceedings into Law Division  
     2A:18-60. At any time before an action for the removal of a tenant comes on for trial, either the landlord or person in possession may apply to the Superior Court, which may, if it deems it of sufficient importance, order the cause transferred from the Special Civil Part to the Law Division.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.66.  

2A:18-61.    Trial by jury in Law Division  
     2A:18-61. A summary action for the removal of a tenant, commenced in the Special Civil Part but transferred to the Law Division shall be tried before a jury, unless a jury is waived.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.67.  

2A:18-61.1  Grounds for removal of tenants.
 
 	2.	No lessee or tenant or the assigns, under-tenants or legal representatives of such lessee or tenant may be removed by the Superior Court from any house, building, mobile home or land in a mobile home park or tenement leased for residential purposes, other than (1) owner-occupied premises with not more than two rental units or a hotel, motel or other guest house or part thereof rented to a transient guest or seasonal tenant; (2) a dwelling unit which is held in trust on behalf of a member of the immediate family of the person or persons establishing the trust, provided that the member of the immediate family on whose behalf the trust is established permanently occupies the unit; and (3) a dwelling unit which is permanently occupied by a member of the immediate family of the owner of that unit, provided, however, that exception (2) or (3) shall apply only in cases in which the member of the immediate family has a developmental disability, except upon establishment of one of the following grounds as good cause:
 
	a.	The person fails to pay rent due and owing under the lease whether the same be oral or written; provided that, for the purposes of this section, any portion of rent unpaid by a tenant to a landlord but utilized by the tenant to continue utility service to the rental premises after receiving notice from an electric, gas, water or sewer public utility that such service was in danger of discontinuance based on nonpayment by the landlord, shall not be deemed to be unpaid rent.
 
	b.	The person has continued to be, after written notice to cease, so disorderly as to destroy the peace and quiet of the occupants or other tenants living in said house or neighborhood.
 
	c.	The person has willfully or by reason of gross negligence caused or allowed destruction, damage or injury to the premises.
 
	d.	The person has continued, after written notice to cease, to substantially violate or breach any of the landlord's rules and regulations governing said premises, provided such rules and regulations are reasonable and have been accepted in writing by the tenant or made a part of the lease at the beginning of the lease term.
 
	e. (1) The person has continued, after written notice to cease, to substantially violate or breach any of the covenants or agreements contained in the lease for the premises where a right of reentry is reserved to the landlord in the lease for a violation of such covenant or agreement, provided that such covenant or agreement is reasonable and was contained in the lease at the beginning of the lease term.
 
	(2)	In public housing under the control of a public housing authority or redevelopment agency, the person has substantially violated or breached any of the covenants or agreements contained in the lease for the premises pertaining to illegal uses of controlled dangerous substances, or other illegal activities, whether or not a right of reentry is reserved to the landlord in the lease for a violation of such covenant or agreement, provided that such covenant or agreement conforms to federal guidelines regarding such lease provisions and was contained in the lease at the beginning of the lease term.
 
	f.	The person has failed to pay rent after a valid notice to quit and notice of increase of said rent, provided the increase in rent is not unconscionable and complies with any and all other laws or municipal ordinances governing rent increases.
 
	g.	The landlord or owner (1) seeks to permanently board up or demolish the premises because he has been cited by local or State housing inspectors for substantial violations affecting the health and safety of tenants and it is economically unfeasible for the owner to eliminate the violations; (2) seeks to comply with local or State housing inspectors who have cited him for substantial violations affecting the health and safety of tenants and it is unfeasible to so comply without removing the tenant; simultaneously with service of notice of eviction pursuant to this clause, the landlord shall notify the Department of Community Affairs of the intention to institute proceedings and shall provide the department with such other information as it may require pursuant to rules and regulations.  The department shall inform all parties and the court of its view with respect to the feasibility of compliance without removal of the tenant and may in its discretion appear and present evidence; (3) seeks to correct an illegal occupancy because he has been cited by local or State housing inspectors or zoning officers and it is unfeasible to correct such illegal occupancy without removing the tenant; or (4) is a governmental agency which seeks to permanently retire the premises from the rental market pursuant to a redevelopment or land clearance plan in a blighted area. In those cases where the tenant is being removed for any reason specified in this subsection, no warrant for possession shall be issued until P.L.1967, c.79 (C.52:31B-1 et seq.) and P.L.1971, c.362 (C.20:4-1 et seq.) have been complied with.
 
	h.	The owner seeks to retire permanently the residential building or the mobile home park from residential use or use as a mobile home park, provided this subsection shall not apply to circumstances covered under subsection g. of this section.
 
	i.	The landlord or owner proposes, at the termination of a lease, reasonable changes of substance in the terms and conditions of the lease, including specifically any change in the term thereof, which the tenant, after written notice, refuses to accept; provided that in cases where a tenant has received a notice of termination pursuant to subsection g. of section 3 of P.L.1974, c.49 (C.2A:18-61.2), or has a protected tenancy status pursuant to the "Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act," P.L.1981, c.226 (C.2A:18-61.22 et al.), or pursuant to the "Tenant Protection Act of 1992," P.L.1991, c.509 (C.2A:18-61.40 et al.), the landlord or owner shall have the burden of proving that any change in the terms and conditions of the lease, rental or regulations both is reasonable and does not substantially reduce the rights and privileges to which the tenant was entitled prior to the conversion.
 
	j.	The person, after written notice to cease, has habitually and without legal justification failed to pay rent which is due and owing.
 
	k.	The landlord or owner of the building or mobile home park is converting from the rental market to a condominium, cooperative or fee simple ownership of two or more dwelling units or park sites, except as hereinafter provided in subsection l. of this section. Where the tenant is being removed pursuant to this subsection, no warrant for possession shall be issued until this act has been complied with.  No action for possession shall be brought pursuant to this subsection against a senior citizen tenant or disabled tenant with protected tenancy status pursuant to the "Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act," P.L.1981, c.226 (C.2A:18-61.22 et al.), or against a qualified tenant under the "Tenant Protection Act of 1992," P.L.1991, c.509 (C.2A:18-61.40 et al.), as long as the agency has not terminated the protected tenancy status or the protected tenancy period has not expired.
 
	l. (1) The owner of a building or mobile home park, which is constructed as or being converted to a condominium, cooperative or fee simple ownership, seeks to evict a tenant or sublessee whose initial tenancy began after the master deed, agreement establishing the cooperative or subdivision plat was recorded, because the owner has contracted to sell the unit to a buyer who seeks to personally occupy it and the contract for sale calls for the unit to be vacant at the time of closing.  However, no action shall be brought against a tenant under paragraph (1) of this subsection unless the tenant was given a statement in accordance with section 6 of P.L.1975, c.311 (C.2A:18-61.9);
 
	(2)	The owner of three or less condominium or cooperative units seeks to evict a tenant whose initial tenancy began by rental from an owner of three or less units after the master deed or agreement establishing the cooperative was recorded, because the owner seeks to personally occupy the unit, or has contracted to sell the unit to a buyer who seeks to personally occupy it and the contract for sale calls for the unit to be vacant at the time of closing;
 
	(3)	The owner of a building of three residential units or less seeks to personally occupy a unit, or has contracted to sell the residential unit to a buyer who wishes to personally occupy it and the contract for sale calls for the unit to be vacant at the time of closing.
 
	m.	The landlord or owner conditioned the tenancy upon and in consideration for the tenant's employment by the landlord or owner as superintendent, janitor or in some other capacity and such employment is being terminated.
 
	n.	The person has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to, or if a juvenile, has been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of an act which if committed by an adult would constitute an offense under the "Comprehensive Drug Reform Act of 1987," N.J.S.2C:35-1 et al., involving the use, possession, manufacture, dispensing or distribution of a controlled dangerous substance, controlled dangerous substance analog or drug paraphernalia within the meaning of that act within or upon the leased premises or the building or complex of buildings and land appurtenant thereto, or the mobile home park, in which those premises are located, and has not in connection with his sentence for that offense either (1) successfully completed or (2) been admitted to and continued upon probation while completing, a drug rehabilitation program pursuant to N.J.S.2C:35-14; or, being the tenant or lessee of such leased premises, knowingly harbors or harbored therein a person who has been so convicted or has so pleaded, or otherwise permits or permitted such a person to occupy those premises for residential purposes, whether continuously or intermittently, except that this subsection shall not apply to a person harboring or permitting a juvenile to occupy the premises if the juvenile has been adjudicated delinquent upon the basis of an act which if committed by an adult would constitute the offense of use or possession under the said act. No action for removal may be brought pursuant to this subsection more than two years after the date of the adjudication or conviction or more than two years after the person's release from incarceration whichever is the later.
 
	o.	The person has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to, or if a juvenile, has been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of an act which if committed by an adult would constitute an offense under N.J.S.2C:12-1 or N.J.S.2C:12-3 involving assault, or terroristic threats against the landlord, a member of the landlord's family or an employee of the landlord; or, being the tenant or lessee of such leased premises, knowingly harbors or harbored therein a person who has been so convicted or has so pleaded, or otherwise permits or permitted such a person to occupy those premises for residential purposes, whether continuously or intermittently. No action for removal may be brought pursuant to this subsection more than two years after the adjudication or conviction or more than two years after the person's release from incarceration whichever is the later.
 
	p.	The person has been found, by a preponderance of the evidence, liable in a civil action for removal commenced under this act for an offense under N.J.S.2C:20-1 et al. involving theft of property located on the leased premises from the landlord, the leased premises or other tenants residing in the leased premises, or N.J.S.2C:12-1 or N.J.S.2C:12-3 involving assault or terroristic threats against the landlord, a member of the landlord's family or an employee of the landlord, or under the "Comprehensive Drug Reform Act of 1987," N.J.S.2C:35-1 et al., involving the use, possession, manufacture, dispensing or distribution of a controlled dangerous substance, controlled dangerous substance analog or drug paraphernalia within the meaning of that act within or upon the leased premises or the building or complex of buildings and land appurtenant thereto, or the mobile home park, in which those premises are located, and has not in connection with his sentence for that offense either (1) successfully completed or (2) been admitted to and continued upon probation while completing a drug rehabilitation program pursuant to N.J.S.2C:35-14; or, being the tenant or lessee of such leased premises, knowingly harbors or harbored therein a person who committed such an offense, or otherwise permits or permitted such a person to occupy those premises for residential purposes, whether continuously or intermittently, except that this subsection shall not apply to a person who harbors or permits a juvenile to occupy the premises if the juvenile has been adjudicated delinquent upon the basis of an act which if committed by an adult would constitute the offense of use or possession under the said "Comprehensive Drug Reform Act of 1987."
 
	q.	The person has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to, or if a juvenile, has been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of an act which if committed by an adult would constitute an offense under N.J.S.2C:20-1 et al. involving theft of property from the landlord, the leased premises or other tenants residing in the same building or complex; or, being the tenant or lessee of such leased premises, knowingly harbors therein a person who has been so convicted or has so pleaded, or otherwise permits such a person to occupy those premises for residential purposes, whether continuously or intermittently.
 
	r.	The person is found in a civil action, by a preponderance of the evidence, to have committed a violation of the human trafficking provisions set forth in section 1 of P.L.2005, c.77 (C.2C:13-8)  within or upon the leased premises or the building or complex of buildings and land appurtenant thereto, or the mobile home park, in which those premises are located; or, being the tenant or lessee of such leased premises, knowingly harbors or harbored therein a person who has been engaged in human trafficking, or otherwise permits or permitted such a person to occupy those premises for residential purposes, whether continuously or intermittently. No action for removal may be brought pursuant to this subsection more than two years after the alleged violation has terminated.  A criminal conviction or a guilty plea to a crime of human trafficking under section 1 of P.L.2005, c.77 (C.2C:13-8) shall be considered prima facie evidence of civil liability under this subsection.
 
	For purposes of this section, (1) "developmental disability" means any disability which is defined as such pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1977, c.82 (C.30:6D-3); (2) "member of the immediate family" means a person's spouse, parent, child or sibling, or a spouse, parent, child or sibling of any of them; and (3) "permanently" occupies or occupied means that the occupant maintains no other domicile at which the occupant votes, pays rent or property taxes or at which rent or property taxes are paid on the occupant's behalf.
 
	L.1974, c.49, s.2; amended 1975, c.311, s.1; 1981, c.8, s.1; 1981, c.226, s.13; 1989, c.294, s.1; 1991, c.91, s.68; 1991, c.307; 1991, c.509, s.19; 1993, c.342, s.1; 1995, c.269; 1996, c.131; 1997, c.228, s.1; 2000, c.113, s.3; 2013, c.51, s.7.

2A:18-61.1a. Findings 
    The Legislature finds that: 

   a.   Acute State and local shortages of supply and high levels of demand for residential dwellings have motivated removal of blameless tenants in order to directly or indirectly profit from conversion to higher income rental or ownership interest residential use. 

   b.   This has resulted in unfortunate attempts to displace tenants employing pretexts, stratagems or means other than those provided pursuant to the intent of State eviction laws designated to fairly balance and protect rights of tenants and landlords. 

   c.   These devices have circumvented the intent of current State eviction laws by failing to utilize available means to avoid displacement, such as: protected tenancies; rights to purchase; rent affordability protection;  full disclosures relevant to eviction challenges; and stays of eviction where relocation is lacking. 

   d.   It is in the public interest of the State to maintain for citizens the broadest protections available under State eviction laws to avoid such displacement and resultant loss of affordable housing, which, due to housing's uniqueness as the most costly and difficult to change necessity of life, causes overcrowding, unsafe and unsanitary conditions, blight, burdens on community services, wasted resources, homelessness, emigration from the State and personal hardship, which is particularly severe for vulnerable seniors, the disabled, the frail, minorities, large families and single parents. 

   e.   Such personal hardship includes, but is not limited to:  economic loss, time loss, physical and emotional stress, and in some cases severe emotional trauma, illness, homelessness or other irreparable harm resulting from strain of eviction controversy; relocation search and moving difficulties; anxiety caused by lack of information, uncertainty, and resultant planning difficulty;  employment, education, family and social disruption; relocation and empty unit security hazards; relocation to premises of less affordability, capacity, accessibility and physical or environmental quality; and relocation adjustment problems, particularly of the blind or other disabled citizens. 

   f.   It is appropriate to take legislative notice of relevant legislative findings adopted pursuant to section 2 of the "Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act," P.L. 1981, c. 226 (C. 2A:18-61.23) and section 2 of the "Prevention of Homelessness Act (1984)," P.L. 1984, c. 180 (C. 52:27D-281), which, with the findings of this section, have relevance to this 1986 amendatory and supplementary act and P.L. 1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.1 et seq.). 

   g.   This 1986 amendatory and supplementary act is adopted in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of New Jersey. 

   L. 1986, c. 138, s. 10, eff. Oct. 29, 1986. 

2A:18-61.1b. Permanent retirement from residential use 
    If an owner seeks an eviction alleging permanent retirement of the premises from residential use pursuant to subsection h. of section 2 of P.L. 1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.1) and if, pursuant to land use law, nonresidential use of the premises is not permitted as a principal permitted use or is limited to accessory, conditional or public use, a rebuttable presumption is created that the premises are not and will not be permanently retired from residential use.  Residential premises that are unoccupied, boarded up or otherwise out of service shall not be deemed retired from residential use unless they are converted to a principal permitted nonresidential use.  No tenant shall be evicted pursuant to subsection h. of section 2 of P.L. 1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.1) if any State or local permit or approval required by law for the nonresidential use is not obtained.  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to require obtaining a certificate of occupancy for the proposed use prior to an eviction.  The detail specified in notice given pursuant to subsection d. of section 3 of P.L. 1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.2) shall disclose the proposed nonresidential use to which the premises are to be permanently retired. 

   L. 1986, c. 138, s. 2, eff. Oct. 29, 1986. 

2A:18-61.1c. 5-year restriction 
    The Department of Community Affairs shall not approve an application for registration of conversion pursuant to "The Planned Real Estate Development Full Disclosure Act," P.L. 1977, c. 419 (C. 45:22A-21 et seq.) for any premises for a period of five years following the date on which any dwelling unit in the premises becomes vacant after notice has been given that the owner seeks to permanently board up or demolish the premises or seeks to retire permanently the premises from residential use pursuant to subsection g.(1) or h. of section 2 of P.L. 1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.1).  Within five days of the date on which any owner provides notice of termination to a tenant pursuant to subsection g.(1) or h. of section 2 of P.L. 1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.1), the owner shall provide a copy of the notice to the Department of Community Affairs. 

   L. 1986, c. 138, s. 3, eff. Oct. 29, 1986. 

2A:18-61.1d. Maximum authorized rent 
    In a municipality which has an ordinance regulating rents in effect, if a dwelling unit in the premises becomes vacated after notice has been given that the owner seeks to permanently board up or demolish the premises or seeks to retire permanently the premises from residential use pursuant to subsection g.(1) or h. of section 2 of P.L. 1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.1) and if any time thereafter an owner permits the personal occupancy of the premises, the maximum rent authorized for a unit in the premises shall not exceed the rent that would have been authorized for that unit if there had been no vacancy or change of tenancy for the unit.  Increased costs which occur during the period of vacancy, which are solely the result of the premises being vacated, closed and reoccupied and which do not add services or amenities not previously provided, or which add new services or amenities whose costs significantly reduce the affordability of the premises, shall not be used as a basis for any rent increase pursuant to any municipal rent regulation provision, fair return or hardship hearing before a municipal rent board or any appeal from such determination.  Increased costs of new services and amenities create a rebuttable presumption that they significantly reduce the affordability of the premises, if they result in a doubling of the rent increases otherwise permitted by law during the period of vacancy.  Within five days of the date on which any owner provides notice of termination to a tenant pursuant to subsection g.(1) or h. of section 2 of P.L. 1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.1), the owner shall provide a copy of the notice to the municipal agency responsible for administering the regulation of rents in the municipality.  The owner's notice to the municipal agency shall also include a listing of the current tenants and rents for each dwelling unit in the premises, unless the owner has previously submitted to the municipal agency a listing which is still current.

   L. 1986, c. 138, s. 4, eff. Oct. 29, 1986. 

2A:18-61.1e.   Rights of former tenants  
   6.     If a dwelling unit becomes vacated after notice has been given that the owner seeks to permanently board up or demolish the premises or seeks to retire permanently the premises from residential use pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection g. or subsection h. of section 2 of P.L.1974, c.49 (C.2A:18-61.1) and if at any time thereafter an owner instead seeks to return the premises to residential use, the owner shall provide the former tenant:  

  a.     Written notice 90 days in advance of any return to residential use or any agreement for possession of the unit by any other party, which notice discloses the owner's intention to return the unit to residential use and all appropriate specifics;  

  b.     The right to return to possession of the vacated unit or, if return is not available, the right to possession of affordable housing relocation in accord with the standards and criteria set forth for comparable housing as defined by section 4 of P.L.1975, c.311 (C.2A:18-61.7); and  

  c.     In the case of a conversion, the right to a protected tenancy pursuant to the "Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act," P.L.1981, c.226 (C.2A:18-61.22 et seq.), or pursuant to the "Tenant Protection Act of 1992," P.L.1991, c.509 (C.2A:18-61.40 et al.), if the former tenant would have at the time of the conversion been eligible for a protected tenancy under either of those acts, had the former tenant not vacated the premises.  

  The 90-day notice shall disclose the tenant's rights pursuant to this section and the method for the tenant's response to exercise these rights. A duplicate of the notice shall be transmitted within the first five days of the 90-day period to the rent board in the municipality or the municipal clerk, if there is no board. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection c. of section 3 of P.L.1975, c.311 (C.2A:18-61.6), damages awarded shall not be trebled where possession has been returned in accord with this section; nor shall any damages be awarded as provided for in subsection e. of section 3 of P.L.1975, c.311 (C.2A:18-61.6).  An owner who fails to provide a former tenant a notice of intention to return to residential use pursuant to this section is liable to a civil penalty of not less than $2,500.00 or more than $10,000.00 for each offense, and shall also be liable in treble damages, plus attorney fees and costs of suit, for any loss or expenses incurred by a former tenant as a result of that failure.  The penalty prescribed in this section shall be collected and enforced by summary proceedings pursuant to "the penalty enforcement law" (N.J.S.2A:58-1 et seq.).  The Superior Court, Law Division, Special Civil Part, in the county in which the rental premises are located shall have jurisdiction over such proceedings.  Process shall be in the nature of a summons or warrant, shall issue upon the complaint of the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, the Attorney General, or any other person.  No owner shall be liable for a penalty pursuant to this section if the unit is returned to residential use more than five years after the date the premises are vacated or if the owner made every reasonable effort to locate the former tenant and provide the notice, including, but not limited to, the employment of a qualified professional locator service, where no return receipt is obtained from the former tenant.  

  In any action under this section the court shall, in addition to damages, award any other appropriate legal or equitable relief.  

  L.1986,c.138,s.6; amended 1991,c.509,s.20.  

2A:18-61.1f. Local ordinances permitted 
    Nothing contained in this 1986 amendatory and supplementary act shall authorize any civil action to require that dwelling units remain vacant, shall limit any defense or challenge to evictions that is otherwise provided by law or shall prohibit any provision of a local ordinance which is not less restrictive, except as prohibited pursuant to subsection e. of section 3 of P.L. 1975, c. 311 (C.2A:18-61.6).  Except as provided in subsection e. of section 3 of  P.L. 1975, c. 311 (C.2A:18-61.6), local ordinances may facilitate the objectives of this 1986 amendatory and supplementary act pertaining to premises where tenants have received notice pursuant to subsection g.(1) or h. of section 2 of P.L.1974, c.49 (C.2A:18-61.1), including, but not limited to, any ordinance intended to: 

   a.	Require owners to obtain and register tenants' current and forwarding addresses; 

   b.	Provide to tenants and former tenants who have received notice of termination pursuant to subsection g.(1) or h. of section 2 of P.L. 1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.1) basic information on their relevant rights; 

   c. 	Provide a municipal registry for former tenants to file current addresses for receiving notice; and 

   d.	Assist in locating former tenants who become entitled to receive notice pursuant to section 6 of this 1986 amendatory and supplementary act. 

   L. 1986, c. 138, s. 8, eff. Oct. 29, 1986. 

2A:18-61.1g  Relocation of displaced tenant; violations, penalty.

	3. a. A municipality may enact an ordinance providing that any tenant who receives a notice of eviction pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1974, c.49 (C.2A:18-61.2) that results from zoning or code enforcement activity for an illegal occupancy, as set forth in paragraph (3) of subsection g. of section 2 of P.L.1974, c.49 (C.2A:18-61.1), shall be considered a displaced person and shall be entitled to relocation assistance in an amount equal to six times the monthly rental paid by the displaced person.  The owner-landlord of the structure shall be liable for the payment of relocation assistance pursuant to this section.

	b.	A municipality that has enacted an ordinance pursuant to subsection a. of this section may pay relocation assistance to any displaced person who has not received the required payment from the owner-landlord of the structure at the time of eviction pursuant to subsection a. of this section from a revolving relocation assistance fund established pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1987, c.98 (C.20:4-4.1a). All relocation assistance costs incurred by a municipality pursuant to this subsection shall be repaid by the owner-landlord of the structure to the municipality in the same manner as relocation costs are billed and collected under section 1 of P.L.1983, c.536 (C.20:4-4.1) and section 1 of P.L.1984, c.30 (C.20:4-4.2).  These repayments shall be deposited into the municipality's revolving relocation assistance fund.

	c.	A municipality that has enacted an ordinance pursuant to subsection a. of this section, in addition to requiring reimbursement from the owner-landlord of the structure for relocation assistance paid to a displaced tenant, may require that an additional fine for zoning or housing code violation for an illegal occupancy, up to an amount equal to six times the monthly rental paid by the displaced person, be paid to the municipality by the owner-landlord of the structure.  

	In addition to this penalty, a municipality, after affording the owner-landlord an opportunity for a hearing on the matter, may impose upon the owner-landlord, for a second or subsequent violation for an illegal occupancy, a fine equal to the annual tuition cost of any resident of the illegally occupied unit attending a public school, which fine shall be recovered in a civil action by a summary proceeding in the name of the municipality pursuant to "The Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).  The municipal court and the Superior Court shall have jurisdiction of proceedings for the enforcement of the penalty provided by this section.  The tuition cost shall be determined in the manner prescribed for nonresident pupils pursuant to N.J.S.18A:38-19 and the payment of the fine shall be remitted to the appropriate school district.

	d.	For the purposes of this section, the owner-landlord of a structure shall exclude mortgagees in possession of a structure through foreclosure.

	For the purposes of this section, a "second or subsequent violation for an illegal occupancy" shall be limited to those violations that are new and are a result of distinct and separate zoning or code enforcement activities, and shall not include any continuing violations for which citations are issued by a zoning or code enforcement agent during the time period required for summary dispossession proceedings to conclude if the owner has initiated eviction proceedings in a court of proper jurisdiction.

	L.1993,c.342,s.3; amended 1999, c.425.

2A:18-61.1h. Reimbursement to displaced tenant  
    4. a.  If a residential tenant is displaced because of an illegal occupancy in a residential rental premises pursuant to paragraph (3) of subsection g. of section 2 of P.L.1974, c.49 (C.2A:18-61.1) and the municipality in which the rental premises is located has not enacted an ordinance pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1993, c.342 (C.2A:18-61.1g), the displaced residential tenant shall be entitled to reimbursement for relocation expenses from the owner in an amount equal to six times the monthly rental paid by the displaced person.  

   b.   Payment by the owner shall be due five days prior to the removal of the displaced tenant.  If payment is not made within this time, interest shall accrue and be due to the displaced residential tenant on the unpaid balance at the rate of 18% per annum until the amount due and all interest accumulated thereon shall be paid in full.  

   c.   If reimbursement for which an owner is liable is not paid in full within 30 days of removal of the tenant, the unpaid balance thereof and all interest accruing thereon and, in addition thereto, an amount equal to six times the monthly rental paid by the displaced tenant shall be a lien upon the parcel of property on which the dwelling of the displaced residential tenant was located, for the benefit of that tenant.  To perfect the lien, a statement showing the amount and due date of the unpaid balance and identifying the parcel shall be recorded with the county clerk or registrar of deeds and mortgages of the county in which the affected property is located, and upon recording, the lien shall have the priority of a mortgage lien. Identification of the parcel by reference to its designation on the tax map of the municipality shall be sufficient for purposes of recording.  Whenever the unpaid balance and all interest accrued thereon has been fully paid, the displaced residential tenant shall promptly withdraw or cancel the statement, in writing, at the place of recording.  

   d.   This section shall not authorize the enforcement of a lien for actual reasonable moving expenses with respect to any real property the title to which has been acquired by a municipality and which has been transferred pursuant to a rehabilitation agreement.  

   e.   For the purposes of this section, the owner of a structure shall exclude mortgagees in possession of a structure through foreclosure.  

   L.1993,c.342,s.4.  

2A:18-61.2  Removal of residential tenants; required notice; contents; service.
 
	3.	No judgment of possession shall be entered for any premises covered by section 2 of this act, except in the nonpayment of rent under subsection a. or f. of section 2, unless the landlord has made written demand and given written notice for delivery of possession of the premises.  The following notice shall be required:
 
	a.	For an action alleging disorderly conduct under subsection b. of section 2, or injury to the premises under subsection c. of section 2, or any grounds under subsection m., n., o., p., q., or r. of section 2, three days' notice prior to the institution of the action for possession;
 
	b.	For an action alleging continued violation of rules and regulations under subsection d. of section 2, or substantial breach of covenant under subsection e. of section 2, or habitual failure to pay rent, one month's notice prior to the institution of the action for possession;
 
	c.	For an action alleging any grounds under subsection g. of section 2, three months' notice prior to the institution of the action;
 
	d.	For an action alleging permanent retirement under subsection h. of section 2, 18 months' notice prior to the institution of the action and, provided that, where there is a lease in effect, no action may be instituted until the lease expires;
 
	e.	For an action alleging refusal of acceptance of reasonable lease changes under subsection i. of section 2, one month's notice prior to institution of action;
 
	f.	For an action alleging any grounds under subsection l. of section 2, two months' notice prior to the institution of the action and, provided that where there is a written lease in effect no action shall be instituted until the lease expires;
 
	g.	For an action alleging any grounds under subsection k. of section 2, three years' notice prior to the institution of action, and provided that where there is a written lease in effect, no action shall be instituted until the lease expires;
 
	h.	In public housing under the control of a public housing authority or redevelopment agency, for an action alleging substantial breach of contract under paragraph (2) of subsection e. of section 2, the period of notice required prior to the institution of an action for possession shall be in accordance with federal regulations pertaining to public housing leases.
 
	The notice in each of the foregoing instances shall specify in detail the cause of the termination of the tenancy and shall be served either personally upon the tenant or lessee or such person in possession by giving him a copy thereof, or by leaving a copy thereof at his usual place of abode with some member of his family above the age of 14 years, or by certified mail; if the certified letter is not claimed, notice shall be sent by regular mail.
 
	L.1974, c.49, s.3; amended 1975, c.311, s.2; 1981, c.8, s.2; 1986, c.138, s.1; 1989, c.294, s.2; 1997, c.228, s.2; 2013, c.51, s.8.

2A:18-61.3.  Causes for eviction or nonrenewal of lease  
    4. a. No landlord may evict or fail to renew any lease of any premises covered by section 2 of this act except for good cause as defined in section 2.  

   b.   A person who was a tenant of a landlord in premises covered by section 2 of P.L.1974, c.49 (C.2A:18-61.1) may not be removed by any order or judgment for possession from the premises by the owner's or landlord's successor in ownership or possession except:  

   (1)  For good cause in accordance with the requirements which apply to premises covered pursuant to P.L.1974, c.49 (C.2A:18-61.1 et al.); or  

   (2)  For proceedings in premises where federal law supersedes applicable State law governing removal of occupants; or  

   (3)  For proceedings where removal of occupants is sought by an authorized State or local agency pursuant to eminent domain or code or zoning enforcement laws and which comply with applicable relocation laws pursuant to the "Relocation Assistance Law of 1967," P.L.1967, c.79 (C.52:31B-1 et seq.), the "Relocation Assistance Act," P.L.1971, c.362 (C.20:4-1 et seq.) or section 3 of P.L.1993, c.342 (C.2A:18-61.1g).  

   Where the owner's or landlord's successor in ownership or possession is not bound by the lease entered into with the former tenant and may offer a different lease to the former tenant, nothing in P.L.1986, c.138 shall limit that right.  

   L.1974,c.49,s.4; amended 1986,c.138,s.7; 1993,c.342,s.2.  

2A:18-61.3a.  Mobile home parks;  restrictions on  "for sale"  signs; prohibition
    No mobile home park owner or operator may evict a mobile home resident for posting in or on his mobile home a  "for sale"  sign or similar notice of the private sale of the mobile home.  Nor may a mobile home park owner or operator prohibit or unreasonably restrict such posting by any means, including but not limited to, rules and regulations of the mobile home park or written leases or rental agreements between the park owner or operator and mobile home residents.

     L.1983, c. 432, s. 1, eff. Jan. 5, 1984.

2A:18-61.4.  Waiver of rights by provision in lease;  unenforceability
    Any provision in a lease whereby any tenant covered by section 2 of this act  agrees that his tenancy may be terminated or not renewed for other than good  cause as defined in section 2, or whereby the tenant waives any other rights  under this act shall be deemed against public policy and unenforceable.

     L.1974, c. 49, s. 5, eff. June 25, 1974.

2A:18-61.5.  Severability
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or other part of this act is  adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or  invalidate the remainder of this act, but shall be confined in its effect to  the section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or other part of this act directly  involved in the controversy in which said judgment shall have been rendered.

     L.1974, c. 49, s. 7, eff. June 25, 1974.

2A:18-61.6.  Owner liability for wrongful evictions 
    a.   Where a tenant vacates the premises after being given a notice alleging the owner seeks to personally occupy the premises under subsection l. of section 2 of P.L. 1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.1) and the owner thereafter arbitrarily fails to personally occupy the premises for a total of at least six months, or arbitrarily fails to execute the contract for sale, but instead permits personal occupancy of the premises by another tenant or instead permits registration of conversion of the premises by the Department of Community Affairs pursuant to "The Planned Real Estate Development Full Disclosure Act," P.L. 1977, c. 419 (C. 45:22A-21 et seq.), such owner shall be liable to the former tenant in a civil action for three times the damages plus the tenant's attorney fees and costs. 

   b.   If an owner purchases the premises pursuant to a contract requiring the tenant to vacate in accordance with subsection l. of section 2 of P.L. 1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.1) and thereafter arbitrarily fails to personally occupy the premises for a total of at least six months, but instead permits personal occupancy of the premises by another tenant or instead permits registration of conversion of the premises by the Department of Community Affairs pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 419 (C. 45:22A-21 et seq.), such owner-purchaser shall be liable to the former tenant in a civil action for three times the damages plus the tenant's attorney fees and costs. 

   c.   If a tenant vacates a dwelling unit after notice has been given alleging that the owner seeks to permanently board up or demolish the premises or to retire permanently the premises from residential use pursuant to subsection g.(1) or h. of section 2 of P.L. 1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.1) and instead, within five years following the date on which the dwelling unit or the premises become vacant, an owner permits residential use of the vacated premises, the owner shall be liable to the former tenant in a civil action for three times the damages plus the tenant's attorney fees and costs of suit. 

   An owner of any premises where notice has been given pursuant to subsection g.(1) or h. of section 2 of P.L. 1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.1), who subsequently seeks to sell, lease or convey the property to another, shall, before executing any lease, deed or contract for such conveyance, advise in writing the prospective owner that such notice was given and that the owners of the property are subject to the liabilities provided in this subsection and sections 3 and 4 of this 1986 amendatory and supplementary act.  Whoever fails to so advise a prospective owner prior to the execution of the contract of sale, lease or conveyance is liable to a civil penalty of not less than $2,500.00 or more than $10,000.00 for each offense, and shall also be liable in treble damages, plus attorney fees and costs of suit, for any loss or expenses incurred by a new owner of the property as a result of that failure. The civil penalty prescribed in this subsection shall be collected and enforced by summary proceedings pursuant to "the penalty enforcement law" (N.J.S. 2A:58-1 et seq.).  The Superior Court, Law Division, Special Civil Part, in the county in which the rental premises are located shall have jurisdiction over such proceedings.  Process shall be in the nature of a summons or warrant, and shall issue upon the complaint of the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, the Attorney General, or any other person. 

   d.   If a tenant vacates a dwelling unit after receiving from an owner an eviction notice (1) purporting to compel by law the tenant to vacate the premises for cause or purporting that if the tenant does not vacate the premises, the tenant shall be compelled by law to vacate the premises for cause; and (2) using a cause that is clearly not provided by law or using a cause that is based upon a lease clause which is contrary to law pursuant to section 6 of P.L. 1975, c. 310 (C. 46:8-48); and (3) misrepresenting that, under the facts alleged, the tenant would be subject to eviction, the owner shall be liable to the former tenant in a civil action for three times the damages plus the tenant's attorney fees and costs.  An owner shall not be liable under this subsection for alleging any cause for eviction which, if proven, would subject the tenant to eviction pursuant to N.J.S. 2A:18-53 et seq. or P.L. 1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.1 et seq.). 

   In any action under this section the court shall, in addition to damages, award any other appropriate legal or equitable relief.  For the purposes of P.L. 1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.1 et seq.), the term "owner" includes, but is not limited to, lessee, successor owner and lessee, and other successors in interest. 

   e.   An owner shall not be liable for damages pursuant to this section or section 6 of this 1986 amendatory and supplementary act or subject to a more restrictive local ordinance adopted pursuant to section 8 of this 1986 amendatory and supplementary act if: 

   (1)  Title to the premises was transferred to that owner by means of a foreclosure sale, execution sale or bankruptcy sale; and 

   (2)   Prior to the foreclosure sale, execution sale or bankruptcy sale, the former tenant vacated the premises after receiving eviction notice from the former owner pursuant to subsection g.(1) or h. of section 2 of P.L. 1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.1); and 

   (3)  The former owner retains no financial interest, direct or indirect, in the premises.  The term "former owner" shall include, but not be limited to, any officer or board member of a corporation which was the former owner and any holder of more than 5% equity interest in any incorporated or unincorporated business entity that was the former owner; and 

   (4)  The former tenant is provided notice and rights in accordance with the provisions of section 6 of this 1986 amendatory and supplementary act. 

   L. 1975, c. 311, s. 3, eff. Feb. 19, 1976.  Amended by L. 1986, c. 138, s. 5, eff. Oct. 29, 1986. 

2A:18-61.7  Definitions.

	4.	As used in this act:
	a.	"Comparable housing or park site" means housing that is (1) decent, safe, sanitary, and in compliance with all local and State housing codes; (2) open to all persons regardless of race, creed, national origin, ancestry, marital status, or sex; and (3) provided with facilities equivalent to that provided by the landlord in the dwelling unit or park site in which the tenant then resides in regard to each of the following:  (a) apartment size including number of rooms or park site size, (b) rent range, (c) apartment's major kitchen and bathroom facilities, and (d) special facilities necessary for a person with a disability, or a person with an infirmity; (4) located in an area not less desirable than the area in which the tenant then resides in regard to each of the following:  (a) accessibility to the tenant's place of employment, (b) accessibility of community and commercial facilities, and (c) environmental quality and conditions; and (5) in accordance with additional reasonable criteria which the tenant has requested in writing at the time of making any request under this act.
	b.	"Condominium" means a condominium as defined in the "Condominium Act," P.L.1969, c.257 (C.46:8B-1 et seq.).
	c.	"Cooperative" means a housing corporation or association which entitles the holder of a share or membership interest thereof to possess and occupy for dwelling purposes a house, apartment, or other structure owned or leased by said corporation or association, or to lease or purchase a dwelling constructed or to be constructed by said corporation or association.
	d.	"Mobile home park" means any park, including a trailer park or camp, equipped to handle mobile homes sited on a year-round basis.

	L.1975, c.311, s.4; amended 1981, c.8, s.3; 2017, c.131, s.1

2A:18-61.8.  Conversion of multiple dwelling into condominium, cooperative or fee simple ownership;  notice to and rights to tenants
    Any owner who intends to convert a multiple dwelling as defined in P.L.1967,  c. 76 (C. 55:13A-1 et seq.), other than a hotel or motel, or a mobile home park  into a condominium or cooperative, or to fee simple ownership of the several  dwelling units or park sites shall give the tenants 60 days' notice of his  intention to convert and the full plan of the conversion prior to serving  notice, provided for in section 3 of P.L.1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.2).  A  duplicate of the first such 60-day notice and full plan shall be transmitted to  the clerk of the municipality at the same time. In the notice of intention to  convert tenants shall be notified of their right to purchase ownership in the  premises at a specified price in accordance with this section, and their other  rights as tenants under this act in relation to the conversion of a building or  park to a condominium, cooperative or fee simple ownership.  A tenant in occupancy at the time of the notice of intention to convert shall have the exclusive right to purchase his unit, the shares of stock allocated thereto or  the park site, as the case may be, for the first 90 days after such notice that  such purchase could be made during which time the unit or site shall not be  shown to a third party unless the tenant has in writing waived the right to  purchase.

     L.1975, c. 311, s. 5, eff. Feb. 19, 1976.  Amended by L.1981, c. 8, s. 4, eff.  Jan. 26, 1981.

2A:18-61.9.  Notice to tenant after master deed or agreement to establish cooperative
    Any owner who establishes with a person an initial tenancy after the master  deed or agreement establishing the cooperative was recorded shall provide to  such person at the time of applying for tenancy and at the time of establishing  any rental agreement a separate written statement as follows:

      "STATEMENT

     THIS BUILDING (PARK) IS BEING CONVERTED TO OR IS A CONDOMINIUM OR COOPERATIVE (OR FEE SIMPLE OWNERSHIP OF THE SEVERAL DWELLING UNITS OR PARK SITES).  YOUR TENANCY CAN BE TERMINATED UPON 60 DAYS' NOTICE IF YOUR APARTMENT (PARK SITE) IS SOLD TO A BUYER WHO SEEKS TO PERSONALLY OCCUPY IT. IF YOU MOVE OUT AS A RESULT OF RECEIVING SUCH A NOTICE, AND THE LANDLORD ARBITRARILY FAILS TO COMPLETE THE SALE, THE LANDLORD SHALL BE LIABLE FOR TREBLE DAMAGES AND COURT  COSTS."

    The parenthesized words shall be omitted or substituted for preceding words  where appropriate.  Such statement shall also be reproduced as the first clause  in any written lease provided to such person.

     L.1975, c. 311, s. 6, eff. Feb. 19, 1976.  Amended by L.1981, c. 8, s. 5, eff.  Jan. 26, 1981.

2A:18-61.10.  Removal of tenant to allow conversion to cooperative or condominium;  moving expense compensation
    Any tenant receiving notice under section 3 g. of P.L.1974, c. 49 who is not  evicted for any cause under this act other than under section 3 g. shall receive from the owner moving expense compensation of waiver of payment of 1 month's rent.

     L.1975, c. 311, s. 7, eff. Feb. 19, 1976.

2A:18-61.11.  Comparable housing;  offer of rental;  stay of eviction; alternative compensation;  senior citizens and disabled protected tenancy period
    a.  Tenants receiving notice under section 3 g. of P.L.1974, c. 49 may request of the landlord within 18 full months after receipt of such notice, and  the landlord shall offer to the tenant, personally or through an agent, the  rental of comparable housing or park site and a reasonable opportunity to examine and rent such comparable housing or park site.  In any proceeding under  subsection 2 k. of P.L.1974, c. 49 instituted following the expiration of  notice required under section 3 g. of P.L.1974, c. 49, the owner shall prove  that a tenant was offered such comparable housing or park site and provided  such reasonable opportunity to examine and rent such housing or park site as  requested pursuant to this section.  The court shall authorize 1-year stays of  eviction with reasonable rent increases until such time as the court is  satisfied that the tenant has been offered comparable housing or park site and  provided a reasonable opportunity to examine and rent such housing or park site  as requested pursuant to this section.  However, in no case shall more than  five such stays be granted.

    b.  The court shall automatically renew any 1-year stay of eviction in any case where the landlord failed to allege to the court within 1 year of a prior stay that the tenant was offered a reasonable opportunity to examine and rent comparable housing or park site within such prior year.

    c.  However the court shall not authorize any further stays at any time after one such stay has been authorized when the owner has also provided a tenant with hardship relocation compensation of waiver of payment of 5 months' rent.

    d.  On or after the effective date of the  "Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act,"  P.L. 1981, c.226 (C.2A:18-61.22 et seq.), notwithstanding the provisions of subsection a. of this section, where the court has jurisdiction pursuant to that subsection, whether by virtue of the authorization by the court of a stay of eviction or by virtue of any other proceedings required or instituted pursuant to P.L.1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.1 et seq.) or P.L.1975, c. 311 (C. 2A:18-61.6 et seq.), or in any action for declaratory judgment, the court may invoke some or all of the provisions of the   "Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act" and grant to a tenant,  pursuant to that amendatory and supplementary act, a protected tenancy period  upon the court's determination that:

    (1) The tenant would otherwise qualify as a senior citizen tenant or disabled tenant pursuant to that amendatory and supplementary act, except that the building or structure in which the dwelling unit is located was converted prior to the effective date of that amendatory and supplementary act;  and

    (2) The granting of the protected tenancy period as applied to the tenant, giving particular consideration to whether a unit was sold on or before the date that the amendatory and supplementary act takes effect to a bona fide individual purchaser who intended personally to occupy the unit, would not be violative of concepts of fundamental fairness or due process. Where a court declines to grant a protected tenancy status, it shall nevertheless order such hardships stays as authorized by subsections a. and b. of this section until comparable relocation housing is provided.  The hardship relocation compensation alternative of subsection c. of this section shall not be applicable in this situation.

     L.1975, c. 311, s. 8, eff. Feb. 19, 1976.  Amended by L.1981, c. 8, s. 6, eff.  Jan. 26, 1981;  L.1981, c. 226, s. 14, eff. July 27, 1981.

2A:18-61.12.  Rules and regulations
    In accordance with the  "Administrative Procedure Act"  (P.L.1968, c. 410, C. 52:14B-1 et seq.), the Department of Community Affairs shall adopt rules and  regulations setting forth procedures required to be followed by landlords in  providing tenants a reasonable opportunity to examine and rent comparable housing and setting forth procedures and content for information required to be  disclosed to tenants regarding such procedures, the rights and responsibilities  of tenants under this act, and the plans and proposals of landlords which may  affect any tenant in order to maximize tenants' ability to exercise rights  provided under this act.  Any rules and regulations adopted under this section  shall only be applicable to tenants and owners of a building or mobile home  park which is being, or is about to be converted from the rental market to a  condominium, cooperative or to fee simple ownership of the several dwelling  units or park sites, or to any mobile home park being permanently retired from  the rental market.

     L.1975, c. 311, s. 9, eff. Feb. 19, 1976.  Amended by L.1981, c. 8, s. 7, eff.  Jan. 26, 1981.

2A:18-61.16a.  Rent defined
     "Rent"  means the amount currently payable by the tenant to the landlord pursuant to lease or other agreement, without regard to any modification thereof by any authorized board or agency, or any court.

     L.1981, c. 495, s. 4; expired as a supplement to 1978,c.139 by operation of s.10 of 1978, c.139 as amended by 1984,c.177.

2A:18-61.22.  Short title
    This amendatory and supplementary act shall be known and may be cited as the   "Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act."

     L.1981, c. 226, s. 1, eff. July 27, 1981.

2A:18-61.23.  Legislative findings and declarations
    The Legislature finds that research studies have demonstrated that the forced eviction and relocation of elderly persons from their established homes and communities harm the mental and physical health of these senior citizens, and that these disruptions in the lives of older persons affect adversely the social, economic and cultural characteristics of communities of the State, and increase the costs borne by all State citizens in providing for their public health, safety and welfare.  These conditions are particularly serious in light  of the rising costs of home ownership, and are of increasing concern where  rental housing is converted into condominiums or cooperatives which senior  citizens on fixed limited incomes cannot afford, an occurrence which is  becoming more and more frequent in this State under prevailing economic circumstances.  The Legislature, therefore, declares that it is in the public interest of the State to avoid the forced eviction and relocation of senior citizen tenants wherever possible, specifically in those instances where rental  housing market conditions and particular financial circumstances combine to  diminish the ability of senior citizens to obtain satisfactory comparable  housing within their established communities, and where the eviction action is  the result not of any failure of the senior citizen tenant to abide by the  terms of a lease or rental agreement, but of the owner's decision  advantageously to dispose of residential property through the device of  conversion to a condominium or cooperative.

    The Legislature further finds that it is in the public interest of the State  to avoid the forced eviction and the displacement of the handicapped wherever  possible because of their limited mobility and the limited number of housing  units which are suitable for their needs.

    The Legislature further declares that in the service of this public interest  it is appropriate that qualified senior citizen tenants and disabled tenants be  accorded a period of protected tenancy, during which they shall be entitled to  the fair enjoyment of the dwelling unit within the converted residential  structure, to continue for such time, up to 40 years, as the conditions and  circumstances which make necessary such protected tenancy shall continue.

    The Legislature further finds that the promotion of this public interest is  possible only if senior citizen tenants and disabled tenants are protected during this period from alterations in the terms of the tenancy or rent increases which are the result solely of an owner's decision to convert.

     L.1981, c. 226, s. 2, eff. July 27, 1981.

2A:18-61.24. Definitions  
     As used in this amendatory and supplementary act:

  

    a.   "Senior citizen tenant" means a person who is at least 62 years of age on the date of the conversion recording for the building or structure in which is located the dwelling unit of which he is a tenant, or the surviving spouse of such a person if the person should die after the owner files the conversion recording and the surviving spouse is at least 50 years of age at the time of the filing; provided that the building or structure has been the principal residence of the senior citizen tenant or the spouse for at least one year immediately preceding the conversion recording or the death or that the building or structure is the principal residence of the senior citizen tenant or the spouse under the terms of a lease for a period of more than one year, as the case may be;  

    b.   "Disabled tenant" means a person who is, on the date of the conversion recording for the building or structure in which is located the dwelling unit of which he is a tenant, totally and permanently unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment, including blindness, or a person who has been honorably discharged or released under honorable circumstances from active service in any branch of the United States Armed Forces and who is rated as having a 60% disability or higher as a result of that service pursuant to any federal law administered by the United States Veterans' Act; provided that the building or structure has been the principal residence of the disabled tenant for at least one year immediately preceding the conversion recording or that the building or structure is the principal residence of the disabled tenant under the terms of a lease for a period of more than one year. For the purposes of this subsection, "blindness" means central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye with the use of correcting lens.  An eye which is accompanied by a limitation in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees shall be considered as having a central visual acuity of 20/200 or less;  

    c.   "Tenant's annual household income" means the total income from all sources during the last full calendar year for all members of the household who reside in the dwelling unit at the time the tenant applies for protected tenant status, whether or not such income is subject to taxation by any taxing authority;  

    d.   "Application for registration of conversion" means an application for registration filed with the Department of Community Affairs in accordance with "The Planned Real Estate Development Full Disclosure Act," P.L.1977, c.419 (C.45:22A-21 et seq.);  

    e.   "Registration of conversion" means an approval of an application for registration by the Department of Community Affairs in accordance with "The Planned Real Estate Development Full Disclosure Act," P.L.1977, c.419 (C.45:22A-21 et seq.);  

    f.   "Convert" means to convert one or more buildings or structures or a mobile home park containing in the aggregate not less than five dwelling units or mobile home sites or pads from residential rental use to condominium, cooperative, planned residential development or separable fee simple ownership of the dwelling units or of the mobile home sites or pads;  

    g.   "Conversion recording" means the recording with the appropriate county officer of a master deed for condominium or a deed to a cooperative corporation for a cooperative or the first deed of sale to a purchaser of an individual unit for a planned residential development or separable fee simple ownership of the dwelling units;  

    h.   "Protected tenancy period" means, except as otherwise provided in section 11 of this amendatory and supplementary act, the 40 years following the conversion recording for the building or structure in which is located the dwelling unit of the senior citizen tenant or disabled tenant.  

    L.1981,c.226,s.3; amended 1981, c.445, s.1; 1983,c.389,s.1; 1990,c.110,s.1; 1990,c.111,s.1.  

2A:18-61.25.  Protected tenancy status;  conversion of dwelling unit of eligible senior citizen or disabled tenant
    Each eligible senior citizen tenant or disabled tenant shall be granted a protected tenancy status with respect to his dwelling unit whenever the building or structure in which that unit is located shall be converted.  The protected tenancy status shall be granted upon proper application and qualification pursuant to the provisions of this amendatory and supplementary act.

     L.1981, c. 226, s. 4, eff. July 27, 1981.

2A:18-61.26.  Administrative agency
    The governing body of the municipality may authorize a municipal board, agency or officer to act as its administrative agency for the purposes of this amendatory and supplementary act or may enter into a contractual agreement with  a county office on aging or a similar agency to act as its administrative  agency for purposes of this amendatory and supplementary act. In the absence  of such authorization or contractual agreement, this amendatory and  supplementary act shall be administered by a municipal board whose principal  responsibility concerns the regulation of residential rents or, if no such  board exists, by the municipal clerk.

     L.1981, c. 226, s. 5, eff. July 27, 1981.

2A:18-61.27. Notice to tenants  
     The owner of any building or structure who, after the effective date of this amendatory and supplementary act, seeks to convert any premises, shall, prior to his filing of the application for registration of conversion with the Department of Community Affairs, notify the administrative agency or officer responsible for administering this amendatory and supplementary act of his intention to so file.  The owner shall supply the agency or officer with a list of every tenant residing in the premises, with stamped envelopes addressed to each tenant and with sufficient copies of the notice to tenants and application form for protected tenancy status.  Within 10 days thereafter, the administrative agency or officer shall notify each residential tenant in writing of the owner's intention and of the applicability of the provisions of this amendatory and supplementary act and shall provide him with a written application form.  The agency's or officer's notice shall be substantially in the following form:  

                                 "NOTICE

  

    THE OWNER OF YOUR APARTMENT HAS NOTIFIED ............................................ (insert name of municipality) OF HIS INTENTION TO CONVERT TO A CONDOMINIUM OR COOPERATIVE. THE LEGISLATURE HAS PROVIDED THAT, IF YOU ARE A SENIOR CITIZEN, 62 YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER, OR DISABLED, YOU MAY BE ENTITLED TO A PROTECTED TENANCY PERIOD. PROTECTED TENANCY MEANS THAT YOU CANNOT BE EVICTED BECAUSE OF THE CONVERSION. YOU MAY BE ELIGIBLE:  

    (1)  IF YOU ARE 62, OR WILL SOON BE 62, OR IF YOU ARE DISABLED; AND

  

    (2)  IF YOU HAVE LIVED IN YOUR APARTMENT FOR AT LEAST ONE YEAR OR IF THE LEASE ON YOUR APARTMENT IS FOR A PERIOD OF MORE THAN ONE YEAR; AND

  

    (3)  IF YOUR HOUSEHOLD INCOME IS LESS THAN ............................ (insert current income figure for county as established by Section 7c. of this amendatory and supplementary act).  

    IF YOU WISH THIS PROTECTION, SEND IN THE APPLICATION FORM BY .............................. (insert date 60 days after municipality's mailing) TO THE .............................. (insert name and address of administrative agency). FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CALL ................................... (insert phone number of administrative agency) OR .................................. (insert phone number of Department of Community Affairs).  

    IF YOU DO NOT APPLY YOU CAN BE EVICTED BY YOUR LANDLORD UPON PROPER NOTICE."

  

    The Department of Community Affairs shall not accept any application for registration of conversion for any building or structure unless included in the application is proof that the agency or officer notified the tenants prior to the application for registration.  The proof shall be by affidavit or in such other form as the department shall require.  

    L.1981,c.226,s.6; amended 1987,c.287,s.1; 1990,c.110,s.2.  

2A:18-61.28. Eligibility for protected tenancy status  
     Within 30 days after receipt of an application for protected tenancy status by a tenant, the administrative agency or officer shall make a determination of eligibility.  It shall send written notice of eligibility to each senior citizen tenant or disabled tenant who:  

    a.   Applied therefor on or before the date of registration of conversion by the Department of Community Affairs; and  

    b.   Qualifies as an eligible senior citizen tenant or disabled tenant pursuant to this amendatory and supplementary act; and  

    c.   Has an annual household income that does not exceed an amount equal to three times the county per capita personal income, as last reported by the Department of Labor and Industry on the basis of the U.S. Department of Commerce's Bureau of Economic Analysis data, or $50,000.00, whichever is greater; and  

    d.   Has occupied the premises as his principal residence for at least one year or has a lease on the premises for a period longer than one year.  

    The department shall adjust the county per capita personal income to be used in subsection c. of this section if there is a difference of one or more years between (1) the year in which the last reported county per capita personal income was based and (2) the last year in which the tenant's annual household income is based.  The county per capita personal income shall be adjusted by the department by an amount equal to the number of years of the difference above times the average increase or decrease in the county per capita personal income for three years, including in the calculation the current year reported and the three immediately preceding years.  

    The administrative agency or officer shall likewise send a notice of denial with reasons to any tenant whom it determines to be ineligible. The owner shall be notified of those tenants who are determined to be eligible and ineligible.  

    The administrative agency or officer may require that the application include such documents and information as may be necessary to establish that the tenant is eligible for a protected tenancy status under the provisions of this amendatory and supplementary act and shall require such application to be submitted under oath.  The Department of Community Affairs may by regulation adopt forms for application for protected tenancy status and notification of eligibility or ineligibility or adopt such other regulations for the procedure of determining eligibility as it determines are necessary.  

    L.1981,c.226,s.7; amended 1987,c.287,s.2; 1990,c.110,s.3.  

2A:18-61.29.  Registration of conversion;  approval after proof of notice of  eligibility to tenants
    No registration of conversion shall be approved until the Department of Community Affairs receives proof that the administrative agency or officer has made determinations and notified all tenants who applied for protected tenancy status within the initial 60-day period of their eligibility or lack of eligibility.  The proof shall be by affidavit or in such other form as the department may require.

    The department may grant registrations of conversion for applications pending on the effective date of this amendatory and supplementary act upon the  implementation of a procedure whereby any eligible tenant may make application  for protected tenancy status in a manner comparable to that specified in  sections 6 and 7 of this amendatory and supplementary act.

     L.1981, c. 226, s. 8, eff. July 27, 1981.

2A:18-61.30.  Protected tenancy status;  applicability after notice of eligibility and filing of conversion recording
    Protected tenancy status shall not be applicable to any eligible tenant until such time as the owner has filed his conversion recording.  The protected  tenancy status shall automatically apply as soon as a tenant receives notice of  eligibility and the landlord files his conversion recording.  The conversion  recording shall not be filed until after the registration of conversion.

     L.1981, c. 226, s. 9, eff. July 27, 1981.

2A:18-61.31. Rent increase restrictions 
    In a municipality which does not have a rent control ordinance in effect, no evidence of increased costs which are solely the result of the conversion, including but not limited to any increase in financing or carrying costs, and which do not add services or amenities not previously provided shall be used as a basis to establish the reasonableness of a rent increase under section 2f. of P.L. 1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.1). 

   In a municipality which has a rent control ordinance in effect, a rent increase for a tenant with a protected tenancy status, or for any tenant to whom notice of termination pursuant to section 3g. of P.L. 1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.2) has been given, shall not exceed the increase authorized by the ordinance for rent controlled units.  Increased costs which are solely the result of a conversion, including but not limited to any increase in financing or carrying costs, and which do not add services or amenities not previously provided shall not be passed directly through to these tenants as surcharges or pass-throughs on the rent, shall not be used as the basis for a rent increase, and shall not be used as a basis for an increase in a fair return or hardship hearing before a municipal rent board or on any appeal from such determination. 

   L. 1981, c. 226, s. 10; amended by L. 1987, c. 287, s. 3. 

2A:18-61.32. Termination of protected tenancy  
    11.  The administrative agency or officer shall terminate the protected tenancy status immediately upon finding that:  

   a.   The dwelling unit is no longer the principal residence of the senior citizen tenant or disabled tenant; or  

   b.   The tenant's annual household income, or the average of the tenant's annual household income for the current year, computed on an annual basis, and the tenant's annual household income for the two preceding years, whichever is less, exceeds an amount equal to three times the county per capita personal income, as last reported by the Department of Labor and Industry on the basis of the U.S. Department of Commerce's Bureau of Economic Analysis data, or $50,000.00, whichever is greater.  

   The department shall adjust the county per capita personal income to be used in subsection b. of this section if there is a difference of one or more years between (1) the year in which the last reported county per capita personal income was based and (2) the last year in which the tenant's annual household income is based.  The county per capita personal income shall be adjusted by the department by an amount equal to the number of years of the difference above times the average increase or decrease in the county per capita personal income for three years, including in the calculation the current year reported and the three immediately preceding years.  

   Upon the termination of the protected tenancy status by the administrative agency or officer, the senior citizen tenant or disabled tenant may be removed from the dwelling unit pursuant to P.L.1974, c.49 (C.2A:18-61.1 et al.), except that all notice and other times set forth therein shall be calculated and extend from the date of the expiration or termination of the protected tenancy period, or the date of the expiration of the last lease entered into with the senior citizen tenant or disabled tenant during the protected tenancy period, whichever shall be later.  

   If the administrative agency determines pursuant to this section that a tenant is no longer qualified for protected tenancy under this act, the administrative agency shall proceed to determine the eligibility of that tenant under the "Tenant Protection Act of 1992," P.L.1991, c.509 (C.2A:18-61.40 et al.), or, in any case in which the administrative agency is not the same as the agency administering that other act in the municipality, refer the case to the appropriate administrative agency for such determination.  If the tenant is found to be eligible under the "Tenant Protection Act of 1992," P.L.1991, c.509 (C.2A:18-61.40 et al.), his protected tenancy status shall be continued.  The protected tenancy status of the tenant shall remain in full force pending such determination.  

   L.1981,c.226,s.11; amended 1987,c.287,s.4; 1991,c.509,s.23.  

2A:18-61.33.  Termination upon purchase of unit by senior citizen or disabled tenant
    In the event that a senior citizen tenant or disabled tenant purchases the dwelling unit he occupies, the protected tenancy status shall terminate immediately upon purchase.

     L.1981, c. 226, s. 12, eff. July 27, 1981.

2A:18-61.34.  Informing prospective purchaser of act;  contract or agreement  for sale;  clause informing of application of act and acknowledgment by  purchaser
    Any public offering statement for a conversion as required by  "The Planned  Real Estate Development Full Disclosure Act,"  P.L.1977, c. 419 (C. 45:22A-21  et seq.), shall clearly inform the prospective purchaser of the provisions of  this amendatory and supplementary act, including, but not limited to, the  provisions concerning eviction, rent increases and leases. Any contract or  agreement for sale of a converted unit shall contain a clause in 10-point bold  type or larger that the contract is subject to the terms of this amendatory and  supplementary act concerning eviction and rent increases and an acknowledgement  that the purchaser has been informed of these terms.

     L.1981, c. 226, s. 15, eff. July 27, 1981.

2A:18-61.35.  Fee
    A municipality is authorized to charge an owner a fee which may vary according to the size of the building to cover the cost of providing the services required by this amendatory and supplementary act.

     L.1981, c. 226, s. 16, eff. July 27, 1981.

2A:18-61.36.  Agreement by tenant to waive rights;  deemed against public policy and unenforceable
    Any agreement whereby the tenant waives any rights under P.L.1981, c. 226 (C. 2A:18-61.22 et seq.) on or after the effective date of this 1983 amendatory  act shall be deemed to be against public policy and unenforceable.

     L.1981, c. 226, s. 17, eff. July 27, 1981.  Amended by L.1983, c. 389, s. 2, eff. Dec. 2, 1983.

2A:18-61.37.  Severability
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or other part of this amendatory and supplementary act is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this act, but shall be confined in its effect to the section, subsection, paragraph, sentence  or other part of this act directly involved in the controversy in which said  judgment shall have been rendered.

     L.1981, c. 226, s. 18, eff. July 27, 1981.

2A:18-61.38.  Rules and regulations
    The Department of Community Affairs is authorized to adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this amendatory and supplementary act.

     L.1981, c. 226, s. 19, eff. July 27, 1981.

2A:18-61.39.  Liberal construction of act
    This amendatory and supplementary act shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes thereof.

     L.1981, c. 226, s. 20, eff. July 27, 1981.

2A:18-61.40. Short title  
     1.   This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Tenant Protection Act of 1992."  

    L.1991,c.509,s.1.  

2A:18-61.41  Findings, declarations.
	2. a. The Legislature finds that the provision and maintenance of an adequate supply of housing affordable to persons of low and moderate income in this State has been and is becoming increasingly difficult as a result of economic and market forces which require special public actions or subsidies to counteract. 
 
	b.	One particularly acute result of these forces has been the continual increase in the number of displaced or homeless persons who, lacking permanent shelter, require special assistance from public services in this State and in surrounding states in order to remain alive. 
 
	c.	The Legislature has taken various actions to increase the supply of affordable housing in the State.  However, it also is necessary to protect residential tenants, particularly those of advanced age or disability, or lower economic status, from the effects of eviction from affordable housing in recognition of the high costs, both financial and social, to the public of displacement from affordable housing and of homelessness.  
 
	d.	The Legislature recognizes that the eviction of residential tenants pursuant to the process of conversion of residential premises to condominiums or cooperatives exacerbates homelessness and makes more difficult the maintenance of an adequate supply of low and moderate income housing.  
 
	e.	The Legislature, therefore, declares that it is in the public interest to establish a tenant protection program specifically designed to provide protection to residential tenants, particularly the aged and disabled and those of low and moderate income, from eviction resulting from condominium or cooperative conversion.  
 
	f.	Despite its laudable objectives, the Legislature finds that the "Tenant Protection Act of 1992," P.L.1991, c.509 (C.2A:18-61.40 et al.) has yet to adequately preserve the supply of affordable housing in certain municipalities in which condominium and cooperative conversions have been especially common.  Accordingly, the Legislature also finds that condominium and cooperative conversions remove affordable rental housing from the market.  
 
	g.	In the public interest of preserving affordable housing, the Legislature therefore declares that qualified municipalities may prohibit the conversion of affordable rental housing units. 
 
	L.1991, c.509, s.2; amended 2020, c.40, s.1.

2A:18-61.42  Definitions.
 	3.	As used in this act:

	"Administrative agency" means the municipal board, officer or agency designated, or the county agency contracted with, pursuant to section 6 of this act.  
 
	"Affordable rental housing unit" means a rental housing unit that is subject to a rent control ordinance.
 
	"Annual household income" means the total income from all sources during the last full calendar year, or the annual average of that total income during the last two calendar years, whichever is less, of a tenant and all members of the household who are residing in the tenant's dwelling unit when the tenant applies for protected tenancy, whether or not such income is subject to taxation by any taxing authority.  
 
	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
 
	"Conversion" means conversion as defined in section 3 of "The Planned Real Estate Development Full Disclosure Act," P.L.1977, c.419 (C.45:22A-23).  
 
	"Conversion recording" means the recording with the appropriate county officer of a master deed for a condominium or a deed to a cooperative corporation for a planned residential development or separable fee simple ownership of the dwelling units.  
 
	"County rental housing shortage" means a certification issued by the Commissioner of Community Affairs that there has occurred a significant decline in the availability of rental dwelling units in the county due to conversions; provided, however, that the commissioner shall not issue any such certification unless during the immediately preceding 10-year period:  
 
	a.	The aggregate number of rental units subject to registrations of conversion during any three consecutive years in the county exceeds 10,000; and  
 
	b.	The aggregate number of rental units subject to registrations of conversion in at least one of those three years exceeds 5,000.  
 
	"Department" means the Department of Community Affairs.
 
	"Index" means the annual average over a 12-month period beginning September 1 and ending August 31 of the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W), All Items Series A, of the United States Department of Labor (1957-1959 = 100), for either the New York, NY-Northeastern New Jersey or the Philadelphia, PA-New Jersey region, according as either shall have been determined by the commissioner to be applicable in the locality of a property undergoing conversion.  
 
	"Protected tenancy period" means, except as otherwise provided in section 11 of this act, all that time following the conversion recording for a building or structure during which a qualified tenant in that building or structure continues to be a qualified tenant and continues to occupy a dwelling unit therein as his principal residence.  
 
	"Qualified county" means:
 
	a.	Any county with a population in excess of 500,000 and a population density in excess of 8,500 per square mile, according to the most recent federal decennial census; or  
 
	b.	Any county wherein there exists a county rental housing shortage.
 
	"Qualified municipality" means any municipality with a population density in excess of 25,000 per square mile, according to the most recent federal decennial census, and which has adopted a rent control ordinance.
 
	"Qualified tenant" means a tenant who is a resident in a qualified county and:
 
	(1)	Applied for protected tenancy status on or before the date of registration of conversion by the department, or within one year of the effective date of P.L.1991, c.509 (C.2A:18-61.40 et al.), whichever is later; 
 
	(2)	Has occupied the premises as his principal residence for at least 12 consecutive months next preceding the date of application; and 
 
	(3)	Has an annual household income that does not at the time of application exceed the maximum qualifying income as determined pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1991, c.509 (C.2A:18-61.43), except that this income limitation shall not apply to any tenant who is age 75 or more years or is disabled within the meaning of section 3 of P.L.1981, c.226 (C.2A:18-61.24). 
 
	"Registration of conversion" means an approval of an application for registration by the department in accordance with "The Planned Real Estate Development Full Disclosure Act," P.L.1977, c.419 (C.45:22A-21 et seq.). 
 
	"Tenant in need of comparable housing" means a tenant who is not a qualified tenant under P.L.1991, c.509 (C.2A:18-61.40 et al.) and is not eligible for protected tenancy under the "Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act," P.L.1981, c.226 (C.2A:18-61.22 et al.). 
 
	L.1991, c.509, s.3; amended 2020, c.40, s.2.

2A:18-61.43.   Maximum qualifying income, adjustment  
   4.     As of the effective date of this act, maximum qualifying income for the purpose of determining qualified tenant status as defined in section 3 of this act shall be  in the case of a household comprising one person, $31,400; two persons, $38,500; three persons, $44,800; four persons, $50,300; five persons, $55,000; six persons, $58,900; seven persons, $62,000; eight or more persons, $64,300.  In the case of any application for protected tenancy filed more than one year from the effective date of this act, and upon any occasion when termination of a previously granted protected tenancy is sought pursuant to section 11 of this act upon the grounds set forth in paragraph (2) of subsection a. of that section, these figures shall be adjusted by the percentage change, if any, in the applicable index that has occurred since the effective date of this act.  

  L.1991,c.509,s.4.  

2A:18-61.44.   Protected tenancy, qualification, duration  
   5. a.  Each qualified tenant shall be granted a protected tenancy status with respect to his dwelling unit upon conversion of the building or structure in which the unit is located.  The protected tenancy status shall be granted upon proper application and qualification pursuant to the provisions of this act.  

  b.     Each qualified tenant in need of comparable housing shall be entitled to remain in his dwelling unit upon conversion of the building or structure in which the unit is located until the owner of the building or structure has complied with the provisions of P.L.1975, c.311 (C.2A:18-61.7 et al.).  

  L.1991,c.509,s.5.  

2A:18-61.45.   Designation of administrative agency  
   6.     Each municipal governing body in a qualified county shall designate a municipal board, agency or officer to act as its administrative agency for the purposes of this act or may enter into a contractual agreement with an appropriate county to act as its administrative agency for purposes of this act.  In the absence of such authorization or contractual agreement, this act shall be administered by the board, agency or officer administering the provisions of the "Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act," P.L.1981, c.226 (C.2A:18-61.22 et al.) in the municipality.  

  L.1991,c.509,s.6.  

2A:18-61.46.   Notice, etc. required of owner seeking to convert, notice to tenants  
   7.     The owner of any building or structure in a qualified county who seeks to convert any premises shall notify the administrative agency of that intention prior to filing the application for registration of conversion with the department.  The owner shall supply the administrative agency with a list of every tenant residing in the premises, with stamped envelopes addressed to each tenant and with sufficient copies of the notice to tenants and application form for protected tenancy status.  Within 10 days thereafter, the administrative agency shall notify each residential tenant in writing of the owner's intention and of the applicability of the provisions of this act and shall provide him with a written application form.  The agency's notice shall be substantially in the following form:  

                               "NOTICE  

  THE OWNER OF YOUR APARTMENT HAS NOTIFIED ................................ (insert name of municipality) OF HIS INTENTION TO CONVERT TO A CONDOMINIUM OR COOPERATIVE.  

  UNDER STATE LAW YOU MAY BE ENTITLED TO A PROTECTED TENANCY.

  

  PROTECTED TENANCY MEANS THAT YOU CANNOT BE EVICTED BECAUSE OF THE CONVERSION.  

  YOU MAY BE QUALIFIED:

  

  (1)    IF YOU HAVE LIVED IN YOUR APARTMENT FOR A YEAR AND

  

  (2)    IF YOUR HOUSEHOLD INCOME IS LESS THAN ............................................. (insert current maximum qualifying income established under section 3 of this act), OR  

  YOU ARE DISABLED OR ARE AT LEAST 75 YEARS OLD.

  

  IF YOU THINK YOU MAY QUALIFY, SEND IN THE APPLICATION FORM BY ....................... (insert date 60 days after municipality's mailing)  

  TO THE ............................................. (insert name and address of administrative agency)  

  EVEN IF YOU DO NOT QUALIFY, YOU HAVE THE RIGHT TO REMAIN IN YOUR APARTMENT UNTIL YOUR LANDLORD HAS COMPLIED WITH LAWS REGARDING THE OFFER OF COMPARABLE HOUSING.  

  FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CALL................... (insert phone number of administrative agency)  

  OR .............................................." (insert phone number of Department of Community Affairs)  

  The department shall not accept any application for registration of conversion for any building or structure unless included in the application is proof that the administrative agency notified the tenants prior to the application for registration.  The proof shall be by affidavit or in such other form as the department shall require.  

  In any municipality where the administrative agency is the same as the agency administering the "Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act," P.L.1981, c.226 (C.2A:18-61.22 et al.), the notices required under that act and this act may be combined in a single mailing.  

  L.1991,c.509,s.7.  

2A:18-61.47.   Determining tenants' qualifications  
   8.     Within 30 days after receipt of an application for the protected tenancy status authorized under the provisions of this act, the administrative agency shall make a determination of qualification.  It shall send written notice of qualification to each tenant who is a resident of the qualified county and:  

  a.     applied on or before the date of registration of conversion by the department, or within one year from the effective date of this act, whichever is later; and,  

  b.     has an annual household income that does not exceed the maximum amount permitted for qualification, or is exempt from that income limitation by reason of age or disability; and,  

  c.     has occupied the premises as his principal residence for at least 12 consecutive months next preceding the date of application.  

  The administrative agency shall likewise send a notice of denial, with reasons therefor, to any tenant whom it determines not to be qualified.  That notice shall inform the tenant of his right to remain in his dwelling unit until the owner shall have complied with the requirements of P.L.1975, c.311 (C.2A:18-61.7 et al.) and shall include an explanation of the meaning of "comparable housing" as used in that act.  The owner shall be notified of those tenants who are determined to be qualified and unqualified.  

  The administrative agency may require that the application include such documents and information as may be necessary to establish that the tenant is qualified for a protected tenancy status under the provisions of this act and shall require that such documentation and information be submitted under oath. The commissioner may by regulation adopt uniform forms to used in applying for protected tenancy status, for notifying an applicant of qualification or denial thereof, and conveying to a denied applicant the information concerning his rights to continued tenancy and offer of comparable housing; he may also adopt such other regulations for the procedure of determining qualification as he deems necessary or expedient to the proper effectuation of the provisions and purposes of this act.  

  L.1991,c.509,s.8.  

2A:18-61.48  Requirements for registration of conversion for building, structure.
	9.	In addition to the limitations set forth in section 4 of P.L.2020, c.40 (C.2A:18-61.48a), a registration of conversion for a building or structure located in a qualified county shall not be approved until the department receives proof that the provisions of section 8 of P.L.1991, c.509 (C.2A:18-61.47) have been complied with, and that notification as required in section 8 of P.L.1991, c.509 (C.2A:18A-61.47) has been made to all tenants who filed application for protected tenancy status on or before the application deadline prescribed in the notice given pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1991, c.509 (C.2A:18-61.46). The proof shall be by affidavit or in such form as the department may require.
 
	L.1991, c.509, s.9; amended 2020, c.40, s.3.

2A:18-61.48a  Prohibition of conversion of affordable rental housing unit to condominium, cooperative form of ownership.
	4. a. A qualified municipality may, by ordinance, prohibit the conversion of any affordable rental housing unit to a condominium or cooperative form of ownership.  Upon the adoption of the ordinance to prohibit the conversion of affordable rental housing units, the prohibition shall remain in effect until such time as the governing body adopts a resolution to suspend the prohibition, as set forth in paragraph 3 of this subsection.  An ordinance to prohibit the conversion of affordable rental housing units shall: 
 
	(1)	recognize a shortage of affordable rental housing within the municipality and the public need to prevent the loss of affordable rental housing units through conversions; 
 
	(2)	establish criteria to determine the minimum number of affordable rental housing units required in the municipality.  The criteria may include, but not be limited to, the vacancy rate of affordable rental housing units, the proportion of affordable rental housing units to total housing units, the proportion of existing affordable housing units to condominium and cooperative units, or any other consideration that the governing body may deem appropriate; and 
 
	(3)	provide for the suspension of the prohibition, by resolution, upon finding that the criteria established pursuant to paragraph 2 of this subsection have been met.  If after adopting a resolution to suspend the prohibition, the governing body of the qualified municipality finds that the criteria established pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection are no longer met, then the governing body may, by resolution, reinstate the prohibition.  
 
	b.	The governing body of a qualified municipality shall transmit any ordinance or resolution adopted pursuant to subsection a. of this section to the department within five days of adoption.  
 
	c.	Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule, or regulation to the contrary, the department shall not approve an application for registration for the conversion of any affordable rental housing unit located in a qualified municipality during such time as the ordinance adopted pursuant to subsection a. of this section remains in effect.  
 
	d.	Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule, or regulation to the contrary, any application for registration of conversion, notice of intention to convert, full plan of conversion, public offering statement, or other required documentation submitted pursuant to any law or regulation, including but not limited to, P.L.1991, c.509 (C.2A:18-61.40 et al.), P.L.1981, c.226 (C.2A:18-61.22 et al.), P.L.1974, c.49 (C.2A:18-61.1 et al.), or P.L.1977, c.419 (C.45:22A-21 et seq.), and that is associated with the conversion of any affordable rental housing unit located in a qualified municipality, shall be deemed null and void if submitted to the department, designated administrative agency, or tenant during such time as the ordinance adopted pursuant to subsection a. of this section remains in effect.  
 
	L.2020, c.40, s.4.

2A:18-61.49.   Applicability of protected tenancy  
   10.    The protected tenancy status authorized under the provisions of this act shall not be applicable to any qualified tenant until such time as the owner has filed his conversion recording.  The protected tenancy status shall automatically apply as soon as a tenant receives notice of qualification and the landlord files his conversion recording.  The conversion recording shall not be filed until after the registration of conversion.  

  L.1991,c.509,s.10.  

2A:18-61.50.   Termination of protected tenancy  
   11. a. The administrative agency shall terminate the protected tenancy status authorized under the provisions of this act immediately upon finding that:  

  (1)    the dwelling unit is no longer the principal residence of the tenant, or

  

  (2)    the tenant's annual household income exceeds the maximum amount permitted for qualification.  

  b.     Upon presentation to the administrative agency of credible evidence that a tenant is no longer qualified for protected tenancy status under this act, the administrative agency shall proceed, in accordance with such regulations and procedures as the department shall adopt and prescribe for use in such cases, to investigate and make a determination as to the continuance of that status.  

  c.     Upon the termination of the protected tenancy status by the administrative agency, the tenant may be removed from the dwelling unit pursuant to P.L.1974, c.49 (C.2A:18-61.1 et al.), except that all notice and other times set forth therein shall be calculated and extend from the date of the expiration or termination of the protected tenancy period, or the date of the expiration of the last lease entered into with the tenant during the protected tenancy period, whichever shall be later.  

  d.     Any protection afforded to a person under the "Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act," P.L.1981, c.226 (C.2A:18-61.22 et al.) shall remain in full force and effect.  If the administrative agency determines that a tenant is no longer qualified for protected tenancy under that act, the administrative agency shall proceed to determine the eligibility of that tenant under the "Tenant Protection Act of 1992," P.L.1991, c.509 (C.2A:18-61.40 et al.), or, in any case in which the administrative agency is not the same as the agency administering the "Tenant Protection Act of 1992" in the municipality, shall refer the case to the appropriate administrative agency for such determination.  If the tenant is found by such determination to be eligible, his protected tenancy status shall be continued.  The protected tenancy status of the tenant shall remain in full force pending such determination.  

  L.1991,c.509,s.11.  

2A:18-61.51.   Tenancy protection terminated by tenant purchase  
   12.    In the event that a qualified tenant purchases the dwelling unit he occupies, the protected tenancy status afforded under the provisions of this act shall terminate immediately upon purchase.  

  L.1991,c.509,s.12.  

2A:18-61.52.   Costs of conversion no basis for rent increases  
   13. a. In the case of a municipality subject to the provisions of this act that does not have a rent control ordinance in effect, no evidence of increased costs that are solely the result of the conversion, including but not limited to any increase in financing or carrying costs, and do not add services or amenities not previously provided shall be used as a basis to establish the reasonableness of a rent increase under subsection f. of section 2 of P.L.1974, c.49 (C.2A:18-61.1).  

  b.     In the case of a municipality subject to the provisions of this act that has a rent control ordinance in effect, a rent increase for a qualified tenant with a protected tenancy status, or for any tenant to whom notice of termination pursuant to subsection g. of section 3 of P.L.1974, c.49 (C.2A:18-61.2) has been given, shall not exceed the increase authorized by the ordinance for rent-controlled units.  Increased costs that are solely the result of a conversion, including but not limited to any increase in financing or carrying costs, and do not add services or amenities not previously provided shall not be used as a basis for an increase in a fair-return or hardship hearing before a municipal rent board or on any appeal from such determination.  

  L.1991,c.509,s.13.  

2A:18-61.53.   Public offering statements, requisites  
   14.    In the case of a building or structure located in a qualified county, the public offering statement for a conversion as required by "The Planned Real Estate Development Full Disclosure Act," P.L.1977, c.419 (C.45:22A-21 et seq.), shall clearly inform the prospective purchaser of the provisions of this act regarding the protection of qualified tenants and tenants in need of comparable housing.  Any contract or agreement for sale of a converted unit shall contain a clause in 10-point bold type or larger that the contract is subject to the terms of this act concerning such tenant protection and an acknowledgement that the purchaser has been informed of these terms.  

  L.1991,c.509,s.14.  

2A:18-61.54.   Municipal fees  
   15.    A municipality located in a qualified county is authorized to charge an owner a fee which may vary according to the size of the building to cover the cost of providing the services required by this act.  

  L.1991,c.509,s.15.  

2A:18-61.55.   Tenant waivers, unenforceable  
   16.    Any agreement whereby the tenant waives any rights under this act shall be deemed to be against public policy and unenforceable.  

  L.1991,c.509,s.16.  

2A:18-61.56.   Actions against qualified tenants, limitations  
   17.    For one year from the effective date of this act, no action for removal of a qualified tenant shall be instituted, no judgment shall be entered against a qualified tenant based upon a previously instituted action, and no qualified tenant shall be removed from his dwelling unit by a landlord, on the basis of the conversion of the premises.  The owner of any residential premises located in a qualified county who, prior to that date, has registered those residential premises for conversion or applied for such registration shall comply with the provisions of this act, and the tenants residing in those premises shall be entitled to the protections extended under this act as if the registration or application for registration had not so occurred prior to that date.  However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any residential unit for which a conversion was registered prior to March 4, 1991 if the unit was sold to a bona fide individual purchaser prior to that date and that purchaser intends to personally occupy the unit as his principal residence.  

  L.1991,c.509,s.17.  

2A:18-61.57.   Removal for good cause  
   18.    Nothing in this act shall be deemed to prevent a court from removing a tenant, qualified tenant or tenant in need of comparable housing from a dwelling unit located in a qualified county for good cause shown not to be related to conversion of the building or structure to a condominium or cooperative.  

  L.1991,c.509,s.18.  

2A:18-61.58.   Severability  
   24.    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or other part of this act is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this act, but shall be confined in its effect to the section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or other part of this act directly involved in the controversy in which the judgment shall have been rendered.  

  L.1991,c.509,s.24.  

2A:18-61.59.   Rules, regulations  
   25.    The commissioner is authorized to adopt, in accordance with the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this act, including but not limited to, the prescribing of administrative and notification procedures which integrate the procedural requirements of this act with those of P.L.1981, c.226 (C.2A:18-61.22 et al.) in order to facilitate the efficient administration of both acts.  

  L.1991,c.509,s.25.  

2A:18-61.60 Tenants' organization permitted to accept billing for utility.

	1.	Whenever an electric, gas, water or sewer public utility has provided written notice to tenants residing in rental premises of a proposed discontinuance of service and the tenants so notified have indicated a desire to continue service, but the utility has determined that it would not be feasible to bill each tenant individually for the service, the utility shall permit a tenants' organization representing each tenant of the rental premises to accept billing for the utility including the periodic billing for current charges, and a statement of any arrearage which is unpaid by the landlord for service previously supplied by the utility, and shall continue providing the service to the premises provided that payment is received.

	L.2000,c.113,s.1.

2A:18-61.61  Deduction of certain utility costs from rental payment.

	2.	Whenever a tenants' organization agrees to accept billing for a utility service, the tenants comprising the membership of the organization accepting and paying such billing shall be permitted to deduct from each of their respective rental payments to the landlord of the premises an amount corresponding to the tenant's contribution towards the currently due utility payment and the arrearage, if any, owed by the landlord, provided that any contribution by a tenant to the arrearage shall not exceed 15 percent of the tenant's rental payment which would have been payable to the landlord, but for the contribution.

	L.2000,c.113,s.2.

2A:18-61.62  Issuance of "Notice of Rent Protection Emergency."

	1.	The Governor shall be empowered, whenever declaring a state of emergency, to determine whether the emergency will, or is likely to, significantly affect the availability and pricing of rental housing in the areas included in the declaration.  If the Governor determines that unconscionable rental practices are likely to occur unless the protections afforded under P.L.2002, c.133 (C.2A:18-61.62 et seq.) are invoked, the Governor may issue a "Notice of Rent Protection Emergency" at any time during the declared state of emergency.

	L.2002,c.133,s.1.

2A:18-61.63  Effect of issuance of "Notice of Rent Protection Emergency."

	2.	Whenever the Governor declares a state of emergency within certain areas of the State, and issues a "Notice of Rent Protection Emergency," the following shall apply:

	a.	Within a zone which includes the area declared to be in a state of emergency and, if so indicated in the Notice of Rent Protection Emergency extending a distance not to exceed 10 miles in all directions from the outward boundaries thereof, there shall be a presumption of unreasonableness given to a notice of increase in rental charges provided subsequent to the date of the declaration by a landlord to a tenant occupying premises which are utilized as a residence, when the proposed percentage increase in rent is greater than twice the rate of inflation as indicated by increases in the CPI for the immediately preceding nine-month period.  For the purposes of this section, "CPI" means the annual average over a 12-month period beginning September 1 and ending August 31 of the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W), All Items Series A, of the United States Department of Labor (1957-1959 = 100), for the New York, NY-Northeastern New Jersey region.

	b.	Within a zone which includes the area declared to be in a state of emergency and, if so indicated in the Notice of Rent Protection Emergency extending a distance not to exceed 10 miles in all directions from the outward boundaries thereof, there shall be a limitation on the amount of rent which may be charged a tenant undertaking a new lease for residential premises during the duration of the declaration of a "Notice of Rent Protection Emergency" made pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2002, c.133 (C.2A:18-61.62).  The amount of rent which may be charged shall be limited to the product of the fair market rental value of the premises prior to the emergency conditions and two times the rate of inflation as determined by the increase in the CPI for the immediately preceding nine month period.  For the purposes of this section, "CPI" means the annual average over a 12-month period beginning September 1 and ending August 31 of the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W), All Items Series A, of the United States Department of Labor (1957-1959 = 100), for the New York, NY-Northeastern New Jersey region.

	c.	In the event that a landlord believes that the limitations on increases in rental charges imposed by a "Notice of Rent Protection Emergency" prevent the landlord from realizing a just and reasonable rate of return on the landlord's investment, the landlord may file an application with the Director of the Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Law and Public Safety for the purpose of requesting permission to increase rental charges in excess of the increases otherwise authorized under the "Notice of Rent Protection Emergency".  In evaluating such an application, the director shall take into consideration the purposes intended to be achieved by P.L.2002, c.133 (C.2A:18-61.62 et seq.), and the "Notice of Rent Protection Emergency" and the amount of rental charges required to provide the landlord with a just and reasonable return.  The Director shall promulgate rules and regulations in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) to effectuate the purposes of this act.

	d.	The provisions of subsections a. and b. of this section will serve to supplement, not replace, any existing local, State, or federal restrictions on rent increases for any dwelling units in residential buildings located within the zone described in subsections a. and b. of this section, and will only apply to those dwelling units where they cause a lowering of the maximum allowable rent increase or of the maximum reasonable rent increase.

	e.	The provisions of subsections a. and b. of this section shall cease to apply upon the expiration of the state of emergency, or upon the rescission of the either the declaration of the state of emergency or the "Notice of Rent Protection Emergency."

	L.2002,c.133,s.2.

2A:18-61.64  Report of violation, investigation, penalties.

	3. a. A tenant or prospective tenant may report a violation of the provisions of P.L.2002, c.133 (C.2A:18-61.62 et seq.) to the Director of the Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Law and Public Safety.  The director shall investigate any complaint within 10 days of receipt of the complaint.

	b.	If the director determines that a violation of this act has occurred:

	(1)	a penalty may be assessed against the landlord in an amount equal to six times the monthly rental sought to be imposed upon a tenant in contravention of the "Notice of Rent Protection Emergency"; or

	(2)	any penalties for violations of the New Jersey consumer fraud act, P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-1 et seq.) may be sought by the director.

	c.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections a. and b. of this section, a tenant shall have the right to petition a court of competent jurisdiction to terminate a lease containing a provision in violation of the provisions of P.L.2002, c.133 (C.2A:18-61.62 et seq.).

	L.2002,c.133,s.3.

2A:18-61.65  Violations considered as consumer fraud.

	4.	Any violation of P.L.2002, c.133 (C.2A:18-61.62 et seq.) shall be considered a violation of the New Jersey consumer fraud act, P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-1 et seq.).

	L.2002,c.133,s.4.

2A:18-61.66  Payment of certain fees, expenses incurred in landlord-tenant disputes.
  
	1.	If a residential lease agreement provides that the landlord is or may be entitled to recover either attorney's fees or expenses, or both, incurred as a result of the failure of the tenant to perform any covenant or agreement in the lease, or if the lease provides that such costs may be recovered as additional rent, the court shall read an additional parallel implied covenant into the lease.  This implied covenant shall require the landlord to pay the tenant either the reasonable attorney's fees or the reasonable expenses, or both, incurred by that tenant as the result of the tenant's successful defense of any action or summary proceeding commenced by the landlord against the tenant, arising out of an alleged failure of the tenant to perform any covenant or agreement in the lease, or as the result of any successful action or summary proceeding commenced by the tenant against the landlord, arising out of the failure of the landlord to perform any covenant or agreement in the lease. 
 
	The court shall order the landlord to pay such attorney's fees or expenses, or both, that are actually and reasonably incurred by a tenant who is the successful party in such actions or proceedings to the same extent the landlord is entitled to recover attorney's fees and expenses, or both, as provided in the lease.  The court shall have discretion with respect to awards of attorney's fees or expenses, or both, for tenants to the same degree as it has with respect to awards of attorney's fees or expenses, or both, for landlords as provided under the lease either explicitly or implicitly.  An order based on this implied covenant shall require the landlord to pay the tenant such costs either as money damages or a credit against future rent, as determined by the tenant.  Any waiver of this section shall be void as against public policy.
 
	Notwithstanding the foregoing, in an action or summary proceeding for non-payment of rent a tenant who pays all rent currently due and owing on or after the filing of the complaint but prior to entry of a final judgment, and whom the court finds presented no meritorious defense to the complaint other than said payment, shall not be deemed to have successfully defended against the action or summary proceeding for the purposes of the award of attorney's fees or expenses, or both.
 
	As used in this act "expenses" shall include expenses directly related to the litigation including, but not limited to, court costs and expenses for witnesses.  "Expenses" shall not include personal expenses for travel, reimbursement for missed work time, or child care.
 
	L.2013, c.206, s.1.

2A:18-61.67  Notice provided in lease.
 
 	2.	If a residential lease agreement provides that the landlord is or may be entitled to recover attorney's fees or expenses, or both from the tenant for any action or summary proceeding arising out of the lease, as described in section 1 of P.L.2013, c.206 (C.2A:18-61.66), the lease clause shall also contain the following provision in a bold typeface in a font size no less than one point larger than the point size of the rest of the lease clause or 11 points, whichever is larger:
 

	IF THE TENANT IS SUCCESSFUL IN ANY ACTION OR SUMMARY PROCEEDING ARISING OUT OF THIS LEASE, THE TENANT SHALL RECOVER ATTORNEY'S FEES OR EXPENSES, OR BOTH FROM THE LANDLORD TO THE SAME EXTENT THE LANDLORD IS ENTITLED TO RECOVER ATTORNEY'S FEES OR EXPENSES, OR BOTH AS PROVIDED IN THIS LEASE.
 
	L.2013, c.206, s.2.

2A:18-66.  Judgment;  orders as to payment;  stay of execution
    The court may either order the judgment paid to the prevailing party or into  court for the use of the prevailing party at a certain date or by specified  installments, and may stay the issue of execution and other supplementary  process during compliance with its order.  Such stay shall at all times be  subject to be modified or vacated.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:18-67.    Docketing small claims judgments  
     2A:18-67. Judgments recovered in the division of small claims of the Superior Court, Law Division, Special Civil Part may be docketed as judgments in the Special Civil Part proper are docketed.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.69.  

2A:18-69.  Costs
    The actual cash disbursements of the prevailing party for any fees paid to the clerk and witness and officers' fees shall be allowed as costs.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:18-71.  Costs on vacation of judgment
    When a judgment is vacated, the court, in its discretion may award costs not  exceeding $10, for or against either party and enter judgment and issue execution therefor.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:18-72.  Disposal of remaining personal property abandoned by tenant
	1.	A landlord of commercial or residential property, in the manner provided by P.L.1999, c.340 (C.2A:18-72 et al.), may dispose of any tangible goods, chattels, manufactured or mobile homes or other personal property left upon a premises by a tenant after giving notice as required by section 2 of P.L.1999, c.340 (C.2A:18-73), only if the landlord reasonably believes under all the circumstances that the tenant has left the property upon the premises with no intention of asserting any further claim to the premises or the property and:

	a.	A warrant for removal has been executed and possession of the premises has been restored to the landlord; or

	b.	The tenant has given written notice that he or she is voluntarily relinquishing possession of the premises.

	The provisions of P.L.1999, c.340 (C.2A:18-72 et al.) shall not apply to the disposal of tenant property left on nonresidential rental property if there is  a lease in effect which has been duly executed by all parties which contains specific terms and conditions for the disposal of tenant property.

	L.1999,c.340,s.1; amended 2001, c.51.

2A:18-73.  Notice to tenant prior to disposition
	2.	To dispose of a tenant's property under this act, a landlord shall first give written notice to the tenant, which shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested  or by receipted first class mail addressed to the tenant, at the tenant's last known address (which may be the address of the premises) and at any alternate address or addresses known to the landlord, in an envelope endorsed "Please Forward."

	"Receipted first class mail" for purposes of this section means first class mail for which a certificate of mailing has been obtained by the sender but does not include certified or registered mail.

	When the property subject to disposal is a manufactured or mobile home, a copy of the notice required pursuant to this section shall also be sent to the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles and to any lienholders with security interests in the property which have been recorded with the Division of Motor Vehicles.

	L.1999,c.340,s.2.

2A:18-74.  Contents of notice
	3.	The notice required under section 2 of P.L.1999, c.340 (C.2A:18-73) shall state as follows:

	a.	That the property is considered abandoned and must be removed from the premises or from the place of safekeeping, if the landlord has stored the property as provided in section 4 of P.L.1999, c.340 (C.2A:18-75), by a date as follows;

	(i)  for all property other than manufactured or mobile homes not less than 30 days after delivery of the notice, or not less than 33 days after the date of mailing, whichever comes first, or 

	(ii)  for property which consists solely of manufactured or mobile homes, not less than 75 days after the delivery of the notice, or not less than 78 days after the date of mailing, whichever comes first,

or the property will be sold or otherwise disposed of; and

	b.	That if the abandoned property is not removed:

	(i)	The landlord may sell the property at a public or private sale; or

	(ii)	The landlord may destroy or otherwise dispose of the property if the landlord reasonably determines that the value of the property is so low that the cost of storage and conducting a public sale would probably exceed the amount that would be realized from the sale; or

	(iii)	The landlord may sell items of value and destroy or otherwise dispose of the remaining property.

	c.	That in the case of a residential tenant, if the tenant claims the property within the time provided in the notice, the landlord must make the property available for removal by the tenant without payment by the tenant of any unpaid rent.

	L.1999,c.340,s.3.

2A:18-75.  Storing abandoned property
	4.	After notifying a tenant as required by sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1999, c.340 (C.2A:18-73 and C.2A:18-74), a landlord shall store all goods, chattels, manufactured or mobile homes and other personal property of the tenant in a place of safekeeping and shall exercise reasonable care for the property, except that the landlord may promptly dispose of perishable food and shall allow an animal control agency or humane society to remove any abandoned pets or livestock.  A landlord may store a tenant's manufactured dwelling or residential vehicle on the space previously rented, elsewhere on the premises or in a safe location off the premises.  A landlord shall be entitled to reasonable storage charges and costs incidental to storage.  A landlord may store property in a commercial storage facility, in which case the storage cost shall include the actual storage charge plus the reasonable cost of removal of the property to the place of storage.

	L.1999,c.340,s.4.

2A:18-76.  Conditions under which the property is considered abandoned
	5.  a.  If a tenant responds in writing or orally to the landlord, on or before the day specified in the required notice, that the tenant intends to remove the property from the premises, or from the place of safekeeping if the landlord has stored the property as provided in section 4 of P.L.1999, c.340 (C.2A:18-75), and does not do so within the time specified in the notice or within 15 days after the written response, whichever is later, the tenant's property shall be conclusively presumed to be abandoned.

	b.	If a lienholder responds in writing to the landlord concerning a security interest in any manufactured or mobile home, and the lienholder indicates an intent to remove the property from the premises, or from the place of safekeeping, or to pay rent as a condition of leaving the property on the premises, but fails to remove the property or make rental payments within the time specified in the notice or within 15 days after the written response, whichever is later, then the landlord may proceed as if the lienholder had not responded.

	c.	If no response is received from a tenant or lienholder within the time period provided under section 3 of P.L.1999, c.340 (C.2A:18-74), then the tenant's property shall be conclusively presumed to be abandoned.

	L.1999,c.340,s.5.

2A:18-77.  Tenant's reimbursement for storage costs
	6.	Upon removal of his property, a tenant shall reimburse the landlord for the reasonable cost of storage for the period the property was in the landlord's safekeeping, including the reasonable cost of removal of the property to a place of storage.  A landlord shall not be entitled to reimbursement for storage and removal costs which are greater than the fair market value of such costs in the locale of the rental property. A landlord shall not be responsible for any loss to a tenant resulting from storage of property in compliance with this act unless the loss was caused by the landlord's deliberate or negligent act or omission.

	L.1999,c.340,s.6.

2A:18-78.  Disposal of property, options
	7.	Property that has been conclusively presumed to be abandoned may be disposed of in any of the following ways:

	a.	The landlord may sell the property at a public or private sale;

	b.	The landlord may destroy or otherwise dispose of the property if the landlord reasonably determines that the value of the property is so low that the cost of storage and conducting a public sale would probably exceed the amount that would be realized from the sale; or

	c.	The landlord may sell certain items and destroy or otherwise dispose of the remaining property, in accordance with subsections a. and b. of this section.

	A public or private sale authorized by this section shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of 12A:9-601 et seq. of the "Uniform Commercial Code".

	L.1999, c.340, s.7; amended 2001, c.117, s.23.


2A:18-79.  Immunity
	9.	Nothing in P.L.1999, c.340 (C.2A:18-72 et al.) shall diminish the right of a landlord of a nonresidential property to use distraint when authorized by law.

	L.1999,c.340,s.9.

2A:18-80.  Deductions from sale proceeds
	11.	A landlord may deduct from the proceeds of any sale the reasonable costs of notice, storage and sale and any unpaid rent and charges not covered by a security deposit.  After deducting these amounts, the landlord shall remit to the tenant the remaining proceeds, if any, together with an itemized accounting.  If the tenant, after due diligence, cannot be found the remaining proceeds shall be deposited into the Superior Court and, if not claimed within 10 years, shall escheat to the State.

	L.1999,c.340,s.11.

2A:18-81.  Compliance with act constitutes complete defense
	12.	Compliance in good faith with all the requirements of this act shall constitute a complete defense in any action brought by a tenant against a landlord for loss or damage to personal property disposed of pursuant to this act.

	L.1999,c.340,s.12.

2A:18-82.  Noncompliance with act; tenant's recovery
	13.	If a landlord seizes and retains a tenant's personal property without complying with this act, the tenant shall be relieved of any liability for  reimbursement to the landlord for storage and removal costs and shall be entitled to recover up to twice the actual damages sustained by the tenant.

	L.1999,c.340,s.13.

2A:18-83.  Applicability of act
	14.	This act shall not be applicable to any unclaimed property which must be disposed of in accordance with the "Uniform Unclaimed Property Act (1981)," P.L.1989, c.58 (R.S.46:30B-1 et seq.).

	L.1999,c.340,s.14.

2A:18-84.  Nonapplicability to motor vehicles
	15.	This act shall not be applicable to abandoned motor vehicles.

	L.1999,c.340,s.15.

2A:19-1.     Definitions.  
     2A:19-1. As used in this chapter:

      a.   "General assignment" means a transfer or conveyance by a debtor in writing, whereby the debtor transfers or conveys to an assignee, in trust for the benefit of his creditors, all of his property. A "general assignment" includes an assignment by a debtor made under section 2A:20-6 of this title.  

    b.   "Debtor" means any person liable on a debt, including any person in actual confinement or discharged under bond pursuant to chapter 20 of this title.  

    c.   "Court" means the Superior Court.

      d.   "Creditor" includes any person to whom a debt is due.

      e.   "Debt" includes any debt, demand or claim.

      f.   "Assignor" means any debtor who has executed a general assignment.

      g.   "Assignee" means an assignee under a general assignment, including an assignee appointed under chapter 20 of this title.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.70.  

2A:19-2.  Assignments must be for equal benefit;  preferences void
    Every general assignment made by a debtor residing in this state shall be made for the equal benefit of his creditors in proportion to their several demands, to the extent of the net amount that shall come to the hands of the assignee for distribution.  All preferences attempted to be made in any such assignment of one creditor over another, or whereby any one creditor shall be first paid or have a greater proportion in respect of his claim than another, shall be deemed fraudulent and shall render the assignment void.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-3.  Transfer of property within 4 months of assignment to give preference void;  recovery of property
    If any person being insolvent or in contemplation of insolvency shall, within 4 months before the making of a general assignment, and with the intention of preferring any creditor or person under liability for him, mortgage, pledge, assign, pay or transfer any of his property, or procure or suffer any of his property to be taken, attached or levied upon, or any lien or  encumbrance to be acquired thereon by legal process or otherwise, such preferential transaction shall be void as against the assignee.  The assignee may recover the property given by way of preference, or the value thereof, from  the person so receiving the same or so benefited thereby.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-4.  Assignor to acknowledge assignment for recording as deed
    The assignor shall acknowledge the general assignment or cause the same to be proved according to law, so that it may be recorded as a deed to real estate.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-5.  Assignor to annex inventory and list of creditors with their claims, to assignment
    The assignor shall annex to the general assignment an inventory, under oath  of his estate, real and personal, together with a list of his creditors and the  amount of their respective claims according to the best of his knowledge.  Such  inventory shall in nowise be conclusive as to the quantum of the assignor's  estate, and the assignee shall be entitled to any other property which may  belong to the assignor at the time of the assignment.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-6.  Legality of assignments
    All general assignments for the benefit of creditors shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-7.     Assignee to record and file assignment  
     2A:19-7. The assignee, upon receiving a general assignment, shall forthwith record it, including the inventory and list of creditors with their claims, in the county where the assignor resides and in any other counties or states where he may deem it necessary. The same shall be recorded in this State in the office of the register of deeds in counties having such an office and in the office of the county clerk in other counties. A copy of the same, executed by the assignor or certified by the register or county clerk, shall be filed by the assignee with the surrogate of the county where the assignor resides or with the clerk of the Superior Court.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.71.  

2A:19-8.  Publication and mailing of notice;  extension of time
    The assignee shall also forthwith give public notice by advertising at least  4 times during 4 consecutive calendar weeks, once in each week in a newspaper  printed in this state and circulating in the neighborhood where the creditors  reside.  Such notice shall make known that a general assignment has been made,  and the date thereof, and shall set forth a general description of any business  carried on by the assignor and the place where the same was so carried on, and  that all claims of creditors against the estate must be presented under oath to  the assignee within 3 months from the date of the general assignment, or be  barred from participating in a dividend of said estate.

    The assignee shall also, within 30 days after the date of the general assignment, mail a copy of such notice to every creditor of the assignor, addressed to him at his usual post-office address, so far as the assignee can ascertain the same.

    In case of failure to give such notice, or mail the same as above provided,  the court may extend and fix the time for the presentation of claims and the  giving and mailing notice thereof as aforesaid.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-9.  Assignee to file inventory and valuation
    The assignee shall also forthwith file with the clerk of the court, under oath, a true inventory and valuation of the estate so far as it has come to his  knowledge.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-10.  Bond of assignee;  additional security
    The assignee shall, after filing the inventory and valuation, forthwith enter into bond in such amount as the court may fix, for the faithful performance of his trust.  The bond shall be filed with the clerk of the court.

    In case at any time the security given by any assignee under this chapter shall be shown to be insufficient, the court shall direct him to give such additional security as it shall deem proper.

    Every bond given under this section shall run to the superior court.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-11.  Assignee not to proceed until bond, etc., filed
    Until the inventory, valuation and bond required by this chapter are filed,  the assignee shall not proceed to the discharge of his trust under the general  assignment, further than may be necessary for the preservation of the assigned  estate;  but the court, before such inventory, valuation and bond are filed,  may authorize the assignee to perform such other acts in the administration of  the trust, and upon such terms, as it may deem necessary for the protection of  the trust.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-12.  Exemption to assignor
    In case of any general assignment, other than a general assignment of partnership property or by a corporation, there shall be reserved of the goods and chattels of any assignor having a family residing in this state, goods and chattels to the value of $500, and all wearing apparel for the use of the assignor and his family.  The assignee shall, at the written demand of the assignor, as soon after the assignment is executed as conveniently may be, cause a just and true appraisement of the assignor's goods and chattels at their actual value.  The appraisement shall be made by 2 appraisers appointed by the assignee.  The assignee shall thereafter set apart for the use of the assignor and his family such of the goods and chattels as the assignor may select from the appraisement, not exceeding in value the said sum of $500.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-13.  Assignee's general powers as successor to assignor
    Every assignee shall have as full power and authority to dispose of all of the assignor's property, except as otherwise may be provided, as the assignor had at the time of the general assignment.  He may sue for and recover in his own name everything belonging or appertaining to the estate. He may compromise, settle and compound all claims, disputes and litigations of the assignor, refer the same to arbitration, agree with any person concerning the same, redeem all mortgages and conditional contracts, and generally act as and do whatsoever the assignor might have lawfully done in the premises.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-14.  Assignee's powers as representative of creditors;  setting aside  conveyances and transfers
    The assignee, in addition to the powers which he may exercise as the successor to the assignor, shall also at all times be the representative of the  creditors of the assignor, and shall have the same power to set aside conveyances, and to recover or reach assets for the benefit of the creditors as  a creditor would have who was the holder of a judgment and levy against the  assignor and his property at the date of the assignment.  All conveyances,  mortgages and transfers of property, real or personal, made by the assignor,  which are void or voidable as against the creditors of the assignor, shall in  like manner be void or voidable as against the assignee.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-15.  Subpoena;  commitment for failure to testify
    The assignee may send for persons and papers and examine, on oath which he may administer, any persons, including the creditors and assignor, respecting the affairs, transactions and assets of the assignor, his debts, credits, obligations, contracts, and liabilities and claims asserted against the assignor.

    If any person shall refuse to be sworn or to answer the questions put to him, or refuse to declare the whole truth touching the subject matter of the examination, the court may, on report by the assignee, commit such person to prison, to remain until he shall have submitted himself to be examined and have  paid all the costs of the proceedings against him.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-16.  Continuing assignor's business
    The court may, upon such notice to creditors as it may direct, authorize the  assignee to continue for such a period and under such conditions as it may  prescribe, any business of the assignor in which the assigned estate, or any  part thereof, is invested.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-17.  Action to compel assignee to perform duties
    The court may, from time to time, compel the assignee to proceed to the execution of his duties.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-18.  Assignee to sell real estate;  manner of sale
    Whenever any assignee shall take any real estate of the assignor under a general assignment, he shall, except as hereinafter provided, proceed to sell the same, at public or private sale, in the manner prescribed for an executor or administrator directed by the court to sell lands for the payment of the debts of a decedent.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-19.  Assignee to submit sales of personalty for confirmation
    The assignee shall submit all contracts for sale of personal property of the  estate, whether by public or private sale, to the court for confirmation.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-20.  Limitation of actions against assignee for taking or disposing of  property
    All actions at law or in equity which may be brought against any assignee on  account of the taking, appropriating, selling or disposing of any property by  him as a part of the trust estate, shall be commenced within 9 months from the  time when the cause of action shall arise, and not afterwards.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-21.  Reconveyance to assignor upon composition with creditors; proceedings
    If after a general assignment the assignor shall make an agreement of compromise or composition with his creditors, the court may, if it confirms the  agreement, authorize the assignee to reassign and reconvey to the assignor all  the trust estate in his hands, in whatsoever form the same may be, free and  discharged from the trust.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-22.  Claims due or to become due are presentable
    Any creditor may present not only any debt due, but any debt to become due,  making in such case a reasonable rebate when interest is not accruing on the  same.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-23.  Claims filed after time share only in subsequent dividends
    If any creditor shall fail to present his claim to the assignee within 3 months from the date of a general assignment, or within such other time as may be fixed by the court for that purpose, his claim shall be barred of a dividend, except that any creditor may, at any time prior to the making of a final dividend, present his claim under oath to the assignee, and share in any dividend made after such presentation.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-24.  Claims filed after time;  notice;  exceptions;  adjudication
    Upon the presentation of any claim after time as authorized by section 2A:19-23 of this title, the assignee, before allowing the same, shall give notice thereof by mail to the other creditors who have proved their claims, as directed by section 2A:19-26 of this title in relation to claims proved in time.  The claim shall be subject to the same exceptions by the assignee or the  other creditors as a claim filed in time and may be adjudicated upon in like  manner.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-25.  Assignee to file list of creditors, statement of claims, and proof of notice
    At the expiration of the time for the presentation of claims, notice having  been duly given and mailed as provided in section 2A:19-8 of this title, the  assignee shall file with the clerk of the court a true list, under oath, of all  the creditors of the assignor who have proved their claims before him, with a  true statement of their respective claims, and due proof of the publication and  mailing of the notice above-mentioned. Such proof shall give in detail the  names of the persons to whom, with the respective addresses to which, and the  time when, such notices were mailed.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-26.  Notice of filing such list and statement;  proof of mailing
    Within 10 days after the filing of the list of creditors and the statement of their claims, the assignee shall mail notice of such filing to every creditor who has proved his claim, addressed to the creditor at his usual post-office address, so far as the assignee can ascertain, and shall, within said 10 days, also file with the clerk of the court due proof of the mailing of  such notice.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-27.  Extending time for compliance with sections 2A:19-25 and 2A:19-26
    In case of failure to comply with the provisions of sections 2A:19-25 and 2A:19-26 of this title, the court may extend and fix the time of any of the duties of the assignee which he may have failed to perform.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-28.  Assignee's inventory, list of creditors and statement of claims to be proved and recorded
    The inventory and list of creditors, with the statement of claims, as required by sections 2A:19-9 and 2A:19-25 of this title to be filed by the assignee, shall be recorded by the clerk of the court in a book provided for that purpose and called  "assignee's book" .

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-29.  Exceptions to claims
    At any time within 60 days after the list of creditors and statement of claims have been filed and notice thereof has been mailed to the creditors, the  assignee, or any creditor or other person interested, may file in the court  exceptions to the allowance or rejection by the assignee of claim or demand of  any creditor exhibited as aforesaid.  The court may then adjudicate upon such  claim or demand.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-30.  Wages of clerks, mechanics, and laborers, preferred
    The wages of clerks, mechanics and laborers due from the assignor at the time of the general assignment including wages fully earned though not then payable, shall be preferred and shall be paid by the assignee before any other claim or debt.  In case any such wages have been partly earned at the time of the assignment, but are not then payable, the same shall be equitably apportioned and shall be paid as preferred debts insofar as they have been earned up to the said time.  No payment of more than $300 shall be made as a preferred debt to any one person.  In case any claim shall receive a preference  to the extent of $300 under this section, any balance thereof remaining unpaid  shall be entitled to all dividends to be calculated upon such balance as upon a  claim of a general creditor.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-31.  Landlord's lien on assignor's goods
    Where the assignor is a tenant, all of his goods and chattels on the premises, in his possession, shall be subject to a lien for the payment of rent  due to the landlord.  The claim for rent in favor of the landlord, not exceeding 1 year's rent, shall be first paid and satisfied by the assignee out of the goods and chattels of the tenant which were on the demised premises at the time of the assignment.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-32.  Landlord's rights where assignor's goods removed
    If the tenant, his assignee, or any other person, shall remove any goods and  chattels from the demised premises, after the assignment, the landlord, at any  time within 40 days after such removal, may seize such goods and chattels in  whosesoever hands the same may be found, as a distress for his rent, and  proceed with the same in the manner directed by law concerning distresses,  whether the rent by the terms of the lease be due or not, making a rebate on  the sum not due, as is required where a party suing out execution pays rent not  due to the landlord.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-33.  Assignee to proceed to make dividends
    If no exceptions to any claim or demand are filed, or in case any exceptions  are filed, then after they have been adjudicated or settled, the assignee shall  proceed to make, from time to time, fair and equal dividends among said  creditors from the assets which shall come to hand in proportion to their  claims.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-34.  Partial distribution
    The court, in its discretion, on the application of the assignee or any person in interest, from time to time, may direct such partial distribution from the assets in hand to those creditors whose claims are not in dispute as may safely be made, reserving at all times sufficient assets to secure, after all the claims shall have been adjudicated and finally settled, an equal and proportionate distribution according to the intent of this chapter.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-35.  Directions as to dividends
    The court may, in its discretion, upon application of the assignee, or of any person in interest, make directions with respect to any or all dividends, including the time when the same shall be made and the amount thereof.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-36.  Death or incapacity of assignee;  successor
    In case the assignee shall die or become incapable of executing his trust the court shall, upon application of any person in interest, appoint some suitable person or persons in his stead.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-37.  Removal for maladministration, neglect, or other cause; successor
    In case any assignee shall embezzle, waste or misapply any part of the trust  estate in his hands or under his control, or shall neglect or refuse to execute  his trust, or to perform and obey any order or judgment of the court in respect  of his trust, or shall remove from the state, or for a reasonable or just cause  manifested to the court shall desire to be relieved from his office, then the  court may remove the assignee and appoint a suitable person or persons in his  stead.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-38.  Estate vests in new assignee;  accounting and delivery by predecessor
    Upon the appointment of any new assignee as aforesaid, the entire trust estate, in whatsoever form the same then may be, shall forthwith vest in him. The court may compel the removed assignee, or the personal representative of the former assignee, to account in said court for his trust, to deliver possession of the estate in his hands to his successor, to pay over to such successor any balance found due on the accounting, and to execute such conveyance of the trust estate to his successor as the court may direct.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-39.  Powers and duties of new assignee
    Every new assignee shall have all the powers and rights and perform all the  duties not already performed, conferred and imposed by the assignment or by law  upon the original assignee.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-40.  Bond of new assignee
    Every new assignee shall enter into bond for the faithful performance of his  trust, in such amount as the court shall fix.  The bond shall run to the superior court.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-41.  Final and intermediate accounts
    As soon as may be after the determination of all claims, the assignee shall  render, on oath, a final account to the court.  The court may, in its discretion, upon the application of the assignee or any creditor, or the surety  on the assignee's bond or other person in interest, direct the assignee to  render an intermediate or final account.

    The settlement and judgment of the court shall be conclusive on all parties  except for assets which may afterward come to hand, or except as relief may be  had in a judgment in any action.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-42.    Disposition of unclaimed money 
     2A:19-42.  Disposition of unclaimed money.

      When an assignee states his final account, and there remains a balance, dividend sum or sum of money to be paid to a person and the person or his guardian, if he be under any disability, the balance, dividend sum or sum of money is intangible property remaining unclaimed in the possession of an assignee.  After the period of time set forth in R.S.46:30B-37.1 has elapsed that property shall be presumed abandoned and handled in accordance with the "Uniform Unclaimed Property Act (1981)," R.S.46:30B-1 et seq. 

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1989,c.58,s.2. 

2A:19-43.  Compensation of assignee
    Such commissions shall be made to the assignee or to the personal representatives of a deceased assignee, or to a person who has been removed by the court from his office as assignee for any cause other than his misconduct, on any intermediate or final account, as the court shall consider just, but not  in excess of 20% on all sums received by the said assignee, except that this  limitation shall be inapplicable where the amount of the estate is less than  $500.00.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1963, c. 137, s. 1, eff. July 24, 1963.

2A:19-44.  Any corporation may assign
    Any corporation organized under the laws of this state may make a general assignment under the provisions of this chapter.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-45.    Corporation deemed resident of what county  
     2A:19-45. A corporation making a general assignment shall be deemed, for the purposes of this chapter, a resident of the county in which its principal office is located.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.72.  

2A:19-46.  Assignee as party to receivership suit
    The assignee may be made a party to any action in the superior court to have  the corporation adjudged insolvent and a receiver thereof appointed, and may be  enjoined, restrained and removed in such action and subjected to all orders and  judgments therein.  The said court may, if it sees fit, appoint the assignee of  the corporation receiver thereof.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-47.    Removal of assignee and transfer of estate to receiver  
     2A:19-47. In case a corporation shall, at any time after the making of a general assignment, be adjudged insolvent and a receiver thereof be appointed by the Superior Court, the said court may, whenever it may deem it to the interest of the stockholders or creditors, remove the assignee and direct and compel him to transfer and convey the trust estate in his hands to the receiver to be administered under the direction of said court. The assignee shall thereupon present his accounts to the Superior Court for settlement and allowance.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.73.  

2A:19-48.  Inclusion of individual estate
    When a general assignment is made by partners in business, it may include only the partnership property or it may include also the several estates of the  partners;  or any of the partners may also make a separate general assignment  of his individual estate.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-49.  Partnership and individual estates to be kept separate
    In all cases where a general assignment includes both a partnership and an individual estate, the same shall be kept separate in all proceedings under this chapter, and all notices and accounts in relation thereto shall plainly distinguish between the different estates, and all proceedings, orders and judgments shall recognize the rights and equities of the different classes of creditors, to the end that the property assigned may be equitably applied to the payment of the claims of such creditors.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:19-50.    One partner to reside in State  
     2A:19-50. In order to bring a general assignment of partners in business within the operation of this chapter, it shall be sufficient if any one of them resides in this State.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.74.  

2A:20-1.     Debtors in actual confinement  
     2A:20-1. Any person, in actual confinement for debt or damages in any jail of this State, who is willing to deliver up to his creditor or creditors all his estate, both real and personal, toward their payment, may bring an action, in a summary manner, for his discharge under this chapter, in the Superior Court.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.75.  

2A:20-2.     Persons arrested; discharge; requirements  
     2A:20-2. Any person arrested or held in custody by any officer in any civil action upon mesne process or process of execution, or who is surrendered in discharge of his bail, shall be discharged from arrest or custody by the officer upon compliance with the following requirements:  

    a.   He shall make out and deliver to the officer making the arrest, or in whose custody he may be, a true and perfect inventory, under oath or affirmation, of all of his personal property and real estate, or any interest therein;  

    b.   He shall give bond to the plaintiff at whose suit he is arrested, with sufficient security, in double the sum for which he is arrested or taken in execution. If the security is individual and not corporate, the surety or sureties shall be freeholders and resident of the county. Such bond shall be conditioned as follows:  

    1.   That he will commence an action in the Superior Court on or before a certain designated date, not more than one month after the date of the bond and apply for his discharge under this chapter; and  

    2.   That he will in all things comply with the requirements of this chapter; and  

    3.   That he will prosecute such an action diligently until duly discharged as an insolvent debtor and, if refused a discharge, he will surrender himself immediately thereafter to the sheriff, warden or keeper of the jail of such county, there to remain until discharged by due course of law.  

    In case of the forfeiture of such bond by breach of any condition therein, the plaintiff, his executors or administrators, may bring an action thereon, and recover the debt, damages and costs due from such person, and for which such arrest was made.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.76.  

2A:20-3.     Persons arrested; discharge; action  
     2A:20-3. Any person arrested as stated in N.J.S.2A:20-2 and who has given the bond therein prescribed, may bring an action in a summary manner for his discharge under this chapter in the Superior Court.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.77.  

2A:20-4.  Officer's return on releasing person arrested;  liability for escape
    When the officer has discharged the defendant from arrest under mesne process, upon giving bond as provided in this article, he shall so return on the process to the court or judge issuing the same, and shall also return therewith the inventory and bond taken by him pursuant to this article.  The plaintiff may thereupon proceed to judgment, and have execution against the personal and real property of the defendant, as in other cases.  When the defendant shall be discharged upon execution, the officer shall so return the same with the bond and inventory.  The delivery of the bond to the plaintiff shall exonerate the officer from any liability for escape.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:20-5.  Appointment of assignee authorized
    If in the action brought under section 2A:20-1 or 2A:20-3 of this title, the  court is satisfied that the conduct of the debtor has been upright, the court  shall appoint 1 or more suitable residents of the county where such debtor is  imprisoned or was arrested as assignee or assignees of the debtor.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:20-6.  Assignment of property to assignee;  exemptions
    The debtor shall forthwith execute to the assignee a general assignment of all his real and personal property, with an inventory of his estate and a list of creditors as provided by chapter 19 of this title.  The assignee shall have all the rights and powers and shall perform all the duties with respect to an assignee under said chapter 19, and all proceedings and other matters shall be governed by said chapter.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:20-7.  Conveyances by debtor after arrest void;  recovery by assignee
    All conveyances, deeds, mortgages, judgments, sales, transfers, assignments  or other disposition of, for or upon any of his estate, real or personal, made,  given or executed after his arrest by any debtor shall be void as against his  creditors and the assignee appointed hereunder.

    The assignee may recover such estate or the value thereof against any person  who may have purchased or in any manner come into the possession thereof after  such arrest.

    The right and remedies conferred by this section shall be in addition to those conferred by section 2A:19-3 of this title.

	L.1951 (1stSS), c.344.
2A:20-8.  Discharge of debtor from confinement on assignment of property
    Upon making the assignment required by section 2A:20-6 of this title, the court may, by order, direct the sheriff to discharge the debtor from confinement on account of any debts previously contracted by him.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:20-9.  Remand of debtor to prison on concealment of property
    If the creditor at whose suit the debtor is imprisoned or was arrested, or any other creditor, shall in an action brought in a summary manner prove to the  satisfaction of the court that the debtor has not fully delivered up to the use  of his creditors all of his property, real or personal, or that he has  concealed or kept back any part of his property or suffered a judgment to be  entered against himself, or made any conveyance, deed, mortgage, sale, transfer, assignment or other disposition of his property, real or personal, with intent to defraud his creditors, the court shall remand him to prison, there to remain in close confinement until discharged by due course of law. In  such an action, the debtor shall have a right to trial by jury.

2A:20-10.  Discharge as immunity from imprisonment
    Every insolvent debtor, who has given up all his estate and conformed in all  things to the directions of this subtitle, shall, so far as regards the imprisonment of his person, forever thereafter be discharged from all debts due  at the time of the assignment, or contracted for before that time, though payable afterwards.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:20-11.  New applications on refusal of discharge
    If the court fails or refuses, for any reason, to discharge a person as an insolvent debtor or remands a person to prison, and such person surrenders himself immediately to the sheriff, warden or keeper of the jail of the county,  he may make out and deliver to the sheriff, warden or keeper a new inventory  and new bond as provided by section 2A:20-2 of this title. Thereupon he shall  be discharged from arrest or custody pursuant to sections 2A:20-2 and 2A:20-3  of this title, provided he brings a new action for his discharge, in which  action the same proceedings shall be had for that purpose, as fully and  effectually as if no previous action had been brought.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:21-1.  County prison limits
    The prison limits or boundary lines of such limits shall be the county or boundary lines of the county in which the county prison or work house is located.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:21-2.  Bond for prison limits
    Each prisoner in a civil action, giving bond to the sheriff, with sufficient  sureties, in double the sum for which he is committed, to keep within the  prison limits or bounds prescribed by section 2A:21-1 of this title, shall be  at liberty to be at large therein.  If the sureties in the bond are individuals  and not corporate they shall be freeholders of and residents in the county.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:21-3.  Forfeiture of bond;  action thereon by sheriff or plaintiff
    If a prisoner at large within the prison limits after giving the bond required by section 2A:21-2 of this title voluntarily and intentionally goes out of and beyond the prison limits, such action on his part shall constitute an absolute forfeiture of his bond, and the sheriff to whom the bond has been given shall, or the plaintiff at whose suit the prisoner was committed to custody, if the bond has been assigned to him pursuant to section 2A:21-4 of this title, may, sue on the bond, although the prisoner may have returned within the prison limits before the commencement of such action, any law, custom or usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:21-4.  Assignment of bond to plaintiff on forfeiture thereof;  action thereon
    If the bond mentioned in section 2A:21-2 of this title is forfeited, the sheriff, at the request of plaintiff or his attorney, shall assign the bond to plaintiff, by indorsement, and by attestation under his hand and seal in the presence of 2 or more witnesses.  Plaintiff may then bring an action on the bond.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:21-5.  Bond for prison limits by debtor refused discharge from imprisonment
    Any person in actual confinement for debt or damages in any jail in this state may give bond for the prison limits as provided by section 2A:21-2 of this title, and thereupon be discharged from imprisonment, except within such limits, notwithstanding any former verdict or judgment rendered against him in any action for his discharge under chapter 20 of this title (s. 2A:20-1 et seq.).

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:22-1.     Action in Superior Court  
     2A:22-1. The Superior Court shall allow an unmarried person of full age, a husband with his wife's consent, a wife with her husband's consent or a husband and wife jointly to adopt an adult person and may change the name of the adult, if the court is satisfied that the adopting parent or parents are of good moral character and of reputable standing in their community, and that the adoption will be to the advantage and benefit of the person to be adopted.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.78.  

2A:22-2.  Age of plaintiff;  request by adoptee;  waiver of requirements
    Such adoption shall not be granted, unless the adopting parent or parents are at least 10 years older than the person to be adopted and the latter has, in writing acknowledged by him as deeds are required to be acknowledged, requested the adoption and, if desired, the change of name. The court, upon being satisfied that the best interests of the person to be adopted would be promoted by granting the adoption, may waive any and all of the above requirements.  Every such waiver shall be recited in any judgment of adoption thereafter entered.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1977, c. 212, s. 1, eff. Sept. 7, 1977.

2A:22-3  Effect of adoption; inheritance.

	2A:22-3.  The adoption, when granted by the court, shall have the following effect:

	a.	The right of the person adopted, and of such persons as legally represent him on his death, to take and inherit intestate personal and real property from his natural parents and their kindred shall not be altered by the  adoption.

	b.	In all other respects, all rights, privileges and obligations due from the natural parents to the person adopted and from the person adopted to them and all relations existing between such person and them shall be at an end, including the right of the natural parents and their kindred to take and inherit intestate personal and real property from and through the person adopted.

	c.	All rights, privileges and obligations due from the parents by adoption  to the person adopted and from the person adopted to them and all relations  between such person and them shall be the same as if the person adopted had  been born to them in lawful wedlock, including the right to take and inherit  intestate personal and real property from and through each other.

	Except, however, that:

	a.	The person adopted shall not be capable of taking property expressly limited by a will or any other instrument to the heirs of the body of the adopting parent or parents, nor property coming on intestacy from the collateral kindred of the adopting parent or parents by right of representation;  and

	b.	On the death of the parent or parents by adoption and the subsequent death of the person adopted, without issue or a spouse, the property of the deceased parent or parents by adoption shall descend to and be distributed among the heirs and next of kin of the parent or parents by adoption and not to the heirs and next of kin of the person adopted;  and

	c.	If the parent or parents by adoption shall have another child or other children entitled to take and inherit from them on intestacy, such children and  the person adopted shall, respectively, take and inherit intestate personal and  real property from and through each other as if all had been children of the same parents born in lawful wedlock; and

	d.	Where a parent who has procured a divorce, or a surviving parent, having lawful custody of a child, lawfully marries again, or where an adult unmarried person who has become a resource family parent and has lawful custody of a child, marries, and such parent or resource family parent consents that the person who thus  becomes the stepfather or the stepmother of the person so adopted may adopt the person so adopted, the rights, privileges and obligations due from the parent or resource family parent, so consenting, to the person adopted and from the person adopted to such parent and the relations existing between them shall not be  altered by the adoption.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 2004, c.130, s.9.

2A:22A-1.    Short title 
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Licensed Alcoholic Beverage Server Fair Liability Act." 

   L. 1987, c. 152, s. 1. 

2A:22A-2.    Findings, declarations  
    2.   The Legislature finds and declares that licensed alcoholic beverage servers face great difficulty in obtaining liability insurance coverage.  Even when insurance coverage is available, drastic increases in the cost of that insurance have recently taken place, and many licensed alcoholic beverage servers are no longer able to afford liability insurance coverage.  

   This lack of insurance adversely affects not only the licensed alcoholic beverage servers themselves, but also patrons and third persons who suffer personal injury and property damage as a result of the negligent service of alcoholic beverages by a licensed alcoholic beverage server.  

   In order to make it economically feasible for insurance companies to provide coverage, the incidence of liability should be more predictable.  That predictability may be achieved by defining the limits of the civil liability of licensed alcoholic beverage servers in order to encourage the development and implementation of risk reduction techniques.  

   This act has been designed to protect the rights of persons who suffer loss as a result of the negligent service of alcoholic beverages by a licensed alcoholic beverage server while at the same time providing a balanced and reasonable procedure for allocating responsibility for such losses.  It is anticipated that this act may result in the improvement of the alcoholic beverage liability insurance market in this State.  

   L.1987,c.152,s.2.  

2A:22A-3.    Definitions 
    As used in this act: 

   "Alcoholic beverage" means a fluid, or a solid capable of being converted into a fluid, suitable for human consumption and having an alcoholic content of more than one-half of 1% by volume.  The term shall include alcohol, beer, lager beer, ale, porter, naturally fermented wine, treated wine, blended wine, fortified wine, sparkling wine, distilled liquors, blended distilled liquors and any brewed, fermented or distilled liquors fit for use for beverage purposes, or any mixture of them; 

   "Licensed alcoholic beverage server" or "server" means a person who is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages pursuant to R.S. 33:1-1 et seq. or who has been issued a permit to sell alcoholic beverages by the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control in the Department of Law and Public Safety; 

   "Minor" means a person under the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages according to P.L. 1972, c. 81 (C. 9:17B-1 et seq.); 

   "Person" means a natural person, the estate of a natural person, an association of natural persons, or an association, trust company, partnership, corporation, organization, or the manager, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them; 

   "Visibly intoxicated" means a state of intoxication accompanied by a perceptible act or series of acts which present clear signs of intoxication. 

   L. 1987, c. 152, s. 3. 

2A:22A-4.    Exclusive civil remedy 
    This act shall be the exclusive civil remedy for personal injury or property damage resulting from the negligent service of alcoholic beverages by a licensed alcoholic beverage server.  Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to limit the criminal, quasi-criminal, or regulatory penalties which may be imposed upon a licensed alcoholic beverage server by any other statute, rule or regulation. 

   L. 1987, c. 152, s. 4. 

2A:22A-5.    Conditions for recovery of damages 
    a.   A person who sustains personal injury or property damage as a result of the negligent service of alcoholic beverages by a licensed alcoholic beverage server may recover damages from a licensed alcoholic beverage server only if: 

   (1)  The server is deemed negligent pursuant to subsection b. of this section; and 

   (2)  The injury or damage was proximately caused by the negligent service of alcoholic beverages; and 

   (3)  The injury or damage was a foreseeable consequence of the negligent service of alcoholic beverages. 

   b.   A licensed alcoholic beverage server shall be deemed to have been negligent only when the server served a visibly intoxicated person, or served a minor, under circumstances where the server knew, or reasonably should have known, that the person served was a minor. 

   L. 1987, c. 152, s. 5. 

2A:22A-6.    Limitations on recovery of damages 
    Damages may be awarded in a civil action under P.L. 1987, c. 152 (C. 2A:22A-1 et seq.) subject to the limitations set forth in this section. 

   a.   The provisions of sections 1 and 2 of P.L. 1973, c. 146 (C. 2A:15-5.1 and C. 2A:15-5.2) shall apply in all civil actions instituted pursuant to the provisions of this act. 

   b.   Notwithstanding the provisions of P.L. 1952, c. 335 (C. 2A:53A-1 et seq.), section 3 of P.L. 1973, c. 146 (C. 2A:15-5.3) or any other law to the contrary, in any case where a licensed alcoholic beverage server or any other party to a suit instituted pursuant to the provisions of this act is determined to be a joint tortfeasor, the licensed alcoholic beverage server or other party shall be responsible for no more than that percentage share of the damages which is equal to the percentage of negligence attributable to the server or other party. 

   L. 1987, c. 152, s. 6. 

2A:22A-7.    Monitoring of alcoholic beverage liability insurance market 
    The Department of Insurance shall monitor the alcoholic beverage liability insurance market in the State following the effective date of this act.  The department shall gather information and statistics on the number of insurers including surplus lines insurers, issuing alcoholic beverage insurance policies, the number of policies issued, the premiums for such policies, the number of civil actions filed in accordance with the provisions of this act, the amounts of damages awarded in civil actions or the amounts of settlements, and any other information deemed necessary in order to determine the effect of this act on the alcoholic beverage liability insurance market.  The department shall issue an initial report on the information obtained to the Governor and the Legislature and make appropriate recommendations within two years following the effective date of this act and a final report within three years following the effective date of this act.  The Commissioner of the Department of Insurance shall promulgate any rules and regulations pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L. 1968, c. 410 (C. 52:14B-1 et seq.), necessary in order to fulfill the requirements of this section. 

   L. 1987, c. 152, s. 7. 

2A:23-1.  Rights of action abolished
    The rights of action formerly existing to recover sums of money as damage for the alienation of affections, criminal conversation, seduction or breach of  contract to marry are abolished from and after June 27, 1935.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:23-2.  No rights of action in future
    No act done in this state after June 27, 1935, shall operate to give rise, either within or without this state, to any of the rights of action abolished by this chapter.  No contract to marry made or entered into in this state after  June 27, 1935, or made or entered into hereafter, shall operate to give rise,  either within or without this state, to any action or right of action for the  breach thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:23-3.  Filing or service of process prohibited
    It shall be unlawful for any person, either as a party or attorney, or an agent or other person in behalf of either, to file or serve, cause to be filed or served or threaten to file or serve, or to threaten to cause to be filed or served, any process or pleading, in any court of this state, setting forth or seeking to recover a sum of money upon any cause of action abolished or barred by this chapter, whether such cause of action arose within or without this state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:23-4.  Contracts, instruments, etc., in payment, etc., of claims or abolished causes of action void;  actions on contracts, etc., unlawful
    All contracts and instruments of every kind, nature or description, which have been executed after June 27, 1935, or which hereafter may be executed within this state in payment, satisfaction, settlement or compromise of any claim or cause of action abolished or barred by this chapter, whether such claim or cause of action arose within or without this state, are hereby declared to be contrary to the public policy of this state and absolutely void.

    It shall be unlawful to cause, induce or procure any person to execute such  a contract or instrument, or cause, induce or procure any person to give, pay,  transfer or deliver any money or thing of value in payment, satisfaction,  settlement or compromise of any such claim or cause of action, or to receive,  take or accept any such money or thing of value as such payment, satisfaction,  settlement or compromise.

    It shall be unlawful to commence or cause to be commenced, either as party or attorney, or as agent or otherwise in behalf of either, in any court of this  state, any proceeding or action seeking to enforce or recover upon any such  contract or instrument, knowing it to be such, whether the same shall have been  executed within or without this state.

    This section shall not apply to the payment, satisfaction, settlement or compromise of any causes of action which are not abolished or barred by this chapter, or any contracts or instruments executed prior to June 27, 1935, or to  the bona fide holder in due course of any negotiable instrument executed since  that date.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:23-5.  Violations of chapter, misdemeanor;  fine or imprisonment
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be  guilty of a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or by imprisonment for not more than 1 year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:23-6.  Construction of chapter
    This chapter shall be liberally construed to effectuate the objects and purposes thereof and the public policy of the state as hereby declared.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:23-7.  Laws not affected
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as a repeal of any of the provisions of the penal law or the criminal procedure law or of any other law of this state relating to criminal or quasi-criminal actions or proceedings.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:23A-1.    Short title 
    This act shall be known and may be cited as "The New Jersey Alternative Procedure for Dispute Resolution Act." 

   L. 1987, c. 54, s. 1. 

2A:23A-2.    Contracts to submit; enforcement of submission; waiver of appeal 
    a.   Any provision in a written contract whereby the parties agree to settle by means of alternative resolution, as provided in this act, (1) any controversy that may arise from the contract or from a refusal to perform the contract or (2) any written agreement whereby the parties to an existing controversy agree to use alternative resolution as provided in this act, whether the controversy arose out of a contract or otherwise, is valid, enforceable and irrevocable, except upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation of a contract.  In order for the provisions of this act to be applicable, it shall be sufficient that the parties signify their intention to resolve their dispute by reference in the agreement to "The New Jersey Alternative Procedure for Dispute Resolution Act" (P.L. 1987, c. 54; C. 2A:23A-1 et seq.). 

   b.   Any contract provision or agreement described in subsection a. of this section shall be construed as an implied consent by the parties to the jurisdiction of the Superior Court to enforce that provision or agreement pursuant to the provisions set forth in this act and to enter judgment thereon.  The contract provision or agreement shall constitute a waiver by the parties of the right to trial by jury and to appeal or review, except as specifically provided for in this act. 

   L. 1987, c. 54, s. 2. 

2A:23A-3.    Coordinated alternative dispute resolution, court proceedings
    a.   When parties have agreed to alternative resolution proceedings under separate agreements under this act, and the claims to be resolved may involve evidence, witnesses and testimony reasonably necessary to resolve issues and facts arising out of a related project or series of agreements, then these proceedings may be held in a consolidated alternative resolution proceeding. Whenever reasonably possible, the same umpire shall be designated to hear and determine these claims. 

   b.   Whenever the claims to be resolved in an alternative resolution proceeding may involve evidence, witnesses and testimony reasonably necessary to resolve issues and facts arising out of a related project or series of agreements, which are the subject of litigation in any court of this State, the court may authorize consolidation of the alternative resolution proceeding and the court proceedings to advance expeditious use of court time; provided, however, that consolidation shall not be permitted to unduly delay the expeditious resolution of the alternative resolution proceedings provided for by this act. 

   c.   The provisions of subsections a. and b. of this section shall be liberally construed to effectuate the remedial purpose of this act to provide for the expeditious resolution of disputes arising out of a related project or series of agreements. 

   L. 1987, c. 54, s. 3. 

2A:23A-4.    Demand for alternative resolution; action for order for alternative resolution 
    a.   Any party to an agreement which provides for alternative resolution under this act shall institute a proceeding pursuant to that agreement by: 

   (1)  Giving written notice to all other parties of the party's demand for resolution, which notice shall set forth concisely the claims, and where appropriate the defenses, in dispute between the parties and the relief sought, including the amount of liquidated damages demanded, if any; and 

   (2)  Initiating the procedure for selecting the umpire or, if no procedure is provided in the agreement, by initiating a summary action as provided in this act to have an umpire appointed. 

   b.   When a party is aggrieved by the failure, neglect or refusal of another to perform under a written agreement providing for alternative resolution that party may apply to the Superior Court for an order directing that alternative resolution proceed in the manner provided for in the agreement.  The court shall proceed in a summary action to determine whether there has been an agreement in writing for alternative resolution or whether there has been a failure to comply with a demand for alternative resolution. 

   L. 1987, c. 54, s. 4. 

2A:23A-5.    Complete authority of umpire; appeals 
    a.   Whenever an alternative resolution is properly demanded, the umpire designated therein shall have full jurisdiction to provide all relief and to determine all claims and disputes arising thereunder, including whether the particular issue or dispute is covered by the agreement for alternative resolution, and whether there was fraud in the inducement of the entire agreement which provides for alternative resolution; however, the umpire shall not have jurisdiction with regard to a claim that an alternative resolution clause was procured by fraud.  Whenever possible, all requests for relief ancillary to the claims and disputes covered by the agreement for alternative resolution shall first be addressed to the umpire for determination. 

   b.   There shall be no review of any intermediate ruling or determination made by the umpire during the course of alternative resolution proceedings, except as provided in this act.  An appeal from a final award decision by the umpire may be obtained only as provided in section 13 of this act. 

   L. 1987, c. 54, s. 5. 

2A:23A-6.    Provisional remedies 
    a.   Whenever an umpire acts upon an application for relief in the nature of a civil provisional remedy under any applicable law, including the civil remedies of attachment, replevin, sequestration, and other corresponding or equivalent remedies, however designated and regardless of whether the remedy is ancillary to an action or must be obtained by an independent action, the umpire shall have full authority to act thereon. Whenever any of these remedies are applied for during an alternative resolution proceeding, the umpire shall promptly rule on that application. Any determination reached before a final award shall be considered an intermediate ruling as provided for in subsection b. of section 5 of this act.  Any party may apply at any time to the Superior Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction for an order enforcing the determination of the umpire directing relief in the nature of any of the provisional remedies provided for in this section.  Whenever enforcement of an order is sought pursuant to this subsection, review of the validity of the order may be had by way of defense to enforcement. 

   b.   Where reasonably required by the circumstances, a party may apply to the Superior Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction for an order granting any of the provisional remedies or other relief set forth in this section, before the umpire provided for in the agreement, or designated by the court, is authorized or able to act on the request for relief. 

   L. 1987, c. 54, s. 6. 

2A:23A-7.    Limited intermediate review 
    a.   In exceptional circumstances, to prevent a manifest denial of justice, or when it clearly appears that a party will suffer irreparable harm or that damages may not be reasonably calculated or, if capable of calculation, that they will not be collectible, a party who is aggrieved by any intermediate ruling, except intermediate rulings made pursuant to section 6 of this act, or the failure to rule by an umpire may move before the Superior Court for an expedited summary review under procedures adopted by the Supreme Court.  The alternative resolution proceeding shall not be abated, stayed or delayed by the application for an intermediate review unless the umpire or the court, in exceptional cases or circumstances, so rules.  The ruling on a summary intermediate review application by the court shall thereafter govern the parties in the alternative resolution proceeding, provided, however, that this ruling may be later modified or vacated by the umpire or the court where specific facts are thereafter determined that would make the continuance of the court ruling manifestly unfair, unjust or grossly inequitable.  When it appears that resort to the court to review an intermediate ruling has been abused by any party, the court may award reasonable counsel fees without regard to the ultimate outcome of the alternative resolution proceeding. 

   b.   The signature of an attorney or party to an intermediate appeal, or in opposition thereto, constitutes a certification by him: 

   (1)  That he has read the pleadings and all supporting papers relating to the intermediate appeal; 

   (2)  That to the best of his knowledge, information and belief, formed after reasonable inquiry, the appeal or opposition is well grounded in fact and is warranted by existing law or a good faith argument for the extension, modification or reversal of existing law; and 

   (3)  That it is not interposed for any improper purpose, such as to cause unnecessary delay or a needless increase in the cost of litigation. 

   If such a pleading, application or other paper is filed in violation of this subsection, the court by summary review, upon motion by one of the parties or upon its own initiative, may impose upon the party causing the summary review, reasonable expenses, including a reasonable attorney's fee, incurred because of the filing of the pleading, application or other paper. 

   L. 1987, c. 54, s. 7. 

2A:23A-8.    Stay of court action for proceeding subject to alternative resolution 
    In an action brought in any court upon an issue arising out of an agreement providing for alternative resolution under this act, the court, when satisfied that the issue involved is referable to alternative resolution, shall stay the action until the alternative resolution proceeding has been conducted in accordance with the terms of the agreement, unless the party seeking the stay is already in default. 

   L. 1987, c. 54, s. 8. 

2A:23A-9.    Umpires 
    a.   An alternative resolution proceeding shall be conducted by a single umpire unless otherwise expressly provided for in the agreement.  If the agreement designates a person or persons, the person or persons named shall conduct the proceeding.  If a method is provided in the agreement for appointing one or more umpires to conduct the alternative resolution proceeding, it shall be followed; but, if no method is provided, or if a method is provided and a party fails to avail himself of that method, or if for other reasons there is a lapse in the naming of an umpire or in filling a vacancy, the Superior Court shall in a summary action appoint the umpire. Any umpire so appointed shall serve with the same powers as if specifically designated. 

   b.   Unless otherwise provided for in the agreement, or set by the parties at the commencement of the proceeding, the court shall set the umpire's hourly fee. 

   c.   An umpire is not competent to testify in any subsequent proceeding arising out of or related to an alternative resolution proceeding in which the umpire served, except for an action brought against the umpire pursuant to subsection d. of this section. 

   d.   An umpire shall be immune from any claim for damages arising out of a proceeding in which the umpire served unless the award is overturned for the reasons set forth in paragraph (1) of subsection c. of section 13 of this act and there is a finding that the umpire participated in such wrongful conduct. Upon such a finding, a separate civil action or proceeding may be instituted against an umpire. 

   e.   A finding that an umpire participated in wrongful conduct proscribed in paragraph (1) of subsection c. of section 13 of this act which results in the award being overturned, shall not be admissible as evidence in any subsequent action against the umpire, nor shall it establish any fact as a claim of res judicata.  The wrongful conduct shall be proved de novo in any subsequent action or proceeding where the issue arises. 

   L. 1987, c. 54, s. 9. 

2A:23A-10.   Discovery 
    a.   Each party shall be entitled to discovery by way of oral deposition, including videotape deposition, inspection and copying of all relevant documents within the care, custody or control of a party or witness, and interrogatories when authorized by leave of the umpire.  Except as provided herein, the rules of the Supreme Court governing discovery shall be applicable. 

   b.   All discovery shall be completed within 60 days following receipt of the demand for alternative resolution or the entry of a final order compelling alternative resolution.  The umpire shall have the authority to extend the time for completion of permitted discovery or to limit or terminate any permitted discovery upon application which can be heard in any suitable way, including telephone conference or on submitted papers.  The decision of the umpire shall be subject to modification upon review by the Superior Court in a summary review as provided for by rules of the New Jersey Supreme Court when the umpire is shown to have improperly exceeded his discretion. 

   c.   Reasonable production of documents at any oral deposition upon notice in lieu of subpoena given to a party may be required. 

   d.   A notice for inspection and copying of documents provided for in this act may require that the same shall be produced no sooner than 15 days after receipt of service.  The cost of copying shall be paid by the party demanding the inspection. 

   L. 1987, c. 54, s. 10. 

2A:23A-11  Hearing by umpire; witnesses; subpoena; factual, legal contentions.

	11. a. When more than one umpire is agreed upon, all the umpires shall sit at the hearing of the case, unless by written consent, all parties agree to a lesser number.

	b.	The umpire conducting an alternative resolution proceeding may require the attendance of any person as a witness and the production of any book or written instrument.  The fees for the attendance shall be those allowed witnesses in a civil action.

	c.	Subpoenas shall issue in the name of and be signed by the umpire, or if there is more than one umpire, by a majority of them, and shall be directed to the person therein named and served in the same manner as a subpoena to testify before a court of record.  If a person subpoenaed to testify refuses or neglects to obey a subpoena, the Superior Court, upon application, may compel his attendance before the umpire or hold the person in contempt as if the person had failed to respond to a subpoena issued by the court.

	d.	In alternative resolution proceedings held under this act, parties shall not be bound by the statutory and common law rules of evidence, except as provided for conduct of contested cases under the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.); provided, however, that all statutes and common law rules relating to privilege shall remain in effect. In any case when no rule, procedure or practice applies to the offer of evidence or procedure to be adopted, the umpire shall proceed so that the informality of the proceedings is assured.

	e.	Each party to an alternative resolution proceeding shall submit to the umpire and his adversary a statement of the party's factual and legal position with respect to the issues to be resolved, at a date fixed by the umpire to permit proper preparation for all hearings.  The submitted statement shall govern, control and limit the facts and legal issues to be determined in the alternative resolution proceeding.  Amended or supplemental legal and factual statements may be filed as permitted by the umpire where the same will not unduly prejudice the other party to the proceeding.

	f.	In an alternative resolution proceeding when the umpire is of the opinion that evidence by impartial experts would be of assistance, the umpire may direct that expert evidence be obtained.  The fees and expenses of expert witnesses shall be paid by the parties as directed by the umpire.

	g.	Unless otherwise provided by the agreement for alternative resolution:

	(1)	The umpire shall appoint a time and place for the hearing and cause notification to the parties by personal service or by certified mail, with return receipt requested, not less than five days before the hearing. Appearance at the hearing waives the notice requirement.  The umpire may adjourn the hearing from time to time as necessary and, on request of a party and for good cause, or upon their own motion, may postpone the hearing to a time not later than the date fixed by the agreement for making the award, unless the parties consent to a later date.  The umpire may determine the controversy upon the evidence produced, notwithstanding the failure of a party duly notified to appear.  The Superior Court, on application in any pending summary proceeding, may direct the umpire to proceed promptly with the hearing and determination of the controversy.

	(2)	The parties are entitled to be heard, to present evidence material to the controversy and to cross-examine witnesses appearing at the hearing.

	(3)	The hearing shall be conducted by all the umpires, but a majority may determine any question and render a final award.  If, during the course of the hearing, an umpire for any reason ceases to act, the remaining umpires appointed to act may continue with the hearing and determination of the controversy.

	L.1987,c.54,s.11;  amended 2003, c.95, s.33.

2A:23A-12.   Determination in writing; application for modification of award by umpire; confirmations 
    a.   The award in an alternative resolution proceeding shall be in writing and acknowledged or proved in the same manner as a deed for the conveyance of real estate and delivered personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or as provided in the agreement to each party or his attorney who has appeared in the proceeding.  The award shall state findings of all relevant material facts, and make all applicable determinations of law. 

   b.   An award shall be made within the time fixed by the agreement for alternative resolution or, if not fixed, within such time as the Superior Court orders on application of a party.  The parties or the Superior Court upon application and for good cause shown may extend the time for making the award either before or after the expiration of that time.  A party waives the right to object that an award was not made within the time required unless the party notifies the umpire of the party's objection prior to the delivery of the award. 

   c.   The power of the umpires may be exercised by a majority of them unless otherwise provided by the agreement for alternative resolution or by this act. 

   d.   On written application of a party to the umpire within 20 days after delivery of the award to the applicant, the umpire may modify the award upon the grounds stated in subsection e. of section 13 of this act. Written notice of the application shall be given to other parties to the proceeding.  Written objection to modification must be served on the umpire and other parties to the proceeding within 10 days of receipt of the notice. The umpire shall dispose of any application made under this section in writing, signed and acknowledged by him, within 30 days after either written objection to modification has been served or the time for serving an objection has expired, whichever is earlier.  The parties may in writing extend the time for the disposition either before or after its expiration. 

   e.   The umpire shall make the award on all issues submitted for alternative resolution in accordance with applicable principles of substantive law. 

   f.   The court shall confirm an award upon application of a party made within one year after its delivery to him, unless the award is vacated or modified upon a ground specified in section 13 of this act. 

   L. 1987, c. 54, s. 12. 

2A:23A-13.   Application to court for review of award 
    a.   A party to an alternative resolution proceeding shall commence a summary application in the Superior Court for its vacation, modification or correction within 45 days after the award is delivered to the applicant, or within 30 days after receipt of an award modified pursuant to subsection d. of section 12 of this act, unless the parties shall extend the time in writing. The award of the umpire shall become final unless the action is commenced as required by this subsection. 

   b.   In considering an application for vacation, modification or correction, a decision of the umpire on the facts shall be final if there is substantial evidence to support that decision; provided, however, that when the application to the court is to vacate the award pursuant to paragraph (1), (2), (3), or (4) of subsection c., the court shall make an independent determination of any facts relevant thereto de novo, upon such record as may exist or as it may determine in a summary expedited proceeding as provided for by rules adopted by the Supreme Court for the purpose of acting on such applications. 

   c.   The award shall be vacated on the application of a party who either participated in the alternative resolution proceeding or was served with a notice of intention to have alternative resolution if the court finds that the rights of that party were prejudiced by: 

   (1)  Corruption, fraud or misconduct in procuring the award; 

   (2)  Partiality of an umpire appointed as a neutral; 

   (3)  In making the award, the umpire's exceeding their power or so imperfectly executing that power that a final and definite award was not made;

   (4)  Failure to follow the procedures set forth in this act, unless the party applying to vacate the award continued with the proceeding with notice of the defect and without objection; or 

   (5)  The umpire's committing prejudicial error by erroneously applying law to the issues and facts presented for alternative resolution. 

   d.   The award shall be vacated on the application of a party who neither participated in the proceeding nor was served with a notice of intention to have alternative resolution if the court finds that: 

   (1)  The rights of that party were prejudiced by one of the grounds specified in subsection c. of this section; or 

   (2)  A valid agreement to have alternative resolution was not made; or 

   (3)  The agreement to have alternative resolution had not been complied with; or 

   (4)  The claim was barred by any provision of this act. 

   e.   The court shall modify the award if: 

   (1)  There was a miscalculation of figures or a mistake in the description of any person, thing or property referred to in the award; 

   (2)  The umpire has made an award based on a matter not submitted to them and the award may be corrected without affecting the merits of the decision upon the issues submitted; 

   (3)  The award is imperfect in a matter of form, not affecting the merits of the controversy; or 

   (4)  The rights of the party applying for the modification were prejudiced by the umpire erroneously applying law to the issues and facts presented for alternative resolution. 

   f.   Whenever it appears to the court to which application is made, pursuant to this section, either to vacate or modify the award because the umpire committed prejudicial error in applying applicable law to the issues and facts presented for alternative resolution, the court shall, after vacating or modifying the erroneous determination of the umpire, appropriately set forth the applicable law and arrive at an appropriate determination under the applicable facts determined by the umpire.  The court shall then confirm the award as modified. 

   L. 1987, c. 54, s. 13. 

2A:23A-14.   Rehearing, confirmation 
    Upon vacating an award pursuant to section 13, except for the reasons stated in paragraph (5) of subsection c. of section 13, the court may order a rehearing and determination of all or any of the issues, either before the same umpire, having due regard for whether the award was vacated by reason of the actions of the umpire which were violative of paragraph (1), (2), (3), or (4) of subsection c. of section 13 or before a new umpire appointed in accordance with the alternative resolution agreement of this act.  Time, in any provision limiting the time for a rehearing or an award, shall be measured from the date of the order or rehearing, whichever is appropriate, or from a time as may be specified by the court.  Upon denial of a motion to vacate or modify, the court to which the application for that relief is directed shall confirm the award. 

   L. 1987, c. 54, s. 14. 

2A:23A-15.   Death, incompetency of party 
    When a party dies after making a written agreement to submit a controversy to alternative resolution, the proceedings may be initiated or continued upon the application of, or upon notice to, the party's executor or administrator or, when it relates to real property, the party's distributee or devisee who has succeeded to the party's interest in the real property.  When a custodian of the property or a guardian of the person of a party to an agreement is appointed, the proceedings may be continued upon the application of, or notice to, the custodian or guardian.  Upon the death or incompetency of a party, the court may extend the time within which an application to confirm, vacate or modify the award or to stay alternative resolution must be made.  Where a party has died since an award was delivered, the proceedings thereupon are the same as when a party dies after a verdict. 

   L. 1987, c. 54, s. 15. 

2A:23A-16.   Limitation of time 
    If, at the time a demand for alternative resolution was made or served, the claims sought to be resolved would have been barred by a limitation of time had it been asserted in a court of this State, a party may assert the limitation as a bar to the alternative resolution to a court to which application has been made to compel alternative resolution under this act. A party may also assert such bar before the umpire, who shall promptly rule upon that issue in a separate determination. 

   L. 1987, c. 54, s. 16. 

2A:23A-17.   Fees, expenses 
    Unless otherwise provided in the agreement for alternative resolution, the expenses and fees of the umpire with other expenses, including, but not limited to, costs for the place where the hearings are held, deposition or hearing transcripts, expert fees, and copying of documents, incurred in the conduct of the proceeding, shall be paid as provided in the award.  When the agreement for alternative resolution expressly provides, the umpire may provide for payment of attorney's fees. 

   L. 1987, c. 54, s. 17. 

2A:23A-18.   Judgment on award 
    a.   Whenever a court shall vacate, modify or correct an award as provided for in this act and thereupon enter an award based on that determination, the court, upon application, shall in a summary proceeding as provided for herein determine all costs and expenses permitted by section 17 of this act.  The court may thereupon include the costs and expenses in the final judgment entered confirming the award. 

   b.   Upon the granting of an order confirming, modifying or correcting an award, a judgment or decree shall be entered by the court in conformity therewith and be enforced as any other judgment or decree.  There shall be no further appeal or review of the judgment or decree. 

   L. 1987, c. 54, s. 18. 

2A:23A-19  Superior Court jurisdiction of proceedings.

	19.	Whenever a party to an agreement for alternative resolution has the right to apply to the Superior Court under this act, those proceedings shall be heard in accordance with any rules adopted by the New Jersey Supreme Court.  These proceedings shall be summary in nature and expedited.  This act shall be liberally construed to effectuate its remedial purpose of allowing parties by agreement to have resolution of factual and legal issues in accordance with informal proceedings and limited judicial review in an expedited manner. 

	L.1987,c.54,s.19; amended 2005, c.338.

2A:23A-20.   Arbitration 
     a.   Any civil action brought for personal injury, except for actions brought pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1972, c. 70 (C. 39:6A-1 et seq.), shall be submitted, except as hereinafter provided, to arbitration by the assignment judge of the court in which the action is filed, if the court determines that the amount in controversy is $20,000.00 or less, exclusive of costs. 

    b.   Notwithstanding that the amount in controversy is in excess of $20,000.00, the court may refer the matter to arbitration, if all of the parties to the action consent in writing to arbitration and the court determines that the controversy does not involve novel legal or unduly complex factual issues. 

    c.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any controversy on which an arbitration decision was rendered prior to the filing of the action. The provisions of this section shall apply to any cause of action, subject to this section, filed prior to the operative date of this act, if a pretrial conference has not been concluded thereon. 

    L. 1987,c.329, s.1. 

2A:23A-21.   Filing 
     Submission of a controversy to arbitration shall toll the statute of limitations for filing an action until the filing of the arbitration decision in accordance with section 6 of this act. 

    L. 1987,c.329, s.2. 

2A:23A-22.   Arbitrators 
     a.   The number or selection of arbitrators may be stipulated by mutual consent of all of the parties to the action, which stipulation shall be made in writing prior to or at the time notice is given that the controversy is to be submitted to arbitration.  The assignment judge shall approve the arbitrators agreed to by the parties, whether or not the designated arbitrators satisfy the requirements of subsection b. of this section, upon a finding that the designees are qualified and their serving would not prejudice the interest of any of the parties. 

    b.   If the parties fail to stipulate the number or names of the arbitrators, the arbitrators shall be selected, in accordance with rules of court adopted by the Supreme Court of New Jersey, from a list of arbitrators compiled by the assignment judge, to be comprised of retired judges and qualified attorneys in this State with at least seven years' negligence experience and recommended by the county or State bar association. 

    L. 1987,c.329, s.3. 

2A:23A-23.   Compensation for arbitrators 
     Compensation for arbitrators shall be set by the rules adopted by the Supreme Court of New Jersey.  The Supreme Court may also establish a schedule of fees for attorneys representing the parties to the dispute and for witnesses in arbitration proceedings subject to the provisions of N.J.S. 59:9-5.  Attorney's fees may exceed these limits upon application made to the assignment judge in accordance with the Rules Governing The Courts of the State of New Jersey for the purpose of determining a reasonable fee in light of all the circumstances. 

    The Supreme Court may adopt rules governing offers of judgment by the claimant or defendant prior to the start of arbitration, including the assessment of the costs of arbitration proceedings and attorney's fees, where an offer is made but refused by the other party to the controversy. 

    L. 1987,c.329,s 4. 

2A:23A-24.   Subpenas 
     The arbitrators may, at their initiative or at the request of any party to the arbitrators, issue subpenas for the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, records, documents and other evidence. Subpenas shall be served and shall be enforceable in the manner provided by law. 

    L. 1987,c.329, s.5. 

2A:23A-25.   Arbitration award over $20,000 
     Notwithstanding that a controversy was submitted pursuant to subsection a. of section 1 of this act, the arbitration award may exceed $20,000.00. The arbitration decision shall be in writing, and shall set forth the issues in controversy, and the arbitrators' findings and conclusions of law and fact. 

    L. 1987,c.329, s.6. 

2A:23A-26.   Confirmation 
     The court shall, upon motion of any of the parties, confirm the arbitration decision, and the action of the court shall have the same effect and be enforceable as a judgment in any other action; unless one of the parties petitions the court within 30 days of the filing of the arbitration decision for a trial de novo or for modification or vacation of the arbitration decision for any of the reasons set forth in chapter 24 of Title 2A of the New Jersey Statutes, or an error of law or factual inconsistencies in the arbitration findings. 

    L. 1987,c.329, s.7. 

2A:23A-27.     Payment of fees  
  8.     Except in the case of an arbitration decision vacated by the court or offers of judgment made pursuant to court rules, the party petitioning the court for a trial de novo shall pay to the court a trial de novo fee in an amount established pursuant to the Rules of Court, which shall be utilized by the judiciary to pay the costs of arbitration including the fees of the arbitrators.  

 L.1987,c.329,s.8; amended 1993,c.88,s.2.  

2A:23A-28.   Trial de novo 
     No statements, admissions or testimony made at the arbitration proceedings, nor the arbitration decision, as confirmed or modified by the court, shall be used or referred to at the trial de novo by any of the parties, except that the court may consider any of those matters in determining the amount of any reduction in assessments made pursuant to section 10 of this act. 

    L. 1987,c.329, s.9. 

2A:23A-29.   Assessment of costs for trial de novo 
     The party having filed for a trial de novo shall be assessed court costs and other reasonable costs of the other party to the judicial proceeding, including attorneys' fees, investigation expenses and expenses for expert or other testimony or evidence, which amount shall be, if the party assessed the costs is the one to whom the award is made, offset against any damages awarded to that party by the court, and only to that extent; except that if the judgment is more favorable to the party having filed for a trial de novo, the court may reduce or eliminate the amount of the assessment in accordance with the extent to which the decision of the court is more favorable to that party than the arbitration decision, and as best serves the interest of justice. The court may waive an assessment of costs required by this section upon a finding that the imposition of costs would create a substantial economic hardship as not to be in the interest of justice. 

    L. 1987,c.329, s.10. 

2A:23A-30.   Rules of court; report 
     The Supreme Court of New Jersey shall adopt rules of court appropriate or necessary to effectuate the purpose of this act.  The Administrative Office of the Courts shall not later than March 1 of each year file with the Governor and Legislature a report on the impact of the implementation of this act on insurance settlement practices and costs, and on court calendars and workload.

    L. 1987,c.329, s.11. 

2A:23B-1  Definitions relative to arbitration after 2002.

	1.	Definitions. For the purposes of this act:

	"Arbitration organization" means an association, agency, board, commission or other entity that is neutral and initiates, sponsors or administers an arbitration proceeding or is involved in the appointment of an arbitrator.

	"Arbitrator" means an individual appointed either as a neutral arbitrator or as a party arbitrator to render an award, alone or with others, in a controversy that is subject to an agreement to arbitrate.

	"Court" means the Superior Court of New Jersey.

	"Court rules" means the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey.

	"Knowledge" means actual knowledge.

	"Person" means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint venture, government; governmental subdivision, agency, or instrumentality; public corporation; or any other legal or commercial entity.

	"Record" means information that is inscribed on a tangible medium or that is stored in an electronic or other medium and is retrievable in perceivable form.

	L.2003,c.95,s.1.

2A:23B-2  Notice.

	2.	Notice.

	a.	Except as otherwise provided in this act, a person gives notice to another person by taking action that is reasonably necessary to inform the other person in ordinary course, whether or not the other person acquires knowledge of the notice.

	b.	A person has notice if the person has knowledge of the notice or has received notice.

	c.	A person receives notice when it comes to the person's attention or the notice is delivered at the person's place of residence or place of business, or at another location held out by the person as a place of delivery of such a notice.

	L.2003,c.95,s.2.

2A:23B-3  When act applies.

	3.	When Act Applies.

	a.	This act governs all agreements to arbitrate made on or after January 1, 2003 with the exception of an arbitration between an employer and a duly elected representative of employees under a collective bargaining agreement or collectively negotiated agreement.

	b.	This act governs an agreement to arbitrate made before January 1, 2003 if all the parties to the agreement or to the arbitration proceeding so agree in a record with the exception of an arbitration between an employer and a duly elected representative of employees under a collective bargaining agreement or collectively negotiated agreement.

	c.	On or after January 1, 2005, this act governs an agreement to arbitrate whenever made with the exception of an arbitration between an employer and a duly elected representative of employees under a collective bargaining agreement or collectively negotiated agreement.

	d.	This act shall not apply to agreements to arbitrate made before July 4, 1923.

	L.2003,c.95,s.3.

2A:23B-4  Effect of agreement to arbitrate; nonwaivable provisions.

	4.	Effect of Agreement to Arbitrate; Nonwaivable Provisions.

	a.	Except as otherwise provided in subsections b. and c. of this section, a party to an agreement to arbitrate or to an arbitration proceeding may waive or, the parties may vary the effect of, the requirements of this act to the extent permitted by law.

	b.	Before a controversy that is subject to an agreement to arbitrate arises, a party to the agreement may not:

	(1)	waive or agree to vary the effect of the requirements of section 5a., 6a., 8, 17a., 17b., 26, or 28 of this act;

	(2)	agree to unreasonably restrict the right to notice of the initiation of an arbitration proceeding pursuant to section 9 of this act;

	(3)	agree to unreasonably restrict the right to disclosure of any facts by an arbitrator pursuant to section 12 of this act; or

	(4)	waive the right of a party to an agreement to arbitrate to be represented by a lawyer pursuant to section 16 of this act at any proceeding or hearing pursuant to this act.

	c.	A party to an agreement to arbitrate or arbitration proceeding may not waive, or the parties may not vary the effect of, the requirements of this section or section 3a., 3c., 7, 14, 18, 20d., 20e., 22, 23, 24, 25a., 25b., 29, 30, 34 or 35. Provided however, that nothing in this act shall preclude the parties from expanding the scope of judicial review of an award by expressly providing for such expansion in a record.

	L.2003,c.95,s.4.

2A:23B-5  Application for judicial relief.

	5.	Application for Judicial Relief.

	a.	Except as otherwise provided in section 28 of this act, an application for judicial relief pursuant to this act shall be made upon commencement of a summary action with the court and heard in the manner provided for in such matters by the applicable court rules.

	b.	Unless a civil action involving the agreement to arbitrate is pending, notice of commencement of a summary action pursuant to this act shall be served in the manner provided by the court rules for serving process in summary actions.

	L.2003,c.95,s.5.

2A:23B-6  Validity of agreement to arbitrate.

	6.	Validity of Agreement to Arbitrate.

	a.	An agreement contained in a record to submit to arbitration any existing or subsequent controversy arising between the parties to the agreement is valid, enforceable, and irrevocable except upon a ground that exists at law or in equity for the revocation of a contract.

	b.	The court shall decide whether an agreement to arbitrate exists or a controversy is subject to an agreement to arbitrate.

	c.	An arbitrator shall decide whether a condition precedent to arbitrability has been fulfilled and whether a contract containing a valid agreement to arbitrate is enforceable.

	d.	If a party to a judicial proceeding challenges the existence of, or claims that a controversy is not subject to, an agreement to arbitrate, the arbitration proceeding may continue pending final resolution of the issue by the court, unless the court otherwise orders.

	L.2003,c.95,s.6.

2A:23B-7  Application to compel or stay arbitration.

	7.	Application to Compel or Stay Arbitration.

	a.	On filing a summary action with the court by a person showing an agreement to arbitrate and alleging another person's refusal to arbitrate pursuant to the agreement:

	(1)	if the refusing party does not appear or does not oppose the summary action, the court shall order the parties to arbitrate; and

	(2)	if the refusing party opposes the summary action, the court shall proceed summarily to decide the issue and order the parties to arbitrate unless it finds that there is no enforceable agreement to arbitrate.

	b.	On filing a summary action with the court by a person alleging that an arbitration proceeding has been initiated or threatened but that there is no agreement to arbitrate, the court shall proceed summarily to decide the issue. If the court finds that there is an enforceable agreement to arbitrate, it shall order the parties to arbitrate.

	c.	If the court finds that there is no enforceable agreement, it may not, pursuant to subsection a. or b. of this section, order the parties to arbitrate.

	d.	The court may not refuse to order arbitration because the claim subject to arbitration lacks merit or grounds for the claim have not been established.

	e.	If a proceeding involving a claim referable to arbitration pursuant to an alleged agreement to arbitrate is pending in court, an application pursuant to this section shall be made in that court.  Otherwise, an application pursuant to this section may be made in any court as provided in section 27 of this act.

	f.	If a party commences a summary action to order arbitration, the court on just terms shall stay any judicial proceeding that involves a claim alleged to be subject to the arbitration until the court renders a final decision pursuant to this section.

	g.	If the court orders arbitration, the court on just terms shall stay any judicial proceeding that involves a claim subject to the arbitration. If a claim subject to the arbitration is severable, the court may limit the stay to that claim.

	L.2003,c.95,s.7.

2A:23B-8  Provisional remedies.

	8.	Provisional Remedies.

	a.	Before an arbitrator is appointed and is authorized and able to act, the court, in such summary action upon application of a party to an arbitration proceeding and for good cause shown, may enter an order for provisional remedies to protect the effectiveness of the arbitration proceeding to the same extent and pursuant to the same conditions as if the controversy were the subject of a civil action.

	b.	After an arbitrator is appointed and is authorized and able to act:

	(1)	the arbitrator may issue orders for provisional remedies, including interim awards, as the arbitrator finds necessary to protect the effectiveness of the arbitration proceeding and to promote the fair and expeditious resolution of the controversy, to the same extent and pursuant to the same conditions as if the controversy were the subject of a civil action; and

	(2)	a party to an arbitration proceeding may move the court for a provisional remedy only if the matter is urgent and the arbitrator is not able to act timely or the arbitrator cannot provide an adequate remedy.

	c.	A party does not waive a right of arbitration by making an application pursuant to subsection a. or b. of this section.

	L.2003,c.95,s.8.

2A:23B-9  Initiation of arbitration.

	9.	Initiation of Arbitration.

	a.	A person initiates an arbitration proceeding by giving notice in a record to the other parties to the agreement to arbitrate in the manner agreed between the parties or, in the absence of agreement, by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested and obtained, or by service as authorized for the commencement of a civil action.  The notice shall describe the nature of the controversy and the remedy sought.

	b.	Unless a person objects for lack or insufficiency of notice pursuant to subsection c. of section 15 of this act not later than the beginning of the arbitration hearing, the person, by appearing at the hearing, waives any objection to the lack or insufficiency of notice.

	L.2003,c.95,s.9.

2A:23B-10  Consolidation of separate arbitration proceedings.

	10.	Consolidation of Separate Arbitration Proceedings.

	a.	Except as otherwise provided in subsection c. of this section, upon application of a party to an agreement to arbitrate or to an arbitration proceeding, the court may order consolidation of separate arbitration proceedings as to all or some of the claims if:

	(1)	there are separate agreements to arbitrate or separate arbitration proceedings between the same persons or one of them is a party to a separate agreement to arbitrate or a separate arbitration proceeding with a third person;

	(2)	the claims subject to the agreements to arbitrate arise in substantial part from the same transaction or series of related transactions;

	(3)	the existence of a common issue of law or fact creates the possibility of conflicting decisions in the separate arbitration proceedings; and

	(4)	prejudice resulting from a failure to consolidate is not outweighed by the risk of undue delay or prejudice to the rights of or hardship to parties opposing consolidation.

	b.	The court may order consolidation of separate arbitration proceedings as to some claims and allow other claims to be resolved in separate arbitration proceedings.

	c.	The court may not order consolidation of the claims of a party to an agreement to arbitrate if the agreement prohibits consolidation.



	L.2003,c.95,s.10.

2A:23B-11  Appointment of arbitrator; service as a neutral arbitrator.

	11.	Appointment of Arbitrator; Service as a Neutral Arbitrator.

	a.	If the parties to an agreement to arbitrate agree on a method for appointing an arbitrator, that method shall be followed, unless the method fails.  If the parties have not agreed on a method, the agreed method fails, or an arbitrator appointed fails or is unable to act and a successor has not been appointed, the court, on application of a party to the arbitration proceeding, shall appoint the arbitrator.  An arbitrator so appointed has all the powers of an arbitrator designated in the agreement to arbitrate or appointed pursuant to the agreed method.

	b.	An individual who has a known, direct, and material interest in the outcome of the arbitration proceeding or a known, existing, and substantial relationship with a party may not serve as an arbitrator required by an agreement to be neutral.

	c.	An individual who has a known, direct, and material interest in the outcome of the arbitration proceeding or a known, existing, and substantial relationship with a party may not serve as a party arbitrator if such information has not been disclosed pursuant to section 12 of this act.

	d.	An individual appointed as a party arbitrator may be predisposed toward the appointing party.  From and after the commencement of an arbitration, an arbitrator shall act in good faith and exercise the arbitrator's responsibilities in a manner consistent with the authority placed in the arbitrator by the courts of this State and this act.

	L.2003,c.95,s.11.

2A:23B-12  Disclosure by arbitrator.

	12.	Disclosure by Arbitrator.

	a.	Before accepting appointment, an individual who is requested to serve as an arbitrator, after making a reasonable inquiry, shall disclose to all parties to the agreement to arbitrate and arbitration proceeding and to any other arbitrators any known facts that a reasonable person would consider likely to affect the impartiality of the arbitrator in the arbitration proceeding, including:

	(1)	a financial or personal interest in the outcome of the arbitration proceeding; and

	(2)	an existing or past relationship with any of the parties to the agreement to arbitrate or the arbitration proceeding, their counsel or representatives, a witness, or other arbitrators.

	b.	An arbitrator has a continuing obligation to disclose to all parties to the agreement to arbitrate and arbitration proceeding and to any other arbitrators any facts that the arbitrator learns after accepting appointment which a reasonable person would consider likely to affect the impartiality of the arbitrator.

	c.	If an arbitrator discloses a fact required by subsection a. or b. of this section to be disclosed and a party timely objects to the appointment or continued service of the arbitrator based upon the fact disclosed, subject to the provisions of section 11d. of this act, the objection may be a ground pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection a. of section 23 of this act for vacating an award made by the arbitrator.

	d.	If the arbitrator did not disclose a fact as required by subsection a. or b. of this section, upon timely objection by a party, the court pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection a. of section 23 may vacate an award.

	e.	An individual appointed as an neutral arbitrator who does not disclose a known, direct and material interest in the outcome of the arbitration proceeding or a known, existing, and substantial relationship with a party is presumed to act with evident partiality pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection a. of section 23 of this act.

	f.	An individual appointed as a party arbitrator who does not disclose a known, direct and material interest in the outcome of the arbitration proceeding is presumed to act with evident partiality pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection a. of section 23 of this act.

	g.	If the parties to an arbitration proceeding agree to the procedures of an arbitration organization or any other procedures for challenges to arbitrators before an award is made, substantial compliance with those procedures is a condition precedent to a summary action to vacate an award on that ground pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection a. of section 23 of this act.

	h.	Should an individual designated as an arbitrator make full disclosure as required by this section and a party fails to object within a reasonable time, the party receiving such information shall be held to have waived any right to object to the designation of the arbitrator on the grounds so revealed.

	L.2003,c.95,s.12.

2A:23B-13  Action by majority.

	13.	Action by Majority.

	If there is more than one arbitrator, the powers of an arbitrator shall be exercised by a majority of the arbitrators, but all of them shall conduct the hearing pursuant to subsection c. of section 15 of this act.

	L.2003,c.95,s.13.

2A:23B-14  Immunity of arbitrator; competency to testify; attorney's fees and costs.

	14.	Immunity of Arbitrator; Competency to Testify; Attorney's Fees and Costs.

	a.	An arbitrator or an arbitration organization acting in that capacity is immune from civil liability to the same extent as a judge of a court of this State acting in a judicial capacity.

	b.	The immunity afforded by this section supplements any immunity pursuant to other law.

	c.	The failure of an arbitrator to make a disclosure required by section 12 of this act does not cause any loss of immunity pursuant to this section.

	d.	In a judicial, administrative, or similar proceeding, an arbitrator or representative of an arbitration organization is not competent to testify, and may not be required to produce records as to any statement, conduct, decision, or ruling occurring during the arbitration proceeding, to the same extent as a judge of a court of this State acting in a judicial capacity.  This subsection does not apply:

	(1)	to the extent necessary to determine the claim of an arbitrator, arbitration organization, or representative of the arbitration organization against a party to the arbitration proceeding; or

	(2)	to a hearing in a summary action to vacate an award pursuant to paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection a. of section 23 of this act if the movant establishes prima facie that a ground for vacating the award exists.

	e.	If a person commences a civil action against an arbitrator, arbitration organization or representative of an arbitration organization arising from the services of the arbitrator, organization or representative or if a person seeks to compel an arbitrator or a representative of an arbitration organization to testify or produce records in violation of subsection d. of this section, and the court decides that the arbitrator, arbitration organization or representative of an arbitration organization is immune from civil liability or that the arbitrator or representative of the organization is not competent to testify, the court shall award to the arbitrator, organization or representative reasonable attorney's fees and other reasonable expenses of litigation.

	L.2003,c.95,s.14.

2A:23B-15  Arbitration process.

	15.	Arbitration Process.

	a.	An arbitrator may conduct an arbitration in such manner as the arbitrator considers appropriate for a fair and expeditious disposition of the proceeding.  The authority conferred upon the arbitrator includes the power to hold conferences with the parties to the arbitration proceeding before the hearing and, among other matters, determine the admissibility, relevance, materiality, and weight of any evidence.

	b.	An arbitrator may decide a request for summary disposition of a claim or particular issue:

	(1)	if all interested parties agree; or

	(2)	upon request of one party to the arbitration proceeding if that party gives notice to all other parties to the proceeding, and the other parties have a reasonable opportunity to respond.

	c.	If an arbitrator orders a hearing, the arbitrator shall set a time and place and give notice of the hearing not less than five days before the hearing begins.  Unless a party to the arbitration proceeding makes an objection due to lack or insufficiency of notice not later than the beginning of the hearing, the party's appearance at the hearing waives the objection.  Upon request of a party to the arbitration proceeding and for good cause shown, or upon the arbitrator's own initiative, the arbitrator may adjourn the hearing from time to time as necessary but may not postpone the hearing to a time later than that fixed by the agreement to arbitrate for making the award unless the parties to the arbitration proceeding consent to a later date.  The arbitrator may hear and decide the controversy upon the evidence produced although a party who was duly notified of the arbitration proceeding did not appear.  The court, on request, may direct the arbitrator to conduct the hearing promptly and render a timely decision.

	d.	At a hearing pursuant to subsection c. of this section, a party to the arbitration proceeding has a right to be heard, to present evidence material to the controversy, and to cross-examine witnesses appearing at the hearing.

	e.	If an arbitrator ceases or is unable to act during the arbitration proceeding, a replacement arbitrator shall be appointed in accordance with section 11 of this act to continue the proceeding and to resolve the controversy.

	L.2003,c.95,s.15.

2A:23B-16  Representation by lawyer.

	16.	Representation by Lawyer.

	A party to an arbitration proceeding may be represented by a lawyer.

	L.2003,c.95,s.16.

2A:23B-17  Witnesses; subpoenas; depositions; discovery.

	17.	Witnesses; Subpoenas; Depositions; Discovery.

	a.	An arbitrator may issue a subpoena for the attendance of a witness and for the production of records and other evidence at any hearing and may administer oaths.  A subpoena shall be served in the manner for service of subpoenas in a civil action, and upon filing a summary action with the court by a party to the arbitration proceeding or the arbitrator, enforced in the manner for enforcement of subpoenas in any civil action.

	b.	In order to make the proceedings fair, expeditious, and cost effective, upon request of a party to or a witness in an arbitration proceeding, an arbitrator may permit a deposition of any witness to be taken for use as evidence at the hearing, including a witness who cannot be subpoenaed for or is unable to attend a hearing.  The arbitrator shall determine the conditions pursuant to which the deposition is taken.

	c.	An arbitrator may permit such discovery as the arbitrator decides is appropriate in the circumstances, taking into account the needs of the parties to the arbitration proceeding and other affected persons and the desirability of making the proceeding fair, expeditious, and cost effective.

	d.	If an arbitrator permits discovery pursuant to subsection c. of this section, the arbitrator may order a party to the arbitration proceeding to comply with the arbitrator's discovery-related orders, issue subpoenas for the attendance of a witness and for the production of records and other evidence at a discovery proceeding, and take action against a noncomplying party to the extent a court could if the controversy were the subject of a civil action in this State.

	e.	An arbitrator may issue a protective order to prevent the disclosure of privileged information, confidential information, trade secrets, and other information protected from disclosure to the extent a court could if the controversy were the subject of a civil action in this State.

	f.	All laws compelling a person under subpoena to testify and all fees for attending a judicial proceeding, a deposition or a discovery proceeding as a witness apply to an arbitration proceeding as if the controversy were the subject of a civil action in this State.

	g.	The court may enforce a subpoena or discovery-related order for the attendance of a witness within this State and for the production of records and other evidence issued by an arbitrator in connection with an arbitration proceeding in another State upon conditions determined by the court so as to make the arbitration proceeding fair, expeditious, and cost effective.  A subpoena or discovery-related order issued by an arbitrator in another State shall be served in the manner provided by law for service of subpoenas in a civil action in this State and, upon filing a summary action with the court by a party to the arbitration proceeding or the arbitrator, enforced in the manner provided by law for enforcement of subpoenas in any civil action in this State.

	L.2003,c.95,s.17.

2A:23B-18  Judicial enforcement of preaward ruling by arbitrator.

	18.	 Judicial Enforcement of Preaward Ruling by Arbitrator.

	If an arbitrator makes a preaward ruling in favor of a party to the arbitration proceeding, the party may request the arbitrator to incorporate the ruling into an award pursuant to section 19 of this act.  A prevailing party may file a summary action with the court for an expedited order to confirm the award pursuant to section 22 of this act, in which case the court shall summarily decide the application.  The court shall issue an order to confirm the award unless the court vacates, modifies, or corrects the award pursuant to section 23 or 24 of this act.

	L.2003,c.95,s.18.

2A:23B-19  Award.

	19.	Award.

	a.	An arbitrator shall make a record of an award.  The record shall be signed or otherwise authenticated by any arbitrator who concurs with the award.  The arbitrator or the arbitration organization shall give notice of the award, including a copy of the award, to each party to the arbitration proceeding.

	b.	An award shall be made within the time specified by the agreement to arbitrate or, if not specified therein, within the time ordered by the court.  The court may extend or the parties to the arbitration proceeding may agree in a record to extend the time.  The court or the parties may do so within or after the time specified or ordered.  A party waives any objection that an award was not timely made unless the party gives notice of the objection to the arbitrator before receiving notice of the award.

	L.2003,c.95,s.19.

2A:23B-20  Change of award by arbitration.

	20.	Change of Award by Arbitrator. 

	a.	On application to an arbitrator by a party to an arbitration proceeding, the arbitrator may modify or correct an award:

	(1)	upon a ground stated in paragraph (1) or (3) of subsection a. of section 24 of this act;

	(2)	if the arbitrator has not made a final and definite award upon a claim submitted by the parties to the arbitration proceeding; or

	(3)	to clarify the award.

	b.	An application pursuant to subsection a. of this section shall be made and notice given to all parties within 20 days after the aggrieved party receives notice of the award.

	c.	A party to the arbitration proceeding shall give notice of any objection to the application within 10 days after receipt of the notice.

	d.	If a summary action with the court is pending pursuant to section 22, 23, or 24 of this act, the court may submit the claim to the arbitrator to consider whether to modify or correct the award:

	(1)	upon a ground stated in paragraph (1) or (3) of subsection a. of section 24 of this act.

	(2)	if the arbitrator has not made a final and definite award upon a claim submitted by the parties to the arbitration proceeding; or

	(3)	to clarify the award.

	e.	An award modified or corrected pursuant to this section is subject to sections 19a., 22, 23, and 24 of this act.

	L.2003,c.95,s.20.

2A:23B-21  Remedies; fees and expenses of arbitration proceeding.

	21.	Remedies; Fees and Expenses of Arbitration Proceeding.

	a.	An arbitrator may award punitive damages or other exemplary relief if such an award is authorized by law in a civil action involving the same claim and the evidence produced at the hearing justifies the award in accordance with the legal standards otherwise applicable to the claim.

	b.	An arbitrator may award reasonable attorney's fees and other reasonable expenses of arbitration if such an award is authorized by law in a civil action involving the same claim or by the agreement of the parties to the arbitration proceeding.

	c.	As to all remedies other than those authorized by subsections a. and b. of this section, an arbitrator may order such remedies as the arbitrator considers just and appropriate under the circumstances of the arbitration proceeding.  The fact that such a remedy could not or would not be granted by the court is not a ground for refusing to confirm an award pursuant to section 22 of this act or for vacating an award pursuant to section 23 of this act.

	d.	An arbitrator's expenses and fees, together with other expenses, shall be paid as provided in the award.

	e.	If an arbitrator awards punitive damages or other exemplary relief pursuant to subsection a. of this section, the arbitrator shall specify in the award the basis in fact justifying and the basis in law authorizing the award and state separately the amount of the punitive damages or other exemplary relief.

	L.2003,c.95,s.21.

2A:23B-22  Confirmation of award.

	22.	Confirmation of Award.

	After a party to an arbitration proceeding receives notice of an award, the party may file a summary action with the court for an order confirming the award, at which time the court shall issue a confirming order unless the award is modified or corrected pursuant to section 20 or 24 of this act or is vacated pursuant to section 23 of this act.

	L.2003,c.95,s.22.

2A:23B-23  Vacating award.

	23.	Vacating Award.

	a.	Upon the filing of a summary action with the court by a party to an arbitration proceeding, the court shall vacate an award made in the arbitration proceeding if:

	(1)	the award was procured by corruption, fraud, or other undue means;

	(2)	the court finds evident partiality by an arbitrator; corruption by an arbitrator; or misconduct by an arbitrator prejudicing the rights of a party to the arbitration proceeding;

	(3)	an arbitrator refused to postpone the hearing upon showing of sufficient cause for postponement, refused to consider evidence material to the controversy, or otherwise conducted the hearing contrary to section 15 of this act, so as to substantially prejudice the rights of a party to the arbitration proceeding;

	(4)	an arbitrator exceeded the arbitrator's powers;

	(5)	there was no agreement to arbitrate, unless the person participated in the arbitration proceeding without raising the objection pursuant to subsection c. of section 15 of this act not later than the beginning of the arbitration hearing; or

	(6)	the arbitration was conducted without proper notice of the initiation of an arbitration as required in section 9 of this act so as to substantially prejudice the rights of a party to the arbitration proceeding.

	b.	A summary action pursuant to this section shall be filed within 120 days after the aggrieved party receives notice of the award pursuant to section 19 of this act or within 120 days after the aggrieved party receives notice of a modified or corrected award pursuant to section 20 of this act, unless the aggrieved party alleges that the award was procured by corruption, fraud, or other undue means, in which case the summary action shall be commenced within 120 days after the ground is known or by the exercise of reasonable care would have been known by the aggrieved party.

	c.	If the court vacates an award on a ground other than that set forth in paragraph (5) of subsection a. of this section, it may order a rehearing.  If the award is vacated on a ground stated in paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection a. of this section, the rehearing shall be before a new arbitrator.  If the award is vacated on a ground stated in paragraph (3), (4), or (6) of subsection a. of this section, the rehearing may be before the arbitrator who made the award or the arbitrator's successor.  The arbitrator shall render the decision in the rehearing within the same time as that provided in subsection b. of section 19 of this act for an award.

	d.	If the court denies an application to vacate an award, it shall confirm the award unless an application to modify or correct the award is pending.

	L.2003,c.95,s.23.

2A:23B-24  Modification or correction of award.

	24.	Modification or Correction of Award.

	a.	Upon filing a summary action within 120 days after the party receives notice of the award pursuant to section 19 of this act or within 120 days after the party receives notice of a modified or corrected award pursuant to section 20 of this act, the court shall modify or correct the award if:

	(1)	there was an evident mathematical miscalculation or an evident mistake in the description of a person, thing, or property referred to in the award;

	(2)	the arbitrator made an award on a claim not submitted to the arbitrator and the award may be corrected without affecting the merits of the decision upon the claims submitted; or

	(3)	the award is imperfect in a matter of form not affecting the merits of the decision on the claims submitted.

	b.	If an application made pursuant to subsection a. of this section is granted, the court shall modify or correct and confirm the award as modified or corrected.  Otherwise, unless an application to vacate is pending, the court shall confirm the award.

	c.	An application to modify or correct an award pursuant to this section may be joined with an application to vacate the award.

	L.2003,c.95,s.24.

2A:23B-25  Judgment on award; attorney's fees and litigation expenses.

	25.	Judgment on Award; Attorney's Fees and Litigation Expenses.

	a.	Upon granting an order confirming, vacating without directing a rehearing, modifying, or correcting an award, the court shall enter a judgment in conformity with the arbitrator's award.  The judgment may be recorded, docketed, and enforced as any other judgment in a civil action.

	b.	A court may allow reasonable costs of the summary action and subsequent judicial proceedings.

	c.	On application of a prevailing party to a contested judicial proceeding pursuant to section 22, 23, or 24 of this act, the court may add reasonable attorney's fees and other reasonable expenses of litigation incurred in a judicial proceeding after the award is made to a judgment confirming, vacating without directing a rehearing, or substantially modifying or correcting an award.

	L.2003,c.95,s.25.

2A:23B-26  Jurisdiction.

	26.	Jurisdiction.

	a.	A court of this State having jurisdiction over the controversy and the parties may enforce an agreement to arbitrate.

	b.	An agreement to arbitrate providing for arbitration in this State confers exclusive jurisdiction on the court to enter judgment on an award pursuant to this act.

	c.	Wherever reference is made to any procedural matter stated in this act, the New Jersey Supreme Court rules governing summary actions, or such other rules as may be adopted by the Supreme Court of New Jersey shall apply.

	L.2003,c.95,s.26.

2A:23B-27  Venue.

	27.	Venue.

	A summary action pursuant to section 5 of this act shall be commenced in the court of the county that would have venue if the matter were subject to Superior Court rules in civil actions, or to a court in which the agreement to arbitrate specifies the arbitration hearing is to be held or, if the hearing has been held, in the court of the county in which it was held. 

	L.2003,c.95,s.27.

2A:23B-28  Appeals.

	28.	Appeals.

	a.	An appeal may be taken from:

	(1)	an order denying a summary action to compel arbitration;

	(2)	an order granting a summary action to stay arbitration;

	(3)	an order confirming or denying confirmation of an award;

	(4)	an order modifying or correcting an award;

	(5)	an order vacating an award without directing a rehearing; or

	(6)	a final judgment entered pursuant to this act.

	b.	An appeal pursuant to this section shall be taken as from an order or a judgment in a civil action.

	L.2003,c.95,s.28.

2A:23B-29  Uniformity of application and construction.

	29.	Uniformity of Application and Construction.

	In applying and construing this uniform act, consideration shall be given to the need to promote uniformity of the law with respect to its subject matter among states that enact it.

	L.2003,c.95,s.29.

2A:23B-30  Relationship to Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act.

	30.	Relationship to Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act.

	The provisions of this act governing the legal effect, validity, and enforceability of electronic records or electronic signatures, and of contracts performed with the use of such records or signatures conform to the requirements of the "Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act," 15 U.S.C.s.7002.

	L.2003,c.95,s.30.

2A:23B-31  Prior action or proceeding.

	31.	Prior Action or Proceeding.

	This act does not affect an action or proceeding commenced or right accrued before this act takes effect.  Subject to section 3 of this act, an arbitration agreement made before the effective date of this act is governed by N.J.S.2A:24-1 et seq. and P.L.1987, c.54 (C.2A:23A-1 et seq.).

	L.2003,c.95,s.31.

2A:23B-32  Statutes and procedures not affected.

	32.	Statutes and Procedures Not Affected.

	This act shall not apply to the substance and procedure of "The New Jersey Alternative Procedure for Dispute Resolution Act, " P.L.1987, c.54 (C.2A:23A-1 et seq.), nor shall this act apply to arbitrations governed by P.L.1987, c.329 (C.2A:23A-20 et seq.), P.L.1983, c.358 (C.39:6A-24 et seq.) or section 24 of P.L.1998, c.21 (C.39:6A-5.1);and, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, any other non-binding court annexed arbitration procedures authorized under court rules or where under existing statutes the application of N.J.S.2A:24-1 through 2A:24-11 is expressly excluded.

	L.2003,c.95,s.32.

2A:23B-33  Definitions relative to arbitration organizations.
	1.	As used in this act:

	"Consumer" means a party to an arbitration agreement who, in the context of that agreement, is an individual who seeks or acquires, including by lease, any goods or services primarily for personal, family, or household purposes including, but not limited to, financial services, healthcare services, or real property. "Consumer" shall not include a business.
 
	"Consumer arbitration" means arbitration pursuant to a standardized contract, written by one party, with a provision requiring that disputes arising after the contract's signing shall be submitted to binding arbitration, and the party not writing the contract is a consumer.  "Consumer arbitration" shall not include an arbitration conducted or administered by a self-regulatory organization as defined by the "Securities Exchange Act of 1934" (15 U.S.C. s.78c), the "Commodity Exchange Act" (7 U.S.C. s.1 et seq.), or regulations adopted under those acts.
 
	"Financial interest" means:
 
	(1)	holding a position in a business as officer, director, trustee, or partner, or holding any position in management of the business, except that any position-holder in a non-profit organization who is not compensated for holding that position shall not be considered to have a financial interest in the organization; or
 
	(2)	ownership of more than a five percent interest in a business.
 
	"Indigent consumer" means a consumer having a gross monthly income that is less than 300 percent of the federal poverty guidelines issued annually by the United States Department of Health and Human Services.
 
	L.2019, c.493, s.1.

2A:23B-34  Prohibited actions for arbitration organization.
  	2.	An arbitration organization shall not administer a consumer arbitration, or provide any other services related to a consumer arbitration, if:
 
	a.	the arbitration organization has, or within the preceding year has had, a financial interest in any party or attorney for a party; or
 
	b.	any party or attorney for a party has, or within the preceding year has had, any type of financial interest in the arbitration organization.
 
	L.2019, c.493, s.2.

2A:23B-35  Payment of fees, costs.
	 3. a. A consumer arbitration shall not require a consumer who is a party to the arbitration to pay the fees and costs incurred by an opposing party if the consumer does not prevail in the arbitration, including, but not limited to, the fees and costs of the arbitrator, arbitration organization, attorney, or witnesses.
 
	 b. (1) All fees and costs charged to or assessed upon a consumer by an arbitration organization in a consumer arbitration, exclusive of arbitrator fees, shall be waived for an indigent consumer. 
 
	(2)	Before requesting or obtaining any fee, an arbitration organization shall provide written notice of the right to obtain a waiver of fees in a manner calculated to bring the matter to the attention of a reasonable consumer, including, but not limited to, prominently placing a notice in its first written communication to the consumer and in any invoice, bill, submission form, fee schedule, or rule or code of procedure.
 
	(3)	Any consumer requesting a waiver of fees or costs may establish eligibility by making a declaration under oath of the consumer's monthly income and the number of persons living in the consumer's household on a form provided by the arbitration organization and signed by the consumer.  An arbitration organization shall not require a consumer to provide any further statement or evidence of indigence.
 
	(4)	Any information obtained by an arbitration organization regarding a consumer's identity, financial condition, income, wealth, or fee waiver request shall be kept confidential and may not be disclosed to any adverse party or any nonparty to the arbitration, except an arbitration organization may not keep confidential the number of waiver requests received or granted, or the total amount of fees waived.
 
	 c.	Nothing in this section shall affect the ability of an arbitration organization to shift fees that would otherwise be charged or assessed upon a consumer party to another party.
 
	 d.	This section shall only apply to arbitration pursuant to a standardized contract, written by one party, with a provision requiring that disputes arising after the contract's signing shall be submitted to binding arbitration, and the party not writing the contract is a consumer.
 
	L.2019, c.493, s.3.

2A:23B-36  Collection, publishing, availability of certain information.
 	 4. a. Any arbitration organization that administers or otherwise is involved in more than 50 consumer arbitrations per year shall collect, publish at least quarterly, and make available to the public, all of the following information regarding each consumer arbitration within the preceding five years:
 
	(1)	the name of any corporation or other business entity that is party to the arbitration;
 
	(2)	the type of dispute involved, including, but not limited to, goods, banking, insurance, health care, or employment.  In the case of arbitration involving employment, the amount of the employees' annual wage divided into the following ranges: 
 
	(a)	less than $100,000;
 
	(b)	$100,000 to $250,000, inclusive; and 
 
	(c)	more than $250,000;
 
	(3)	whether the consumer was the prevailing party;
 
	(4)	the number of occasions a business entity, which is a party to an arbitration, has previously been a party in an arbitration or mediation administered by the arbitration organization;
 
	(5)	whether the consumer was represented by an attorney;
 
	(6)	the date the arbitration organization received the demand for arbitration, the date the arbitrator was appointed, and the date of disposition by the arbitrator or arbitration organization;
 
	(7)	the type of disposition of the dispute, if known, including withdrawal, abandonment, settlement, award after hearing, award without hearing, default, or dismissal without hearing;
 
	(8)	the amount of the claim, the amount of the award, and any other relief granted, if any; and
 
	(9)	the name of the arbitrator, the total fee for the case, and the percentage of the arbitrator's fee allocated to each party.
 
	 b.	If the information required by subsection a. of this section is provided by the arbitration organization in a computer-searchable format through the company's Internet website and may be downloaded without any fee, the company may charge the actual cost of copying to any person who requests the information on paper.  If the information required by subsection a. of this section is not accessible through the Internet, the company shall provide that information without charge to any person who requests the information on paper.
 
	 c.	An arbitration organization shall not be liable for collecting, publishing, or distributing the information required by this section.
 
	L.2019, c.493, s.4.

2A:23C-1  Short title.
	1.	This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Uniform Mediation Act."

	L.2004,c.157,s.1.

2A:23C-2  Definitions.
	2.	Definitions. As used in this act:

	"Mediation" means a process in which a mediator facilitates communication and negotiation between parties to assist them in reaching a voluntary agreement regarding their dispute.

	"Mediation communication" means a statement, whether verbal or nonverbal or in a record, that occurs during a mediation or is made for purposes of considering, conducting, participating in, initiating, continuing, or reconvening a mediation or retaining a mediator.  A mediation communication shall not be deemed to be a public record under P.L.1963, c.73 (C.47:1A-1 et seq.) as amended and supplemented by P.L.2001, c.404 (C.47:1A-5 et seq.).

	"Mediator" means an individual who conducts a mediation.

	"Nonparty participant" means a person, other than a party or mediator, who participates in a mediation.

	"Mediation party" means a person who participates in a mediation and whose agreement is necessary to resolve the dispute.

	"Person" means an individual; corporation; business trust; estate; trust; partnership; limited liability company; association; joint venture; government; governmental subdivision, agency, or instrumentality; public corporation, or any other legal or commercial entity.

	"Proceeding" means a judicial, administrative, arbitral, or other adjudicative process, including related pre-hearing and post-hearing motions, conferences, and discovery; or a legislative hearing or similar process.

	"Record" means information that is inscribed on a tangible medium or that is stored in an electronic or other medium and is retrievable in perceivable form.

	"Sign" means to execute or adopt a tangible symbol with the present intent to authenticate a record, or to attach or logically associate an electronic symbol, sound, or process to or with a record with the present intent to authenticate a record.

	L.2004,c.157,s.2.

2A:23C-3  Scope.
	3.	Scope.

	a.	Except as otherwise provided in subsection b. or c., this act shall apply to a mediation in which:

	(1)	the mediation parties are required to mediate by statute, court rule or administrative agency rule, or are referred to mediation by a court, administrative agency, or arbitrator;

	(2)	the mediation parties and the mediator agree to mediate in a record that demonstrates an expectation that mediation communications will be privileged against disclosure; or

	(3)	the mediation parties use as a mediator an individual who holds himself out as a mediator, or the mediation is provided by a person who holds itself out as providing mediation.

	b.	The act shall not apply to a mediation:

	(1)	relating to the establishment, negotiation, administration, or termination of a collective bargaining relationship or to any mediation conducted by the Public Employment Relations Commission or the State Board of Mediation;

	(2)	relating to a dispute that is pending under or is part of the processes established by a collective bargaining agreement, except that the act applies to a mediation arising out of a dispute that has been filed with a court or an administrative agency other than the Public Employment Relations Commission or the State Board of Mediation;

	(3)	conducted by a judge who may make a ruling on the case; or

	(4)	conducted under the auspices of:

	(a)	a primary or secondary school if all the parties are students; or

	(b)	a juvenile detention facility or shelter if all the parties are residents of that facility or shelter.

	c.	If the parties agree in advance in a signed record, or a record of proceeding so reflects, that all or part of a mediation is not privileged, the privileges under sections 4 through 6 of P.L. 2004, c.157 (C.2A:23C-4 through C.2A:23C-6) shall not apply to the mediation or part agreed upon.  Sections 4 through 6 of P.L. 2004, c.157 (C.2A:23C-4 through C.2A:23C-6) shall apply to a mediation communication made by a person who has not received actual notice of the agreement before the communication is made.

	L.2004,c.157,s.3.

2A:23C-4  Privilege against disclosure; admissibility; discovery.
	4.	Privilege against Disclosure; Admissibility; Discovery.

	a.	Except as otherwise provided in section 6 of P.L. 2004, c.157 (C.2A:23C-6), a mediation communication is privileged as provided in subsection b. of this section and shall not be subject to discovery or admissible in evidence in a proceeding unless waived or precluded as provided by section 5 of P.L. 2004, c.157 (C.2A:23C-5).

	b.	In a proceeding, the following privileges shall apply:

	(1)	a mediation party may refuse to disclose, and may prevent any other person from disclosing, a mediation communication.

	(2)	a mediator may refuse to disclose a mediation communication, and may prevent any other person from disclosing a mediation communication of the mediator.

	(3)	a nonparty participant may refuse to disclose, and may prevent any other person from disclosing, a mediation communication of the nonparty participant.

	c.	Evidence or information that is otherwise admissible or subject to discovery shall not become inadmissible or protected from discovery solely by reason of its disclosure or use in a mediation.

	L.2004,c.157,s.4.

2A:23C-5  Waiver and preclusion of privilege.
	5.	Waiver and Preclusion of Privilege.

	a.	A privilege under section 4 of P.L.2004, c.157 (C.2A:23C-4) may be waived in a record or orally during a proceeding if it is expressly waived by all parties to the mediation and:

	(1)	in the case of the privilege of a mediator, it is expressly waived by the mediator; and

	(2)	in the case of the privilege of a nonparty participant, it is expressly waived by the nonparty participant.

	b.	A person who discloses or makes a representation about a mediation communication that prejudices another person in a proceeding is precluded from asserting a privilege under section 4 of P.L.2004, c.157 (C.2A:23C-4), but only to the extent necessary for the person prejudiced to respond to the representation or disclosure.

	c.	A person who intentionally uses a mediation to plan, attempt to commit or commit a crime, or to conceal an ongoing crime or ongoing criminal activity is precluded from asserting a privilege under section 4 of P.L.2004, c.157 (C.2A:23C-4).

	L.2004,c.157,s.5.

2A:23C-6  Exceptions to privilege.
 
 	6.	Exceptions to Privilege.

	a.	There is no privilege under section 4 of P.L.2004, c.157 (C.2A:23C-4) for a mediation communication that is:
 
	(1)	in an agreement evidenced by a record signed by all parties to the agreement;
 
	(2)	made during a session of a mediation that is open, or is required by law to be open, to the public;
 
	(3)	a threat or statement of a plan to inflict bodily injury or commit a crime;
 
	(4)	intentionally used to plan a crime, attempt to commit a crime, or to conceal an ongoing crime or ongoing criminal activity;
 
	(5)	sought or offered to prove or disprove a claim or complaint filed against a mediator arising out of a mediation;
 
	(6)	except as otherwise provided in subsection c., sought or offered to prove or disprove a claim or complaint of professional misconduct or malpractice filed against a mediation party, nonparty participant, or representative of a party based on conduct occurring during a mediation; or
 
	(7)	sought or offered to prove or disprove child abuse or neglect in a proceeding in which the Division of Child Protection and Permanency in the Department of Children and Families is a party, unless the Division of Child Protection and Permanency participates in the mediation.
 
	b.	There is no privilege under section 4 of P.L.2004, c.157 (C.2A:23C-4) if a court, administrative agency, or arbitrator finds, after a hearing in camera, that the party seeking discovery or the proponent of the evidence has shown that the evidence is not otherwise available, that there is a need for the evidence that substantially outweighs the interest in protecting confidentiality, and that the mediation communication is sought or offered in:
 
	(1)	a court proceeding involving a crime as defined in the "New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice," N.J.S.2C:1-1 et seq.; or
 
	(2)	 except as otherwise provided in subsection c., a proceeding to prove a claim to rescind or reform or a defense to avoid liability on a contract arising out of the mediation.
 
	c.	A mediator may not be compelled to provide evidence of a mediation communication referred to in paragraph (6) of subsection a. or paragraph (2) of subsection b.
 
	d.	If a mediation communication is not privileged under subsection a. or b., only the portion of the communication necessary for the application of the exception from nondisclosure may be admitted. Admission of evidence under subsection a. or b. does not render the evidence, or any other mediation communication, discoverable or admissible for any other purpose.
 
	L.2004, c.157, s.6; amended 2006, c.47, s.22; 2012, c.16, s.4.

2A:23C-7  Prohibited mediator reports.
	7.	Prohibited mediator reports.

	a.	Except as required in subsection b., a mediator may not make a report, assessment, evaluation, recommendation, finding, or other oral or written communication regarding a mediation to a court, administrative agency, or other authority that may make a ruling on the dispute that is the subject of the mediation.

	b.	A mediator may disclose:

	(1)	whether the mediation occurred or has terminated, whether a settlement was reached, and attendance; or

	(2)	a mediation communication as permitted under section 6 of P.L.2004, c.157 (C.2A:23C-6);

	c.	A communication made in violation of subsection a. may not be considered by a court, administrative agency, or arbitrator.

	L.2004,c.157,s.7.

2A:23C-8  Confidentiality.
	8.	Confidentiality.

	Unless made during a session of a mediation which is open, or is required by law to be open, to the public, mediation communications are confidential to the extent agreed by the parties or provided by other law or rule of this State.

	L.2004,c.157,s.8.

2A:23C-9  Mediator's disclosure of conflicts of interest; background.
	9.	Mediator's Disclosure of Conflicts of Interest; Background.

	a.	Before accepting a mediation, an individual who is requested to serve as a mediator shall:

	(1)	make an inquiry that is reasonable under the circumstances to determine whether there are any known facts that a reasonable individual would consider likely to affect the impartiality of the mediator, including a financial or personal interest in the outcome of the mediation and an existing or past relationship with a mediation party or foreseeable participant in the mediation; and

	(2)	disclose any such known fact to the mediation parties as soon as is practicable before accepting a mediation.

	b.	If a mediator learns any fact described in paragraph (1) of subsection a. after accepting a mediation, the mediator shall disclose it as soon as is practicable.

	c.	At the request of a mediation party, an individual who is requested to serve as a mediator shall disclose the mediator's qualifications to mediate a dispute.

	d.	A person who  violates subsection a., b., or g. shall be  precluded by the violation from asserting a privilege under section 4 of P.L.2004, c.157 (C.2A:23C-4), but only to the extent necessary to prove the violation.

	e.	Subsections a, b., c., and g. do not apply to a judge of any court of this State acting as a mediator.

	f.	This act does not require that a mediator have a special qualification by background or profession.

	g.	A mediator shall be impartial, notwithstanding disclosure of the facts required in subsections a. and b.

	L.2004,c.157,s.9.

2A:23C-10  Participation in mediation.
	10.  Participation in Mediation.

	An attorney or other individual designated by a party may accompany the party to and participate in a mediation.  A waiver of representation or participation given before the mediation may be rescinded.

	L.2004,c.157,s.10.

2A:23C-11  Relation to Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act.
	11.  Relation to Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act.

	This act modifies, limits, or supersedes the federal Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act, 15 U.S.C. s.7001 et seq., but this act does not modify, limit, or supersede s.101(c) of that act or authorize electronic delivery of any of the notices described in s.103(b) of that act.

	L.2004,c.157,s.11.

2A:23C-12  Uniformity of application and construction.
	12.  Uniformity of application and construction.

	In applying and construing this act, consideration shall be given to the need to promote uniformity of the law with respect to its subject matter among states that enact it.

	L.2004,c.157,s.12.

2A:23C-13  Severability clause.
	13.  Severability clause.

	If any provision of P.L.2004, c.157 (C.2A:23C-1 et seq.) or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this act which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this act are severable.

	L.2004,c.157,s.13.

2A:23D-1  Short title.
 
 	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Family Collaborative Law Act." 
 
	L.2014, c.50, s.1.

2A:23D-2  Findings, declarations relative to family collaborative law.
 
	2.	The Legislature finds and declares:

	a.	Since at least 2005, attorneys in New Jersey have participated in the dispute resolution method known as family collaborative law, in which an attorney is retained for the limited purpose of assisting his client in resolving family disputes in a voluntary, non-adversarial manner, without court intervention. 
 
	b.	The family collaborative law process is distinct from other dispute resolution mechanisms because the parties intend to resolve their dispute without litigation. Instead, each party, represented by his attorney, meets together with the other party to the dispute, that party's attorney, and, as needed, one or more nonparty participants who are not attorneys but are professionals in their fields, such as certified financial planners, certified public accountants, licensed clinical social workers, psychologists, licensed professional counselors, licensed marriage and family therapists, and psychiatrists. All participants in the family collaborative law process understand and agree that the process is intended to replace litigation and that the process will terminate if either party or either attorney commences a proceeding related to the subject matter to be addressed through the family collaborative process before a court or other tribunal other than to seek incorporation of a settlement agreement into a final judgment.
 
	c.	In order to facilitate full and fair disclosure by the parties to the family collaborative law process, the parties must have an evidentiary privilege to protect them from disclosure of any collaborative law communication.  The nonparty participants in the family collaborative law process, who serve as neutral experts, need a privilege from disclosure of communications made by them during the process similar to the privilege created for mediators in the "Uniform Mediation Act," P.L.2004, c.157 (C.2A:23C-1 et seq.). This will enable nonparty participants to participate candidly in the process and thereby facilitate resolution of the family law dispute. 
 
	L.2014, c.50, s.2.

2A:23D-3  Definitions relative to family collaborative law.
 
	3.	As used in this act:

	a.	"Family collaborative law communication" means a statement, whether oral or in a record, that is made in the course of a family collaborative law process and occurs after the parties sign a family collaborative law participation agreement but before the family collaborative law process is concluded.
 
	b.	"Family collaborative participation agreement" means a written agreement by the parties to participate in a family collaborative law process, in accordance with section 5 of P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-5) in order to resolve their family law dispute.
 
	c.	"Family collaborative law process" means a procedure intended to resolve the family law dispute without intervention by a tribunal provided that the individuals in the dispute: (1) sign a family collaborative law participation agreement; and (2) are represented by family collaborative lawyers. 
 
	d.	"Family collaborative lawyer" means a lawyer who represents a party in a family collaborative law process and whom the party acknowledges is retained for that limited purpose. 
 
	e.	"Family law dispute" means a dispute, claim or issue which is described in a participation agreement and arises under the family or domestic relations law of this State, including but not limited to:
 
	(1)	marriage, civil union, domestic partnership, divorce, dissolution, annulment, or property distribution;
 
	(2)	child custody, visitation, or parenting time;
 
	(3)	alimony, maintenance, or child support; or
 
	(4)	premarital, marital or post-marital agreements, or comparable agreements affecting civil unions or domestic partnerships.
 
	f.	"Nonparty participant" means a person, other than a party and the party's family collaborative lawyer, who participates in a family collaborative law process. This includes, but is not limited to, financial practitioners, including certified financial planners and certified public accountants, and mental health professionals, including licensed clinical social workers, psychologists, licensed professional counselors, licensed marriage and family therapists, and psychiatrists.
 
	g.	"Party" means an individual who signs a family collaborative law participation agreement and whose consent is necessary to resolve a family law dispute under P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-1 et seq.).
 
	h.	"Proceeding" means a judicial or arbitral or adjudicative process before a tribunal.
 
	i.	"Prospective party" means an individual who discusses with a prospective family collaborative lawyer the possibility of signing a family collaborative law participation agreement.
 
	j.	"Record" means information that is inscribed on a tangible medium or that is stored in an electronic or other medium and is retrievable in perceivable form.
 
	k.	"Related to the family law dispute" means involving the same parties, transaction or occurrence, nucleus of operative fact, claim, matter or issue as the family law dispute.
 
	l.	"Settlement agreement" means a signed agreement entered into by the parties to a family collaborative law participation agreement that sets forth a resolution of the parties' family law dispute.
 
	m.	"Sign" means, with present intent to authenticate or adopt a record to execute or adopt a tangible symbol; or attach to or logically associate with the record an electronic symbol, sound, or process.
 
	n.	"Tribunal" means a court, arbitrator, or administrative agency, as applicable, that after presentation of evidence or legal argument, has jurisdiction to render a decision affecting a party's interests in a matter.
 
	L.2014, c.50, s.3.

2A:23D-4  Application of act.
  
	4.	P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-1 et seq.) applies to a family collaborative law process that is subject to a family collaborative law participation agreement, meets the requirements set forth in section 5 of P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D- 5), and is signed on or after the effective date of this act.  
 
	P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-1 et seq.) does not apply to any other collaborative law process or any other collaborative law participation agreement.
 
	L.2014, c.50, s.4.

2A:23D-5  Family collaborative law participation agreement.
  
	5. a. A family collaborative law participation agreement shall:

	(1)	be in a record;
 
	(2)	be signed by the parties;
 
	(3)	state the parties' intention to resolve a family law dispute through a family collaborative law process pursuant to P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-1 et seq.);
 
	(4)	describe the nature and scope of the family law dispute;
 
	(5)	identify the family collaborative lawyer who represents each party in the process; 
 
	(6)	contain a statement that a family collaborative lawyer's role is limited as defined in P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-1 et seq.), consistent with the Rules of Professional Conduct promulgated by the Supreme Court of New Jersey; 
 
	(7)	set forth the manner by which a family collaborative law process begins and the manner by which it terminates or concludes in accordance with sections 6 and 7 of P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-6 and C.2A:23D-7);
 
	(8)	state that any family collaborative law communication of a party or a nonparty participant is confidential and subject to an evidentiary privilege under section 13 of P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-13), and that the privilege may be waived only expressly and by both parties or in the case of a nonparty participant, by the nonparty participant having the right to exercise the privilege; and 
 
	(9)	state that the conduct of the family collaborative lawyer is governed by P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-1 et seq.), the Rules of Court adopted by the Supreme Court of New Jersey, and the Rules of Professional Conduct promulgated by the Supreme Court of New Jersey and that P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-1 et seq.) does not alter the family collaborative lawyer's responsibilities to the client under the Rules of Professional Conduct and any other applicable Rules of Court. 
 
	b.	Parties may agree to include in a family collaborative law participation agreement additional provisions not inconsistent with P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-1 et seq.) or other applicable law.
 
	L.2014, c.50, s.5.

2A:23D-6  Beginning of family collaborative law process.
 
 
	6. a. A family collaborative law process begins when the parties sign a family collaborative law participation agreement. 
 
	b.	Participation in a family collaborative law process is voluntary and may not be compelled by a tribunal.
 
	L.2014, c.50, s.6.

2A:23D-7  Conclusion of family collaborative law process.
  
	7. a. A family collaborative law process is concluded by either:

	(1) 	resolution of a family law dispute as evidenced by a signed settlement agreement; or
 
	(2)	 termination of the process.
 
	b.	A family collaborative law process terminates when:
 
	(1)	a party gives notice to other parties in a record that the process is ended, which a party may do with or without cause; or 
 
	(2)	a party files a document without the agreement of all parties that initiates a proceeding related to the family law dispute; or
 
	(3)	either party is subject to, or obtains, a temporary or final restraining order against the other party in accordance with the "Prevention of Domestic Violence Act of 1991," P.L.1991, c.261 (C.2C:25-17 et seq.); or
 
	(4)	an action is commenced requesting that a tribunal issue emergency relief to protect the health, safety, welfare, or interests of a party or the defense against such a request is commenced; or
 
	(5)	except as provided by section 9 of P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-9), a party discharges a family collaborative lawyer; or
 
	(6)	a party fails to provide information pursuant to section 10 of P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-10) that is necessary to address the issues in dispute, and one of the parties chooses to terminate the collaborative process as a result; or
 
	(7)	a family collaborative lawyer ceases further representation of a party. 
 
	c.	A family collaborative law process does not terminate if, with the consent of the parties, a party, or the party's family collaborative lawyer on the party's behalf, requests a tribunal to incorporate a settlement agreement into a final judgment.
 
	d.	A family collaborative law participation agreement may provide additional methods of terminating or concluding a family collaborative law process consistent with P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-1 et seq.) and the Rules of Professional Conduct promulgated by the Supreme Court of New Jersey.
 
	e.	In the event the family collaborative law process does not result in a judgment resolving the family law dispute and the dispute is, instead, submitted to a tribunal for adjudication, the family collaborative lawyer and the lawyers in the law firm with whom the collaborative family lawyer is associated shall not continue to represent the party in that family law dispute.
 
	L.2014, c.50, s.7.

2A:23D-8 Disqualification of family collaborative lawyer.
 
	8.	A lawyer in a law firm with which the family collaborative lawyer is associated in a partnership, professional corporation, sole proprietorship, limited liability company, or law association is disqualified from appearing before a tribunal to represent a party in a proceeding related to a family collaborative law matter if the family collaborative lawyer is disqualified from doing so in subsection e. of section 7 of P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-7).
 
	L.2014, c.50, s.8.

2A:23D-9 Notice of cessation of representation; continuation of process.
 
	9. a. If a family collaborative lawyer ceases or is disqualified from representation of a party, prompt notice of the cessation of representation or discharge shall be given to all parties in a record.
 
	b.	Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (5) of subsection b. of section 7 of P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-7), and subject to this subsection, if a family collaborative lawyer is discharged or ceases representation of a party, the family collaborative law process continues if, not later than 30 days after the date of notice of the discharge or cessation of representation is sent to the parties pursuant to subsection a. of this section, the unrepresented party:
 
	(1)	retains a successor family collaborative lawyer who is identified in an amended family collaborative law participation agreement; and
 
	(2)	in that amended family collaborative law participation agreement, the parties consent to continue the process and the successor lawyer confirms representation of the party. 
 
	L.2014, c.50, s.9.

2A:23D-10  Disclosure of information.
 
	10.	Except as otherwise provided by law, during the family collaborative law process a party shall, in good faith, provide timely, full, and candid disclosure of information related to the family law dispute without formal discovery. A party shall also promptly update previously disclosed information that has materially changed. The parties may define the scope of disclosure during the collaborative family law process except as provided by law.
 
	L.2014, c.50, s.10.

2A:23D-11  Certain responsibilities of lawyer unaffected.
 
 	11.	P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-1 et seq.) does not affect, waive or supersede:

	a.	The professional responsibility obligations and standards applicable to a lawyer or other licensed professional in this State, including but not limited to the Rules of Professional Conduct promulgated by the Supreme Court of New Jersey; or
 
	b.	The obligation of a person to report abuse or neglect, abandonment, or exploitation of a child or adult under the law of this State.
 
	L.2014, c.50, s.11.

2A:23D-12  Confidentiality.
 
 	12.	A family collaborative law communication is confidential to the extent agreed to by the parties in a signed record or as provided by law.
 
	L.2014, c.50, s.12.

2A:23D-13  Privileges.
 
	13. a. Subject to sections 14 and 15 of P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-14 and C.2A:23D-15), a family collaborative law communication made by a party or any nonparty participant is privileged under subsection b. of this section, is not subject to discovery, and is not admissible in evidence.
 
	b.	In a proceeding, and in addition to application of the lawyer-client privilege provided under the laws of this State, the following privileges apply:
 
	(1)	A party may refuse to disclose, and may prevent the party's lawyer, or a nonparty participant, or any other person from disclosing, a family collaborative law communication.
 
	(2)	A nonparty participant may refuse to disclose, and may prevent a party, a party's lawyer or any other person from disclosing, a family collaborative law communication of the nonparty participant.
 
	c.	The privilege created by this section may be claimed by the party or nonparty participant in person, or if the party or nonparty participant is incapacitated or deceased, by his guardian or personal representative.  Where a corporation or association or other legal entity is the nonparty participant claiming the privilege, and the corporation, association or other entity has been dissolved, the privilege may be claimed by its successors, assigns or trustees in dissolution.
 
	d.	Evidence or information that is otherwise admissible, readily available from other sources, or subject to discovery does not become inadmissible or protected from discovery solely because of its disclosure or use in a family collaborative law process.
 
	L.2014, c.50, s.13.

2A:23D-14  Waiver of privilege.
 
 	14. a. A privilege under section 13 of P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-13) may be waived in a record or orally during a proceeding if it is expressly waived by both parties and, in the case of the privilege of a nonparty participant, it is also expressly waived by the nonparty participant.
 
	b.	A person who discloses or makes a representation about a family collaborative law communication that prejudices another person in a proceeding is precluded from asserting a privilege under section 13 of P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-13), but this preclusion applies only to the extent necessary for the person prejudiced to respond to the disclosure or representation.
 
	L.2014, c.50, s.14.

2A:23D-15  Exemption from privilege.
 
 	15. a. There is no privilege under section 13 of P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-13) for a family collaborative law communication that is:
 
	(1)	made during a session of a family collaborative law process that is open, or is required by law to be open, to the public; or
 
	(2)	sought, obtained, or used to threaten or plan to inflict bodily injury or a crime, or to commit or attempt to commit a crime, or to conceal an ongoing crime or ongoing criminal activity; or
 
	(3)	in a settlement agreement resulting from the family collaborative law process, evidenced by a record signed by both parties to the agreement; or
 
	(4)	a disclosure in a report of suspected domestic violence or suspected child abuse to an appropriate agency under the laws of this State.
 
	b.	There is no privilege under section 13 of P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-13) if a tribunal finds, after a hearing in camera, that the party seeking discovery or the proponent of the evidence has shown the evidence is not otherwise available, the need for the evidence substantially outweighs the interest in protecting confidentiality, and the family collaborative law communication is sought or offered in:
 
	(1)	a court proceeding involving a crime; or
 
	(2)	a proceeding seeking rescission or reformation of a contract arising out of the family collaborative law process or in which a defense to avoid liability on the contract is asserted.
 
	c.	The privileges under section 13 of P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-13) for a family collaborative law communication do not apply to the extent that a communication is:
 
	(1)	sought or offered to prove or disprove a claim or complaint of professional misconduct or malpractice or the unreasonableness of a family collaborative lawyer's fee arising from or related to a family collaborative law process; or
 
	(2)	sought or offered to prove or disprove abuse, neglect, abandonment, or exploitation of a child or adult, unless the appropriate protective services agency is a party to or otherwise participates in the process.
 
	d.	If a family collaborative law communication is subject to an exception under subsection b. or c. of this section, only the part of the communication necessary for the application of the exception may be disclosed or admitted.
 
	e.	Disclosure or admission of evidence excepted from the privilege under subsection b. or c. of this section does not make the evidence or any other family collaborative law communication discoverable or admissible for any other purpose.
 
	f.	The privileges under section 13 of P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-13) do not apply if the parties agree in advance in a signed record that all or part of a family collaborative law process is not privileged. 
 
	L.2014, c.50, s.15.

2A:23D-16  Family collaborative law agreement, intention to enter into.
 
	16.	If a family collaborative law participation agreement fails to meet the requirements of section 5 of P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-5), the parties may be found to have intended to enter into a family collaborative law participation agreement if they signed a record indicating an intention to enter into a family collaborative law participation agreement and reasonably believed they were participating in a family collaborative law process.
 
	L.2014, c.50, s.16.

2A:23D-17  Application, construction of act.
 
 	17.	In applying and construing this act, consideration shall be given to the need to promote uniformity of the law with respect to its subject matter among states that enact a family collaborative law act.
 
	L.2014, c.50, s.17.

2A:23D-18  Severability.
 
	18.	If any provision of P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-1 et seq.) or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-1 et seq.) which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of P.L.2014, c.50 (C.2A:23D-1 et seq.) are severable.
 
	L.2014, c.50, s.18.

2A:23E-1  Short title.
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey International Arbitration, Mediation, and Conciliation Act."
 
	L.2017, c.1, s.1.

2A:23E-2  Findings, declarations relative to international arbitration.
 	2.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	The State of New Jersey is in a unique position to benefit from the growth of international trade, and the State's position in the region provides important opportunities for the State to participate in international business, trade, and commerce;
 
	b.	There will inevitably arise, from time to time, disagreements and disputes arising from international commercial transactions that are amenable to resolution through international arbitration, mediation, conciliation, and other forms of dispute resolution in lieu of international litigation;
 
	c.	It is the policy of this State to encourage the use of arbitration, mediation, and conciliation to reduce disputes arising out of international business, trade, commercial, and other relationships; and
 
	d.	It is declared that the objective of encouraging the development of New Jersey as an international center for the resolution of international business, commercial, trade, and other disputes be supported through the establishment of certain legal authorities, as set forth in this act.
 
	L.2017, c.1, s.2.

2A:23E-3  Definitions relative to international arbitration.
	3.	As used in this act:

	"Arbitral award" means an award signed by an arbitrator that may be the result of a settlement in arbitration, mediation, conciliation or other form of dispute resolution that involves the assistance of a neutral.
 
	"Center" means any center organized as a non-profit entity, whose principal purpose is to facilitate the resolution of international business, trade, commercial, and other disputes between persons by means of arbitration, mediation, conciliation, and other means as an alternative to litigation.
 
	"Person" means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint venture, government, public corporation, or any other legal or commercial entity, including any government subdivision, agency, or instrumentality.
 
	"Resident of the United States" means a person who maintains sole residence within a state, possession, commonwealth, or territory of the United States or within the District of Columbia.
 
	"Written undertaking to arbitrate" means a writing in which a person undertakes to submit a dispute to arbitration, without regard to whether that undertaking is sufficient to sustain a valid and enforceable contract or is subject to defenses.  A written undertaking may be part of a contract, may be a separate writing, and may be contained in correspondence, telegrams, telexes, or any other form of written communication.
 
	L.2017, c.1, s.3.

2A:23E-4  Applicability of act.
 	4. a. This act shall apply only to the arbitration of disputes between:

	(1)	two or more persons at least one of whom is a nonresident of the United States; or
 
	(2)	two or more persons all of whom are residents of the United States if the dispute:
 
	(a)	involves property located outside the United States;
 
	(b)	relates to a contract which envisages enforcement or performance in whole or in part outside the United States; or
 
	(c)	bears some other relation to one or more foreign countries.
 
	b.	Notwithstanding subsection a. of this section, this act shall not apply to the arbitration of:
 
	(1)	any dispute pertaining to the ownership, use, development, or possession of, or a lien of record upon, real property located in this State, unless the parties expressly submit the resolution of that dispute to this act; or
 
	(2)	any dispute involving family or domestic relations law.
 
	c.	If, in any arbitration within the scope of this act, reference must be made, under applicable conflict of laws principles, to the arbitration law of this State, that reference shall be to this act.
 
	d.	This act shall apply to any arbitration within the scope of this act, without regard to whether the place of arbitration is within or without this State:
 
	(1)	if the written undertaking to arbitrate expressly provides that the laws of this State shall apply;
 
	(2)	in the absence of a choice of law provision applicable to the written undertaking to arbitrate, if that undertaking forms part of a contract the interpretation of which is to be governed by the laws of this State; or
 
	(3)	in any other case, any arbitral tribunal or other panel established pursuant to this act that decides under applicable conflict of laws principles that the arbitration shall be conducted in accordance with the laws of this State.
 
	L.2017, c.1, s.4.

2A:23E-5  Consent by parties to arbitration.
 	5.	Conducting arbitration in this State, or making a written agreement to arbitrate which provides for arbitration within this State subject to this act, shall constitute a consent by the parties to that arbitration or undertaking to the exercise of in personam jurisdiction by the courts of this State, but only for the purposes of that arbitration.
 
	L.2017, c.1, s.5.

2A:23E-6  Authority of center.
	6. a. A center shall not be considered a department, agency, or public instrumentality of this State, and shall not be subject to the laws of this State applying to departments, agencies, or public instrumentalities of this State.
 
	b.	A center shall permit the participants to an arbitration to select any body of rules and procedures for the conduct, administration, and facilitation of that proceeding, whether those rules and procedures have been prepared by private arbitral organizations, created by the participants themselves, or by the center.
 
	c.	A center shall have the authority to establish rules and procedures for the conduct, administration, and facilitation of the resolution of all disputes subject to this act.
 
	d.	A center shall have the authority to adopt rules providing, without limitation and by way of illustration only, for the establishment of arbitral tribunals or other panels, which shall provide that arbitral tribunals or other panels may:
 
	(1)	determine the relevance and materiality of the evidence without the need to follow formal rules of evidence;
 
	(2)	be able to utilize any lawful methods that it deems appropriate to obtain evidence additional to that produced by the parties;
 
	(3)	issue subpoenas or other requests for the attendance of witnesses or for the production of books, records, documents, and other evidence;
 
	(4)	be empowered to administer oaths, order depositions to be taken or other discovery obtained or produced, without regard to the place where the witness or other evidence is located, and appoint one or more experts to report to it;
 
	(5)	fix any fees for the attendance of witnesses it deems appropriate; and
 
	(6)	make awards of interest, reasonable attorney's fees and costs of arbitration as agreed to in writing by the parties, or in the absence of an agreement, as it deems appropriate.
 
	e.	In assuring the exercise of the powers conferred by this act, the participants to an arbitration may apply for assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction.  Any application to a court hereunder shall be made and heard in a summary way in the manner provided for the making and hearing of motions, except as otherwise herein expressly provided.
 
	L.2017, c.1, s.6.

2A:23E-7  Subpoena power of arbitral tribunal or panel.
 	7.	An arbitral tribunal or panel established pursuant to section 6 of this act may subpoena in writing any person to attend before it as a witness and to bring books, papers, records, and documents. The  subpoena shall issue in the name of the arbitral tribunal or panel and be signed by a majority of the tribunal or panel, shall be directed to the person being summoned, and shall be served in the same manner as subpoenas to testify before a court of this State.  If any person subpoenaed to testify refuses or neglects to obey the subpoena, upon petition a court of competent jurisdiction may compel the attendance of that person before the arbitral tribunal or panel, or punish that person for contempt in the same manner now provided for the attendance of witnesses or punishment in a court of this State.  The arbitral panel may also consider and take action within the arbitration, as deemed appropriate by the arbitral tribunal, in response to non-attendance by any subpoenaed person.  
 
	L.2017, c.1, s.7.

2A:23E-8  Enforcement of arbitral awards issued by center.
 	8. a. Arbitral  awards  issued pursuant to this act by a center shall be enforced by any court of competent jurisdiction as permitted by law and consistent with the Federal Arbitration Act (9 U.S.C. s.1 et seq.), and the enforcement provisions of the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, as implemented by the Federal Arbitration Act, except as provided in subsection b. of this section.
 
	b.	If the parties specifically submit to jurisdiction under this act pursuant to section 4 of this act, the center may require those parties residing in countries not signatories to the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, as implemented by the Federal Arbitration Act, and not having sufficient assets otherwise within the jurisdiction of the courts of this State, to post any bonds or other security as the center shall deem appropriate to assure reasonable likelihood of enforcement of any award or other relief ultimately ordered by the center in the proceeding.
 
	L.2017, c.1, s.8.

2A:24-1.  Arbitration provisions;  validity and effect
    A provision in a written contract to settle by arbitration a controversy that may arise therefrom or a refusal to perform the whole or a part thereof or  a written agreement to submit, pursuant to section 2A:24-2 of this title, any  existing controversy to arbitration, whether the controversy arise out of contract or otherwise, shall be valid, enforceable and irrevocable, except upon  such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation of a contract.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:24-1.1  Applicability of N.J.S.2A:24-1 through N.J.S.2A:24-11 to collective bargaining agreements.

	34.	N.J.S.2A:24-1 through N.J.S.2A:24-11 shall only apply to an arbitration or dispute arising from a collective bargaining agreement or a collectively negotiated agreement.

	L.2003,c.95,s.34.

2A:24-2.     Who may submit to arbitration; agreement for judgment upon award by specified court  
     2A:24-2. Two or more persons by their agreement in writing may submit to arbitration a controversy existing between them at the time of the agreement, whether the controversy arises out of a contract or the refusal to perform the whole or a part thereof or out of any other matter. They may also agree in writing that a judgment of a court of record, chosen by them shall be rendered upon the award made pursuant to the submission.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.79.  

2A:24-3.     Nonperformance of agreement; action for order of arbitration
     2A:24-3. Where a party is aggrieved by the failure, neglect or refusal of another to perform under a written agreement providing for arbitration, the Superior Court may in a summary action direct that the arbitration proceed in the manner provided for in the agreement. The party alleged to be in default may demand a jury trial as to the issue that there has been no agreement in writing for an arbitration or that there has been no failure to comply therewith.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.80.  

2A:24-4.  Stay of action or proceeding subject to arbitration
    In an action brought in any court upon an issue arising out of an agreement  providing for the arbitration thereof, the court, upon being satisfied that the  issue involved is referable to arbitration, shall stay the action, if the  applicant for the stay is not in default in proceeding with the arbitration,  until an arbitration has been had in accordance with the terms of the  agreement.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:24-5.     Naming arbitrators or umpire  
     2A:24-5. If a method is provided in the agreement for naming or appointing an arbitrator or an umpire, it shall be followed; but if not so provided, or if one is provided and a party thereto shall fail to avail himself thereof, or for other reasons there shall be a lapse or failure in the naming of an arbitrator or an umpire or in filling a vacancy, the Superior Court may in the summary action provided for in N.J.S.2A:24-3 or in another action, designate and appoint an arbitrator or an umpire, as the case may require, who shall act thereunder with the same force and effect as if specifically named therein. The arbitration shall be by a single arbitrator unless otherwise provided.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.81.  

2A:24-6.  Hearing by arbitrators;  witnesses;  fees;  subpoena
    When more than 1 arbitrator is agreed upon, all the arbitrators shall sit at  the hearing of the case, unless by written consent, all parties agree to a lesser  number.

    The arbitrator so sitting or an attorney of record in the arbitration proceeding may require the attendance of any person as a witness and, in a proper case, to bring with him any book or written instrument.  The fees for the attendance shall be those allowed witnesses in a civil action in the Superior Court.

    An arbitrator, or where more than one arbitrator is sitting, a majority of them, or an attorney of record in the arbitration proceeding, may issue a subpena.  The subpena shall issue in the name of the arbitrator.  The subpena shall be signed by an arbitrator, or a majority of them, or an attorney of record, as the case may be.  The subpena shall be directed to the person therein named and served in the same manner as a subpena to testify before the Superior Court.  If any person so subpenaed to testify shall refuse or neglect to obey such subpena, the court, upon motion, may compel his attendance before the arbitrator or punish him for contempt in the manner provided for the attendance of witnesses or their punishment in the Superior Court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1984, c. 187, s. 1, eff. Nov. 15, 1984.

2A:24-7.  Application for confirmation, vacation or modification of award
    The award must be in writing and acknowledged or proved in like manner as a  deed for the conveyance of real estate and delivered to one of the parties or  his attorney.

    A party to the arbitration may, within 3 months after the award is delivered  to him, unless the parties shall extend the time in writing, commence a summary  action in the court aforesaid for the confirmation of the award or for its  vacation, modification or correction.  Such confirmation shall be granted  unless the award is vacated, modified or corrected.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:24-8.  Vacation of award;  rehearing
    The court shall vacate the award in any of the following cases:

    a.  Where the award was procured by corruption, fraud or undue means;

     b.  Where there was either evident partiality or corruption in the arbitrators, or any thereof;

     c.  Where the arbitrators were guilty of misconduct in refusing to postpone  the hearing, upon sufficient cause being shown therefor, or in refusing to hear  evidence, pertinent and material to the controversy, or of any other  misbehaviors prejudicial to the rights of any party;

    d.  Where the arbitrators exceeded or so imperfectly executed their powers that a mutual, final and definite award upon the subject matter submitted was not made.

    When an award is vacated and the time within which the agreement required the award to be made has not expired, the court may, in its discretion, direct a rehearing by the arbitrators.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:24-9.  Modification or correction of award;  order
    The court shall modify or correct the award in any of the following cases:

    a.  Where there was an evident miscalculation of figures or an evident mistake in the description of a person, thing or property referred to therein;

    b.  Where the arbitrators awarded upon a matter not submitted to them unless  it affects the merit of the decision upon the matter submitted; and

    c.  Where the award is imperfect in a matter of form not affecting the merits of the controversy.

    The court shall modify and correct the award, to effect the intent thereof and promote justice between the parties.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:24-10.  Force and effect of judgment
    The judgment confirming, modifying or correcting an award or a judgment in any action under this chapter shall have the same effect, in all respects, as, and is subject to all the provisions of law relating to, a judgment in any other action and may be enforced as if rendered in any other action in the court in which it is entered.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:24-11.  Contracts made before July 4, 1923, unaffected
    This article shall not apply to contracts made prior to July 4, 1923; nor shall it apply to acts heretofore performed.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:24A-1.    Short title 
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Artists' Rights Act." 

   L. 1986, c. 97, s. 1, eff. Aug. 27, 1986. 

2A:24A-2.    Findings, declarations 
    The Legislature finds and declares that: 

   a.   The physical state of a work of fine art is of enduring and crucial importance to the artist and the artist's reputation; 

   b.   There have been cases where works of art have been altered, defaced, mutilated or modified, thereby destroying the integrity of the artwork and causing a loss to the artist and the artist's reputation; 

   c.   Alteration, defacement, mutilation or other modification of an artist's work may be prejudicial to his career and reputation; and 

   d.   There are circumstances when an artist has the legal right to object to the alteration, defacement, mutilation or other modification of his work or to claim or disclaim authorship of a work of art. 

   L. 1986, c. 97, s. 2, eff. Aug. 27, 1986. 

2A:24A-3.    Definitions 
    As used in this act: 

   a.   "Artist" means the creator of a work of fine art; 

   b.   "Conservation" means acts taken to correct deterioration and alteration or acts taken to prevent, stop or retard deterioration; 

   c.   "Person" means an individual, partnership, corporation, association or other group, however organized; 

   d.   "Reproduction" means a copy, in any medium, of a work of fine art that is displayed or published under circumstances which, reasonably construed, evince an intent that it be taken as a representation of a work of fine art as created by the artist; and 

   e.   "Work of fine art" means any original work of visual or graphic art in any medium, which includes, but is not limited to, paintings, drawings, prints, and photographic prints or sculptures of a limited edition of no more than 300 copies; provided, however, that a work of fine art shall not include sequential imagery as in motion pictures. 

   L. 1986, c. 97, s. 3, eff. Aug. 27, 1986. 

2A:24A-4.    Display in altered form 
    No person other than the artist, or a person acting with the artist's consent, shall knowingly display in a place accessible to the public a work of fine art of that artist in an altered, defaced, mutilated or modified form, if damage to the artist's reputation is reasonably likely to result and if the work is displayed as being the work of the artist.  No person other than the artist, or a person acting with the artist's consent, shall either knowingly publish or reproduce a work of fine art of that artist in an altered, defaced, mutilated or modified form, if damage to the artist's reputation is reasonably likely to result and if the work is published or reproduced as being the work of the artist by use of the artist's name in conjunction with the reproduction or publication. 

   L. 1986, c. 97, s. 4, eff. Aug. 27, 1986. 

2A:24A-5.    Right to claim, disclaim authorship 
    The artist shall retain at all times the right to claim authorship or, for just and valid reason, to disclaim authorship of his work of fine art. The right to claim authorship shall include the right of the artist to have his name appear on or in connection with the work of fine art as the artist. The right to disclaim authorship shall include the right of the artist to prevent his name from appearing on, or in connection with, the work of fine art as the artist.  Just and valid reasons for disclaiming authorship shall include: that the work of fine art has been altered, defaced, mutilated or modified other than by the artist; that the work of fine art has been altered, defaced, mutilated or modified without the artist's consent; and that damage to the artist's reputation is reasonably likely to result or has resulted. 

   L. 1986, c. 97, s. 5, eff. Aug. 27, 1986. 

2A:24A-6.    Not violations 
    a.   Alteration, defacement, mutilation or modification of a work of fine art resulting from the passage of time or the inherent nature of the materials shall not create a violation of this act or a right to disclaim authorship under this act, provided that the alteration, defacement, mutilation or modification was not the result of gross negligence in maintaining or protecting the work of fine art. 

   b.   In the case of a reproduction, a change that is an ordinary result of the medium of reproduction shall not create a violation of this act or a right to disclaim authorship under this act. 

   c.   Conservation shall not constitute an alteration, defacement, mutilation or modification within the meaning of this act, unless the conservation work is shown to have been performed in a negligent manner. 

   L. 1986, c. 97, s. 6, eff. Aug. 27, 1986. 

2A:24A-7.    Applicability 
    This act shall apply only to works of fine art knowingly displayed in a place accessible to the public or published or reproduced in this State.  It shall not apply to work prepared under contract for advertising or trade use unless the contract so provides. 

   L. 1986, c. 97, s. 7, eff. Aug. 27, 1986. 

2A:24A-8.    Legal, injunctive relief 
    a.   An artist aggrieved under this act shall have a cause of action for legal and injunctive relief. 

   b.   No action may be maintained to enforce any liability under this act unless brought within six years of the violation complained of or two years after the constructive discovery of the violation, whichever is later. 

   L. 1986, c. 97, s. 8, eff. Aug. 27, 1986. 

2A:25-1  Contracts and judgments assignable; action by assignee; defenses.

	2A:25-1.  All contracts for the sale and conveyance of real estate, all judgments and  decrees recovered in any of the courts of this State or of the United States or  in any of the courts of any other state of the United States and all choses in  action arising on contract shall be assignable, and the assignee may sue  thereon in his own name.  In such an action, the person sued shall be allowed,  not only all set-offs, discounts and defenses he has against the assignee, but  also all set-offs, discounts and defenses he had against the assignor before  notice of such assignment was given to him. The assignment of a sealed  instrument by writing not under seal shall be as valid as if under seal.

	The assignee for a valuable consideration of any chose in action may, although the assignor is dead, sue for and recover the same in his own name. The person sued in any such action shall be allowed not only all set-offs, discounts and defenses he has against the assignee, but also all set-offs, discounts and defenses he had against the assignor or his representatives before notice of such assignment was given to him.  

	Security interests in commercial tort claims may be created, attached, perfected and enforced in accordance with Chapter 9 of Title 12A of the New Jersey Statutes (12A:9-101 et seq.).

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 2001, c.386, s.137.

2A:26-1.  Construction of chapter
    This chapter shall be liberally construed, as a remedial law for the protection of resident and nonresident creditors and claimants.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:26-2.     Issuance of attachments; grounds  
     2A:26-2. An attachment may issue out of the Superior Court upon the application of any resident or nonresident plaintiff against the property, real and personal, of any defendant in any of the following instances:  

    a.   Where the facts would entitle plaintiff to an order of arrest before judgment in a civil action; and in such cases the attachment may issue against the property of a female, or of a corporation in the same manner as though the defendant would be liable to arrest in a civil action, except that, in actions founded upon a tort, an attachment shall not issue against a corporation upon which a summons can be served in this State; or  

    b.   Where the defendant absconds or is a nonresident of this State, and a summons cannot be served on him in this State; but an attachment shall not issue hereunder against the rolling stock of a common carrier of another state or against the goods of a nonresident in transit in the custody of a common carrier of this or another state; or  

    c.   Where the cause of action existed against a decedent, which survives against his heirs, devisees, executors, administrators or trustees, and there is property in this State which by law is subject to plaintiff's claim; but no action of attachment may be brought hereunder against the heirs unless they, or some of them, nor against the devisees unless they, or some of them, nor against the executors unless they, or some of them, nor against the administrators unless they, or some of them, nor against the trustees unless they, or some of them, are unknown or nonresident and cannot be served with a summons in this State; or  

    d.   Where plaintiff has a claim of an equitable nature as to which a money judgment is demanded against the defendant, and the defendant absconds or is a nonresident and a summons cannot be served upon him in this State; or 

    e.   Where the defendant is a corporation created by the laws of another state but authorized to do business in this State and such other state authorizes attachments against New Jersey corporations authorized to do business in that state.  

    For the purposes of this section a summons can be served upon a person in this State where service can duly be made upon someone on his behalf in the State, but not where service may be made only by publication in the State.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.82.  

2A:26-3.  Attachment against property of joint debtors
    An attachment may issue against the separate and joint property of joint debtors or any of them, either by their names or the name of the partnership or  by whatever name they may be generally distinguished, or against the heirs,  executors or administrators of them or any of them.  The property so attached,  whether separate or joint, shall be subject to the payment of the joint debt.

    In case of fraud by one of several joint debtors which accrues to the benefit of all the joint debtors an attachment may issue against the separate property of such joint debtor or against the joint property of all.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:26-4.  Property exempt
    Household goods and furniture not exceeding $1,000.00 in value of a person shall be exempt from attachment, except for a debt incurred in the purchase thereof.

    If the attaching officer believes that the goods and furniture exceed such value, he may attach and include them in his inventory and appraisement, and the person entitled to the exemption, his family or his estate shall forthwith,  on demand by the officer, select, from the inventoried and appraised property,  goods and furniture to the value of $1,000.00.  A failure to make the selection  shall be deemed to be a waiver of the exemption.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1974, c. 92, s. 1, eff. Sept. 10, 1974.

2A:26-5.  Wages and personal property not attachable in certain cases
    Wages or other compensation for labor or services due to a nonresident employee shall not be attached at the action of a nonresident creditor or his assigns;  nor shall the personal property in this state of a nonresident be attached at the action of a nonresident creditor, if such property is exempt from liability by the law of the state of which the debtor and creditor are residents.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:26-6.  Attachment of legacy or distributive share for claims against legatee or next of kin
    A legacy or distributive share of an estate in the hands of an executor, administrator or trustee may be attached in an action against the legatee or next of kin.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:26-7.  Bond
    A plaintiff in attachment may be required to give bond to the defendant in such amount as the court shall fix or the court, in its discretion, may dispense with the giving of such bond.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:26-8.  Personal property bound from time of execution of attachment
    The attachment shall bind the attached goods and chattels, rights and credits, moneys and effects of defendant attached from the time of its execution.  The attached property, unless released, shall, during the pendency of the action, remain as security for any judgment which may be entered in the action.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:26-9.     Lien of attachment on real estate of defendant; amendment of return; disposal of real estate; conveyances by defendant void  
     2A:26-9. The attachment from the time of its issue, shall constitute a lien on the real estate of the defendant in the State even though the officer fails to especially attach the same or part thereof; and the defendant cannot thereafter assign, transfer or convey the same or any interest therein. The attachment shall also be a lien upon all real estate acquired by defendant in the State after such issue and before final judgment. The court may order the clerk to amend the return to the attachment by annexing thereto a description of such real estate, and may make orders for the disposal thereof. All conveyances by the defendant pending the attachment shall be void against the plaintiff. The said lien shall continue to be a lien until the claim of plaintiff is satisfied, the attachment is discharged or judgment is given against plaintiff.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.83.  

2A:26-10.  Conveyance of attached real estate after lien of attachment fixed
    Any conveyance or transfer of the attached real estate or any interest therein, made after the filing of the attachment, shall be void as against the plaintiff, the judgment, and the execution issued thereon, unless the attachment has been released.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:26-11.  Lien of judgment on defendant's real estate
    The judgment in the action shall be a lien on defendant's real estate acquired either before or after the entry thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:26-12.  Custody of personal property attached
    Personal property of a defendant attached as provided by this chapter shall  remain in the safekeeping of the attaching officer to answer and abide the  judgment of the court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:26-13.  Actions to obtain possession of attached property in hands of third person
    The court may order the institution and prosecution of appropriate actions and proceedings by the attaching officer to obtain possession of any attached property in the hands of a third person.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:26-14.  Effect of sales of personalty
    Every sale of the attached personal property made under this chapter or under an order of the court shall be as valid and effectual in law as if made by defendant at the time when the attachment became a lien thereon.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:26-15.  Sale under execution
    A sale by a sheriff or other officer of the attached property under an execution issued and a conveyance made pursuant thereto shall convey all the title to such property had by a defendant therein at the time that the writ of attachment became a lien thereon or by him acquired at any time afterwards.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:26-16.  Death of defendant not to abate proceedings
    The death of defendant after the issue and filing of the attachment shall not abate the action or the lien created thereby.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:27-1.  Application for prosecution;  jurisdiction;  applicant liable for  costs
    The governor may upon application in writing by any person aggrieved or supposing himself to be aggrieved by the neglect, default, misconduct or malpractice in office of any public official under bond to the state, order an action upon such bond to be commenced and prosecuted in the superior court, in the name of the state of New Jersey, and at the cost of the applicant.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:27-2.  Applications for relief by other persons aggrieved
    After judgment in an action on an official bond and before such judgment is  satisfied and discharged of record, any other person aggrieved by the neglect,  default, misconduct or malpractice of the officer in his office whose bond is  in action may apply to the superior court for relief in the pending action.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:27-3.  Continuing liability on bond
    A judgment in an action upon an official bond, although satisfied and discharged of record, shall not operate to discharge the public officer or his sureties from liability on the bond;  but new actions may be commenced on such bond as often as circumstances require.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:27-4.  Claims included in action on bond of municipal tax collector
    In an action by a municipality on the bond of a tax collector or receiver of  taxes, there may be included all claims of such municipality in its own right  or in the right of another person for public moneys which have come into the  hands of such collector or receiver for any purpose whatever and for which he  is legally chargeable.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:28-1.     Application for and appointment of commissioners  
     2A:28-1. When any dispute arises between the owners of adjoining lands as to the location of any dividing line or lines between such lands, the Superior Court may, on application of either owner on notice to the other, appoint three disinterested commissioners, one of whom shall be a practical surveyor, who shall fix, ascertain and regulate such lines.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.84.  

2A:28-2.  Duties and powers of commissioners
    Before entering upon their duties the commissioners shall take and subscribe  an oath that they and each of them will fairly and impartially and to the best  of their judgment ascertain the true location of the lines in dispute.  The  commissioners may enter upon any lands for the purpose of ascertaining and  deciding the location of the disputed lines, and they shall have power to  examine witnesses under oath and to inquire fully into the questions in  dispute.  The commissioners shall file a report thereof with the court within  such time as the court shall prescribe and, unless otherwise ordered by the  court, the report shall be final and conclusive against all of the parties and  their heirs and assigns.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:28-3.  Trial by court
    Either party to the dispute shall be afforded, by the court, a specified period of time within which to apply to set aside the report and, if any party so applies, the court shall hear the matter in a summary manner with a jury, if  a jury be demanded, or without a jury, if no jury be demanded, and the issue  shall be tried and determined as in other cases of a civil nature at law, in  said court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:28-4.  Compensation of commissioners
    The court shall fix the compensation of the commissioners and direct payment  of the same by the parties, or one or more of them, according to the determination of the issue.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:29-1.  Expense of examining title and making survey recoverable
    When any person shall contract to sell real estate and shall not be able to  perform such contract because of a defect in the title to the real estate, the  person with whom such contract was made, or his legal representatives or assigns, may, in a civil action, recover from the vendor, not only the deposit money, with interest and costs, but also the reasonable expenses of examining the title and making a survey of the property, unless the contract shall provide otherwise.  This section shall not preclude the recovery by the purchaser from the vendor of any other damages to which he may be entitled by law.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:29A-1.  Money deposited or advanced for purchase of dwelling house as trust fund
    All moneys paid as a deposit or advance by a person who has contracted or agreed to purchase a dwelling house to be constructed, shall constitute trust funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of said contract or agreement.  In any case in which more than 1 dwelling house is to be constructed as part of the development of a tract of land, said trust funds may  be used in the development of said tracts of land.  Any use of said moneys,  other than for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of said contract or  agreement, shall constitute an unlawful diversion of trust funds.

     L.1962, c. 208, s. 1, eff. July 1, 1962.

2A:29A-2.  Enforcement of trust;  jurisdiction
    Any trust arising under the provisions of this act shall be enforceable by a  civil action in the Superior Court of New Jersey and that court shall have jurisdiction to make any appropriate order or judgment both pendente lite and final to fully effectuate the purposes of this act.

     L.1962, c. 208, s. 2.

2A:29A-3.  Insolvency or bankruptcy of person receiving money deposited or advanced
    In the event of the insolvency or bankruptcy of the person receiving the said moneys, the claim of the person who paid the said moneys shall constitute a statutory trust with respect to any moneys so received and not previously expended in accordance with the terms of the contract or agreement.

     L.1962, c. 208, s. 3.

2A:29A-4.  Unlawful diversion of trust funds;  offender as disorderly person
    Any person party to said contract or agreement, or any agent of said person,  or any officer of a corporation receiving said moneys, who with knowledge that  such moneys constitute trust funds, unlawfully diverts or consents to an  unlawful diversion of such moneys shall be a disorderly person and subject to a  fine of not less than $200.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or  both.

     L.1962, c. 208, s. 4.

2A:29B-1.  Liability for professional engineers, certain circumstances
	1.	A professional engineer or engineering firm, or any employee or representative of a professional engineer or engineering firm, who is assisting or representing the professional engineer or firm, shall only be liable for any injury on a construction project or site resulting from a breach or disregard of construction safety standards or practices on the construction project or site for which compensation is recoverable under R.S.34:15-7 et seq., if:

	a.	The professional engineer or firm has by written contract expressly assumed, to the extent stated therein, responsibility for the implementation, discharge or monitoring of safety standards or practices; or

	b.	In a multi-prime project, the professional engineer or firm is the representative of the project owner and no contractor has been designated to be responsible for site safety; or

	c.	It is shown that:

	(1)	The professional engineer or firm, including its employees or representatives, was present at the portion of the project or site for which the engineer had provided services, prior to or at the time of the accident, or both; and

	(2)	The professional engineer or firm, including its employees or representatives, had actual knowledge of the site conditions which are alleged to be a cause of an imminent danger; and

	(3)	The professional engineer or firm, including its employees or representatives, had the opportunity to notify the responsible contractor and worker of the presence of the site conditions which are alleged to be a cause of an imminent danger, and failed to do so within a reasonable period of time.  If that notice is provided, and the responsible contractor fails to respond within one business day, the engineer or firm shall immediately provide that notice to the project owner.

	L.1999,c.112,s.1.

2A:29B-2.  Inapplicability
	2.	The limitations provided by this act shall not apply to willful misconduct or gross negligence.

	L.1999,c.112,s.2.

2A:30-1.  Liability of plaintiff upon discontinuance without leave
    If the plaintiff in any action for the recovery of a penalty, not wholly appropriated to the use of the plaintiff, settles with the defendant, and discontinues the action without leave of the court, the plaintiff shall be liable to the state or to a political subdivision of the state, or to any other  person, for so much of the penalty as would have accrued to the state or to the  political subdivision, or to such other person, if judgment had been taken  against the defendant.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:30A-1  Definitions.
  
	1.	As used in this act:

	"Billing" means, in accordance with the terms and definitions of the applicable contract, any periodic payment, final payment, written approved change order or request for release of retainage.
 
	"Prime contractor" means a person who contracts with an owner to improve real property.
 
	"Improve" means: to build, alter, repair or demolish any structure upon, connected with, on or beneath the surface of any real property; to excavate, clear, grade, fill or landscape any real property; to construct driveways and private roadways on real property; to furnish construction related materials, including trees and shrubbery, for any of the above purposes; or to perform any labor upon a structure, including any design, professional or skilled services furnished by an architect, engineer, land surveyor or landscape architect licensed or registered pursuant to the laws of this State.
 
	"Structure" means all or any part of a building and other improvements to real property.
 
	"Owner" means any person, including any public or governmental entity, who has an interest in the real property to be improved and who has contracted with a prime contractor for such improvement to be made. "Owner" shall be deemed to include any successor in interest or agent acting on behalf of an owner.
 
	"Prime rate" means the base rate on corporate loans at large United States money center commercial banks.  
 
	"Real property" means the real estate that is improved upon or to be improved upon.
 
	"Subcontractor" means any person who has contracted to furnish labor, materials or other services to a prime contractor in connection with a contract to improve real property.
 
	"Subsubcontractor" means any person who has contracted to furnish labor, materials or other services to a subcontractor in connection with a contract to improve real property.
 
	L.1991, c.133, s.1; amended 2006, c.96, s.1.

2A:30A-2  Payment to prime contractor, subcontractor, subsubcontractor, timely payment; exceptions; disputes; resolution.
 
 	2. a. If a prime contractor has performed in accordance with the provisions of a contract with the owner and the billing for the work has been approved and certified by the owner or the owner's authorized approving agent, the owner shall pay the amount due to the prime contractor for each periodic payment, final payment or retainage monies not more than   30 calendar days after the billing date, which for a periodic billing, shall be the periodic billing date specified in the contract.  The billing shall be deemed approved and certified   20 days after the owner receives it unless the owner provides, before the end of the   20-day period, a written statement of the amount withheld and the reason for withholding payment, except that in the case of a public or governmental entity that requires the entity's governing body to vote on authorizations for each periodic payment, final payment or retainage monies, the amount due may be approved and certified at the next scheduled public meeting of the entity's governing body, and paid during the entity's subsequent payment cycle, provided this exception has been defined in the bid specifications and contract documents. 
 
	b.	If a subcontractor or subsubcontractor has performed in accordance with the provisions of its contract with the  prime contractor or subcontractor and the work has been accepted by the owner, the owner's authorized approving agent, or the prime contractor, as applicable, and the parties have not otherwise agreed in writing, the prime contractor shall pay to its subcontractor and the subcontractor shall pay to  its subsubcontractor within 10 calendar days of the receipt of each periodic payment, final payment or receipt of retainage monies, the full amount received for the work of the subcontractor or subsubcontractor based on the work completed or the services rendered under the applicable contract.  In the case of ongoing work on the same project for which partial payments are made, the amount of money owed for work already completed shall only be payable if the subcontractor or subsubcontractor is performing to the satisfaction of the prime contractor or subcontractor, as applicable.
 
	c.	If a payment due pursuant to the provisions of this section is not made in a timely manner, the delinquent party shall be liable for the amount of money owed under the contract, plus interest at a rate equal to the prime rate plus 1%.  Interest on amounts due pursuant to this section shall be paid to the prime contractor, subcontractor or subsubcontractor for the period beginning on the day after the required payment date and ending on the day on which the check for payment has been drawn.  The provisions of this subsection c. shall not apply to any transportation project as defined in section 3 of P.L. 1984, c.73 (C.27:1B-3), if that project receives federal funding and the awarding agency has been notified by the federal government that it will be classified as a high risk grantee pursuant to 49 C.F.R. 18.12.
	d. 	A prime contractor, subcontractor or subsubcontractor  may, after providing seven calendar days' written notice to the party failing to make the required payments, suspend performance of a construction contract, without penalty for breach of contract, until the payment required pursuant to this section is made, if the contractor, subcontractor or subsubcontractor: is not paid as required by this section; is not provided a written statement of the amount withheld and the reason for the withholding; and the payor is not engaged in a good faith effort to resolve the reason for the withholding.  The provisions of this subsection d. shall not apply to any transportation project as defined in section 3 of P.L. 1984, c.73 (C.27:1B-3), if that project receives federal funding and the application of this provision would jeopardize the funding because the owner could not meet the federal standards for financial management systems as outlined in 49 C.F.R. 18.20. 
 
	e. (1) The rights, remedies or protections provided by this section for prime contractors, subcontractors and subsubcontractors shall be in addition to other remedies provided pursuant to any other provision of State law.  To the extent that the provisions of this section provide greater rights, remedies or protections for prime contractors, subcontractors and subsubcontractors than other provisions of State law, the provisions of this section shall supersede those other provisions.
 
	(2)	No provision of this section shall be construed as restricting in any way the rights or remedies provided by any other applicable State or federal law to an owner who is a resident homeowner or purchaser with respect to the real property being improved.
 
	f.	All contracts for the improvement of structures entered into after the effective date of P.L.2006, c.96 between owners, prime contractors, subcontractors or subsubcontractors shall provide that disputes regarding whether a party has failed to make payments required pursuant to this section  may be submitted to a process of alternative dispute resolution.  Alternative dispute resolution permitted by this section shall not apply to disputes concerning the bid solicitation or award process, or to the formation of contracts or subcontracts.  In any civil action brought to collect payments pursuant to this section, the action  shall be conducted inside of this State and the prevailing party shall be awarded reasonable costs and attorney fees. 
 
	L.1991, c.133, s.2; amended 2006, c.96, s.2.

2A:30B-1.    Findings, declarations.
	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that:
 
	a.	Trade in child sexual abuse or exploitation material, often referred to as child pornography, is a lucrative business which sexually exploits children and preys on their vulnerability.
 
	b.	While criminal laws exist to penalize those who sexually exploit children, these laws are sometimes insufficient to protect and indemnify the victim and prevent the perpetrators from accumulating large profits from the making and distribution of "kiddie porn."
 
	c.	This act is designed to give the victims of trade in child sexual abuse or exploitation material a civil action against those persons who sexually abuse or exploit them for profit directly or indirectly which can be brought through a parent or guardian or child advocacy organization or by the victim upon reaching the age of majority.  Any director, officer, servant, employee, or other person authorized to act on behalf of a corporation may be personally liable if found liable individually or jointly with the corporation under the provisions of this act.
 
	d.	The act will allow victims to recover three times the financial gains made by those who exploit them and will authorize injunctive relief to halt the making and distribution of films and other materials.

    L.1992,c.7,s.1; amended 2024, c.92, s.1.

2A:30B-2.    Definitions  
     2.   As used in this act:

    a.   "Child" means any person under 18 years of age;

      b.   "Person" means any natural person, association, partnership, corporation or other entity.  "Corporation" includes any director, officer, servant, employee or other person authorized to act on behalf of a corporation;  

    c.   "Prohibited sexual act" means

    (1)  Sexual intercourse; or

  

    (2)  Anal intercourse; or

  

    (3)  Masturbation; or

  

    (4)  Bestiality; or

  

    (5)  Sadism; or

  

    (6)  Masochism; or

  

    (7)  Fellatio; or

  

    (8)  Cunnilingus; or

  

    (9)  Nudity, if depicted for the purpose of sexual stimulation or gratification of any person who may view the depiction.  

    L.1992,c.7,s.2.  

2A:30B-3.    Civil actions by child permitted  
     3. a. A child, through a parent or guardian or child advocacy organization or personally upon reaching the age of majority, may bring a civil action in the Superior Court, in any county where venue lies, for monetary damages or injunctive relief or both, against a person who:  

    (1)  Permits, entices or coerces the child to engage in a prohibited sexual act or in the simulation of such an act if the person knows, has reason to know or intends that the prohibited act may be photographed, filmed, reproduced, or reconstructed in any manner or may be part of an exhibition or performance;  

    (2)  Photographs or films the child in a prohibited sexual act or in the simulation of such an act or who uses any device to reproduce or reconstruct the image of the child in a prohibited sexual act or in the simulation of such an act;  

    (3)  Knowingly receives for the purpose of selling or who knowingly sells, procures, manufactures, gives, provides, lends, trades, mails, delivers, transfers, publishes, distributes, circulates, disseminates, presents, exhibits, advertises, offers or agrees to offer any photograph, film, videotape or any other reproduction or reconstruction which depicts the child engaging in a prohibited sexual act or in the simulation of such an act.

    b.   In any action brought pursuant to this act, the court shall, upon a finding for the plaintiff, award recovery of three times the amount of damages consisting of financial gains to the defendant resulting from the conduct described in paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) of subsection a. of this section, together with full costs and reasonable attorney's fees.  

    L.1992,c.7,s.3.  

2A:30B-4.    Special guardian  
     4.   If the parent or guardian is to be a defendant in the action, the court shall appoint a special guardian to bring the action on behalf of the child.  

    L.1992,c.7,s.4.  

2A:30B-5.    Rules  
     5.   The Supreme Court is directed to adopt appropriate rules to effectuate the purposes of this act.  

    L.1992,c.7,s.5.  

2A:30B-6  Commencement of action.
  	6.	In any action for injury based on P.L.1992, c.7 (C.2A:30B-1 et seq.), the cause of action shall accrue at the time of reasonable discovery of the injury and its causal relationship to the act.  The action shall be subject to the statute of limitations set forth in section 2 of P.L.2019, c.120 (C.2A:14-2a).  
 
	L.1992, c.7, s.6; amended 2019, c.120, s.3.

2A:30B-7.    Other civil, criminal actions, personal liability of certain persons  
     7.   The right to bring an action under this act is in addition to and not in derogation of the right to bring any other civil or criminal action. This act shall be construed so that any director, officer, servant, employee or other person authorized to act on behalf of a corporation may be personally liable under the provisions of this act.  

    L.1992,c.7,s.7.  

2A:31-1.  When action lies
    When the death of a person is caused by a wrongful act, neglect or default,  such as would, if death had not ensued, have entitled the person injured to  maintain an action for damages resulting from the injury, the person who would  have been liable in damages for the injury if death had not ensued shall be  liable in an action for damages, notwithstanding the death of the person  injured and although the death was caused under circumstances amounting in law  to a crime.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:31-2.  Persons entitled to sue or make claim
	2A:31-2. a. Every action commenced under this chapter shall be brought in the name of an administrator ad prosequendum or administrator of the decedent for whose death damages are sought, except where decedent dies testate and his will is probated, in which event the executor named in the will and qualifying, or the administrator with the will annexed, as the case may be, shall bring the action.
 
	b.	In the case of a plaintiff who is qualified for appointment as administrator ad prosequendum, executor, or administrator with the will annexed, as the case may be, but who was not yet appointed as such at the time the plaintiff commenced an action under this chapter, the court may allow the plaintiff to be designated administrator ad prosequendum, executor, or administrator with the will annexed, as the case may be, and to allow the plaintiff to amend pleadings nunc pro tunc relating back to the plaintiff's first filed pleading to reflect the designation.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 2021, c.481, s.2.

2A:31-3.  Limitation of actions; exceptions
	2A:31-3 Every action brought under this chapter shall be commenced within 2 years after the death of the decedent, and not thereafter, provided, however, that if the death resulted from murder, aggravated manslaughter or manslaughter  for which the defendant has been convicted, found not guilty by reason of insanity or adjudicated delinquent, the action may be brought at any time.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 2000, c.157.

2A:31-4  Persons entitled to amount recovered.
  
	2A:31-4.  Persons entitled to amount recovered

	The amount recovered in proceedings under this chapter shall be for the exclusive benefit of the persons entitled to take any intestate personal property of the decedent, and in the proportions in which they are entitled to take the same except if there is a surviving spouse of the decedent and one or more surviving descendants of the decedent they shall be entitled to equal proportions for purposes of recovery under this chapter notwithstanding the provisions of Title 3B of the New Jersey Statutes.  If any of the persons so entitled in accordance with this section were dependent on the decedent at his death, they shall take the same as though they were sole persons so entitled, in such proportions, as shall be determined by the court without a jury, and as will result in a fair and equitable apportionment of the amount recovered, among them, taking into account in such determination, but not limited necessarily thereby, the age of the dependents, their physical and mental condition, the necessity or desirability of providing them with educational facilities, their financial condition and the availability to them of other means of support, present and future, and any other relevant factors which will contribute to a fair and equitable apportionment of the amount recovered.
 
	Amended 1960, c.194, s.1; 2007, c.261, s.1.

2A:31-5  Assessment of damages by jury.
  
	2A:31-5.  Assessment of damages by jury.

	In every action brought under the provisions of this chapter the jury may give such damages as they shall deem fair and just with reference to the pecuniary injuries resulting from such death, together with the hospital, medical and funeral expenses incurred for the deceased, to the persons entitled to any intestate personal property of the decedent in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.2A:31-4.
 
	Amended 1967, c.307, s.1; 2007, c.261, s.2.

2A:31-6.  To whom amount recovered paid;  release or cancellation of judgment
    When an action is commenced by an administrator ad prosequendum under this chapter, no payment in settlement thereof or in satisfaction of a judgment rendered therein shall be made to him, but such payment shall be made only to the duly appointed general administrator of the estate of the decedent, who has  filed a bond or supplemental bond adequate to protect the persons entitled to  receive the amount so paid.

    No release or cancellation of a judgment, whether by warrant or otherwise, by an administrator ad prosequendum or by his attorney of record or attorney in  fact shall release the person making payment from liability to the persons entitled to any intestate personal property of the decedent, shall operate as a  valid cancellation of the judgment or be an authority to the clerk of any court  to cancel the judgment of record.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:32-1.  Remedies of person defrauded
    Whenever there is fraud in the execution or consideration of a contract, the  person defrauded at any time thereafter may institute a civil action, to recover the money owing on such contract although, by its terms, the debt contracted or the money secured to be paid thereby is not then due or payable; and the person defrauded may, upon discovery of the fraud, either rescind the contract entirely and recover the money or property obtained by the fraud, or, sue on the contract to recover thereon.

    The plaintiff in such an action shall have all rights to which he would be entitled if the debt or obligation was due and payable at the time of the commencement of the action.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:32-2  Actions by participant to recover paid consideration, inventory repurchase program.
 	2. a. Notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary, a participant, other than a leader, in a pyramid promotional scheme, may declare the related sale or contract for sale void and, unless the defendant made available to the participant an inventory repurchase program as set forth in subsection b. of this section, may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover the consideration the participant paid to participate in the scheme or course of conduct. In any action the court shall, in addition to any judgment awarded to the plaintiff, require the defendant to pay interest, reasonable attorneys' fees, and costs.
 
	b.	To qualify as an inventory repurchase program for the purposes of subsection a. of this section, there shall be an enforceable agreement by the business enterprise to repurchase all unencumbered products that are in commercially resalable condition at a price not less than 90 percent of the amount actually paid by the participant for the products being returned, less any reasonable consideration as may have been received by the participant for the purchase of the products being returned. In the case of consumable or durable goods, a product is in commercially resalable condition if it is unopened, unused, and within its commercially reasonable use or shelf-life period. A product that is no longer marketed by the business enterprise because it is a discontinued, seasonal, or special promotional item shall be considered commercially resalable, unless before the participant purchased the product it was clearly disclosed to the participant and the participant acknowledged in writing that the product was sold as a discontinued, seasonal, or special promotional item and would not be returnable. In the case of service products and intangible property, including Internet websites, the unexpired portion of any contract or agreement shall be deemed commercially resalable, and the repurchase of any service products shall be on a pro rata basis. Additionally, there shall be a clear description of the inventory repurchase program in any recruiting literature or sales manual provided to participants prior to their entry into the scheme or course of conduct, and the details of the inventory repurchase program, including the manner in which the repurchase is exercised, shall be memorialized in the contract that obligated participation in the scheme or course of conduct. 
 
	c.	Nothing in subsection a. of this section shall be construed to define any scheme or course of conduct as a pyramid promotional scheme based solely upon the fact that participants in the scheme or operation give consideration in return for the right to receive compensation based upon purchases of goods, services, or intangible property by participants for personal use, consumption, or resale.
 
	d. (1) The provisions of subsection a. of this section shall not be waived or modified by contract or agreement.  Any effort to waive or modify the remedy established by subsection a. of this section through a contract for indemnification or otherwise, that is executed or renewed after the date of enactment of this act, shall be void.
 
	(2)	The rights and remedies provided under this section are independent of and supplemental to any other right or remedy for any violation or conduct provided for in any other law, and nothing contained herein shall be construed to diminish or to abrogate any such right or remedy.
 
	e.	As used in this section:
 
	"Compensation" means payment of any money, thing of value, or financial benefit.
 
	"Consideration" means the payment of cash or the purchase of goods, services, or intangible property, but does not include the purchase of goods or services furnished at cost to be used in making sales and not for resale, or the time and effort spent in pursuit of sales or recruiting activities.
 
	"Financier" means a person who, with the intent to derive a profit, provides money or credit or other thing of value in order to finance the operations of a scheme or course of conduct.
 
	"Inventory" includes both goods and services, including but not limited to promotional materials, sales aids, and sales kits produced by or on behalf of the scheme or those engaged in the course of conduct that are offered to participants for purchase by the scheme or those engaged in the course of conduct.
 
	"Leader" is a person who conspires with any other person as an organizer, supervisor, financier, or manager.
 
	"Pyramid promotional scheme" is any scheme or course of conduct by which a person gives consideration for the opportunity to receive compensation that is derived primarily from a person's introduction of another person to participate in the scheme or course of conduct rather than from the sale of a product by a person introduced into the scheme or course of conduct.
 
	L.2017, c.74, s.2.

2A:32A-1  Civil action for bad checks, electronic funds transfers.
  
	1. a.  Notwithstanding N.J.S.2C:21-5, or any other criminal sanction which may apply, any person who makes any check, draft, or order of withdrawal for the payment of money , or authorizes an electronic funds transfer, which is subsequently dishonored for lack of funds or credit to pay, or because the maker does not have an account with the drawee, and who then fails to pay the face amount in cash or by cashier's or certified check within 35 days after the date a demand for payment of dishonored check notice was mailed by or on behalf of a payee by certified mail to the maker's last known address, shall be liable to the payee, in addition to the amount owing upon the check, draft, order, or electronic funds transfer for attorneys' fees, court costs and the costs of mailing the written demand for payment and for damages in an amount equal to $100 or triple the amount for which the check, draft  , order , or electronic funds transfer is drawn or made, whichever is greater.  However, damages recovered under this section shall not exceed by more than $500 the amount of the check, draft, order, or electronic funds transfer.
 
	For purposes of this section, "date" means the date indicated on the form registering the demand notice as certified mail.
 
	b.	A cause of action under this section may be brought in any court of competent jurisdiction.  Prior to the hearing of any action under this section, the defendant may tender to the plaintiff and the plaintiff shall accept as satisfaction of the claim, an amount of money equal to the sum of the face amount of the check, draft, , order , or electronic funds transfer and the incurred attorneys' fees, court costs and costs of mailing the written demand for payment.
 
	c.	The written demand for payment required by this section shall be in the following form and shall be printed in both the English and Spanish languages:
 

 
	DEMAND FOR PAYMENT OF DISHONORED CHECK
 

 
DATE:............................
 

 
TO:..............................
 

 

 
       NAME OF MAKER      WARNING: YOU MAY BE SUED IF
 

 
                                        YOU DO NOT MAKE PAYMENT OF
 

 
                                        THE AMOUNT SHOWN ON THIS
 

 
                                        NOTICE WITHIN 35 DAYS AFTER
 

 
                                        THE DATE THIS NOTICE WAS
 

 
                                        MAILED.
 

 
................................
 

 
...............................
 

 
...............................
 

 
LAST KNOWN RESIDENCE ADDRESS OR
 

 
PLACE OF BUSINESS
 

 
YOUR CHECK/DRAFT/ORDER /ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFERIN THE AMOUNT OF $...............
 

 
DATED............., PAYABLE TO THE ORDER OF
 

 
................................  HAS BEEN DISHONORED BY THE BANK OR
 

 
OTHER DEPOSITORY UPON WHICH IT HAS BEEN DRAWN BECAUSE:
 

 
THE MAKER HAD NO ACCOUNT WITH SUCH BANK OR DEPOSITORY
 

 
THE MAKER HAD INSUFFICIENT FUNDS ON DEPOSIT WITH SUCH BANK OR DEPOSITORY
 
IF YOU DO NOT MAKE PAYMENT WITHIN 35 DAYS AFTER THE DATE THIS NOTICE WAS MAILED, YOU MAY BE SUED TO RECOVER PAYMENT.  IF A JUDGMENT IS RENDERED AGAINST YOU IN COURT, IT WILL INCLUDE NOT ONLY THE ORIGINAL FACE AMOUNT OF THE CHECK/DRAFT/ORDER  /ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFER, BUT ALSO ADDITIONAL LIQUIDATED DAMAGES OF NOT LESS THAN ONE HUNDRED DOLLARS ($100) NOR MORE THAN THE FACE AMOUNT OF THE CHECK/DRAFT/ORDER /ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFER PLUS FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS ($500).
 

 
PLEASE MAKE PAYMENT IN THE AMOUNT OF $..............TO:
 

 
                                      ............................
 

 
                                        NAME OF PAYEE
 

 
                                      ............................
 

 
                                      ............................
 

 
                                      ............................
 

 
                                        ADDRESS TO WHICH PAYMENT
                                         SHOULD BE DELIVERED
  
	d.	If the court or jury determines that the failure of the defendant to satisfy the dishonored check, draft, order, or electronic funds transfer was due to economic hardship, the court or jury may waive all or part of the statutory damages.  However, if the court or jury waives all or part of the statutory damages, the court shall render judgment against the defendant in the amount of the dishonored check, draft, order, or electronic funds transfer plus incurred attorneys' fees, court costs and costs of mailing the written demand for payment.
 
	L.1993, c.379, s.1; amended 2014, c.46.

2A:32B-1  Definitions relative to deceptive practices in musical performances.
 
 	1.	As used in this act:

	"Performing group" means a vocal or instrumental group seeking to use the name of another group that has previously released a commercial sound recording under that name.
 
	"Recording group" means a vocal or instrumental group, at least one of whose members has previously released a commercial sound recording under that group's name and in which the member or members have a legal right by virtue of use or operation under the group name without having abandoned the name or affiliation with the group.
 
	"Sound recording" means a work that results from the fixation on a material object of a series of musical, spoken or other sounds regardless of the nature of the material object, such as a disk, tape or other phono-record, in which the sounds are embodied.
 
	L.2007, c.88, s.1.

2A:32B-2  Conditions for advertising or conducting a live musical performance.
 
 	2.	A person shall not advertise or conduct a live musical performance or production through the use of an affiliation, connection or association between the performing group and the recording group unless:
 
	a.	The performing group is the authorized registrant and owner of a federal service mark for the group registered in the United States Patent and Trademark Office; or
 
	b.	At least one member of the performing group was a member of the recording group and has a legal right by virtue of use or operation under the group name without having abandoned the name or affiliation of the group; or
 
	c.	The live musical performance or production is identified in all advertising and promotion as a salute or tribute; or
 
	d.	The advertising does not relate to a live musical performance or production taking place in this State; or
 
	e.	The performance or production is expressly authorized by the recording group.
 
	L.2007, c.88, s.2.

2A:32B-3  Violations, enforcement, penalties.
 
	3. a. A person who violates the provisions of section 2 of this act shall be subject to a civil action brought by a party in the Superior Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction:
 
	(1)	for appropriate legal and equitable relief, including injunctive relief, and for treble damages, reasonable attorney's fees, filing fees, and costs for the injured party; and
 
	(2)	additionally, for a civil penalty of:
 
	(a)	not more than $10,000 for the first offense; and
 
	(b)	not more than $20,000 for the second and each subsequent offense.
 
	b.	The civil penalty prescribed by paragraph (2) of subsection a. of this section shall be collected and enforced by summary proceedings pursuant to the provisions of the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	c.	A violation of the provisions of section 2 of this act shall also be an unlawful practice in violation of P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-1 et seq.), and subject the violator to all available State or private actions, remedies, damages, and penalties under that act, including, but not limited to, the Attorney General seeking and obtaining an injunction pursuant to section 8 of P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-8) and the assessment of a civil penalty pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1966, c.39 (C.56:8-13).
 
	L.2007, c.88, s.3.

2A:32C-1  Short title.
  
	1.	Sections 1 through 15 and sections 17 and 18 of this act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey False Claims Act."
 
	L.2007, c.265, s.1.

2A:32C-2  Definitions relative to false claims.
	2.	As used in this act:
 
	"Attorney General" means the Attorney General of the State of New Jersey, or the Attorney General's designee.
 
	"Claim" means any request or demand, under a contract or otherwise, for money or property, whether or not the State has title to the money or property, or for services, that is made to any employee, officer, or agent of the State, or is made to any contractor, grantee, or other recipient if the money, property, or service is to be spent or used on the State's behalf or to advance a State program or interest, if the State provides or has provided any portion of the money, property, or services requested or demanded or if the State will reimburse the contractor, grantee, or other recipient for any portion of the money, property, or services requested or demanded.  The term does not include claims, records, or statements made in connection with State tax laws or requests or demands for money or property that the State has paid to an individual as compensation for governmental employment or as an income subsidy with no restrictions on that individual's use of the money or property.
 
	"Knowing" or "knowingly" means, with respect to information, that a person: 
 
	(1) has actual knowledge of the information; or
 
	(2) acts in deliberate ignorance of the truth or falsity of the information; or
 
	(3) acts in reckless disregard of the truth or falsity of the information.
 
	No proof of specific intent to defraud is required.  Acts occurring by innocent mistake or as a result of mere negligence shall be a defense to an action under this act.
 
	"Material" means having a natural tendency to influence, or be capable of influencing, the payment or receipt of money or property.
 
	"Obligation" means an established duty, whether or not fixed, arising from an express or implied contractual, grantor-grantee, or licensor-licensee relationship, from a fee-based or similar relationship, from statute or regulation, or from the retention of any overpayment.
 
	"State" means any of the principal departments in the Executive Branch of State government, and any division, board, bureau, office, commission or other instrumentality within or created by such department; and any independent State authority, commission, instrumentality or agency.
 
	L.2007, c.265, s.2; amended 2023, c.73, s.1.

2A:32C-3  Civil liability for false, fraudulent claim.
 	3.	A person shall be jointly and severally liable to the State for a civil penalty of not less than and not more than the civil penalty allowed under the federal False Claims Act (31 U.S.C.s.3729 et seq.), as may be adjusted in accordance with the inflation adjustment procedures prescribed in the Federal Civil Penalties Inflation Adjustment Act of 1990, Pub.L.101-410, for each false or fraudulent claim, plus three times the amount of damages which the State sustains, if the person commits any of the following acts:
 
	a.	Knowingly presents or causes to be presented, a false or fraudulent claim for payment or approval;
 
	b.	Knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made or used a false record or statement material to a false or fraudulent claim;
 
	c.	Conspires to commit any violation of subsection a., b., d., e., f., or g. of this section;
 
	d.	Has possession, custody, or control of public property or money used or to be used by the State and knowingly delivers or causes to be delivered less property or money than the amount for which the person receives a certificate or receipt;
 
	e.	Is authorized to make or deliver a document certifying receipt of property used or to be used by the State and, intending to defraud the entity, makes or delivers a receipt without completely knowing that the information on the receipt is true;
 
	f.	Knowingly buys, or receives as a pledge of an obligation or debt, public property from any person who lawfully may not sell or pledge the property; or
 
	g.	Knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made or used a false record or statement material to an obligation to pay or transmit money or property to the State, or knowingly conceals or knowingly and improperly avoids or decreases an obligation to pay or transmit money or property to the State.
 
	L.2007, c.265, s.3; amended 2023, c.73, s.2.

2A:32C-4  Reduction of treble damages by court, conditions.
  
	4.	The court may reduce the treble damages authorized under section 3 of this act to not less than twice the amount of damages which the State sustains if the court finds all of the following:
 
	a.	The person committing the violation furnished officials of the State responsible for investigating false claims violations with all information known to such person about the violation within 30 days after the date on which the person first obtained the information;
 
	b.	The person fully cooperated with any government investigation of the violation; and
 
	c.	At the time such person furnished the State with information about the violation, no criminal prosecution, civil action, or administrative action had commenced with respect to such violation, and the person did not have actual knowledge of the existence of an investigation into such violation.
 
	L.2007, c.265, s.4.

2A:32C-5  Investigation of violation; civil actions.
	5. a. The Attorney General shall investigate a violation of this act.  If the Attorney General finds that a person has violated or is violating this act, the Attorney General may bring a civil action in State or federal court against the person.  The Superior Court shall have jurisdiction over a State action brought pursuant to this act.
 
	b.	A person may bring a civil action for a violation of this act for the person and for the State.  Civil actions instituted under this act shall be brought in the name of the State of New Jersey.
 
	c.	A complaint filed by a person under this act shall remain under seal for at least 60 days and shall not be served on the defendant until the court so orders.  Once filed, the action may be dismissed by the person bringing the action if the Attorney General gives written consent to the dismissal along with the reason for consenting, and the court approves the dismissal.
 
	d.	A complaint alleging a false claim filed under this act shall be so designated when filed, in accordance with the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey.  Upon filing of the complaint, the plaintiff shall serve by registered mail, return receipt requested, the Attorney General with a copy of the complaint and written disclosure of substantially all material evidence and information the person possesses.  The Attorney General may elect to intervene and proceed with the action on behalf of the State within 60 days after it receives both the complaint and the material evidence and information, and in doing so may file its own complaint, amend the plaintiff's complaint, or supplement the claims in which it is intervening with additional detail or by adding any additional claims with respect to which the Attorney General contends it is entitled to relief.  For statute of limitations purposes, any such pleading by the Attorney General pursuant to this subsection shall relate back to the filing date of the complaint of the person who originally brought the action, to the extent that the claim of the Attorney General arises out of the conduct, transactions or occurrences set forth, or attempted to be set forth, in the prior complaint of that person.
 
	e.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2009, c.265)
 
	f.	The Attorney General may, for good cause shown, request that the court extend the time during which the complaint remains under seal.  Any such motion may be supported by affidavits or other submissions in camera.
 
	g.	Before the expiration of the 60-day period or any extensions obtained under subsection f., the Attorney General shall:
 
	(1) file a pleading with the court that he intends to proceed with the action, in which case the action is conducted by the Attorney General and the seal may be lifted; or
 
	(2) file a pleading with the court that he declines to proceed with the action, in which case the seal may be lifted and the person bringing the action shall have the right to conduct the action.
 
	h.	The defendant's answer to any complaint filed under this act shall be filed in accordance with the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey after the complaint is unsealed and served upon the defendant.
 
	i.	When a person files an action under this act, no other person except the State may intervene or bring a related action based on the facts underlying the pending action.
 
	L.2007, c.265, s.5; amended 2009, c.265, s.1; 2023, c.73, s.3.

2A:32C-6  Primary responsibility for prosecuting action; remedies, supplementary.
	6. a. If the Attorney General proceeds with the action, the Attorney General shall have primary responsibility for prosecuting the action, and shall not be bound by any act of the person bringing the action.  The person bringing the action has the right to continue as a party to the action, subject to limitations specified in this act.  The person bringing the action shall be authorized to continue to disclose information related to the action to the Attorney General.
 
	b.	The Attorney General may move to dismiss the action for good cause shown, notwithstanding the objections of the person bringing the action, provided that the person bringing the action has been notified by the Attorney General and the court has provided the person bringing the action with the opportunity for a hearing.
 
	c.	Nothing in this act shall be construed to limit the authority of the Attorney General to settle the action, if the court determines after a hearing that the proposed settlement is fair, adequate, and reasonable under all the circumstances.  Upon a showing of good cause, the hearing may be held in camera.
 
	d.	Upon a showing by the Attorney General that unrestricted participation during the course of the litigation by the person initiating the action would interfere with or unduly delay the Attorney General's prosecution of the case, or would be repetitious, irrelevant, or for purposes of harassment, the court may, in its discretion, impose limitations on the person's participation, including, but not limited to:
 
	(1) Limiting the number of witnesses the person may call;
 
	(2) Limiting the length of the testimony of the person's witnesses;
 
	(3) Limiting the person's cross-examination of witnesses; or
 
	(4) Otherwise limiting the participation by the person in the litigation.
 
	e.	Upon a showing by the defendant that unrestricted participation during the course of the litigation by the person initiating the action would be for purposes of harassment or would cause the defendant undue burden or unnecessary expense, the court may limit the participation by the person in the litigation.
 
	f.	If the Attorney General decides not to proceed with the action, the seal may be lifted and the person who initiated the action shall have the right to conduct the action.  The decision of the Attorney General on whether to proceed with an action shall be deemed final and shall not be subject to review by any court or agency.  If the Attorney General so requests, the Attorney General shall be served at the expense of the Attorney General with copies of all pleadings and motions filed in the action and copies of all deposition transcripts.  When a person proceeds with the action, the court, without limiting the rights of the person initiating the action, may permit the Attorney General to intervene and take over the action on behalf of the State at a later date upon a showing of good cause.
 
	g.	Whether or not the Attorney General proceeds with the action, upon a showing by the Attorney General that certain actions of discovery by the person initiating the action would interfere with an investigation by the State or the prosecution of a criminal or civil matter arising out of the same facts, the court may stay such discovery for a period of not more than 60 days.  Such a showing shall be conducted in camera.  The court may extend the 60-day period upon a further showing in camera by the Attorney General that the criminal or civil investigation or proceeding has been pursued with reasonable diligence and any proposed discovery in the civil action will interfere with an ongoing criminal or civil investigation or proceeding.
 
	h.	The application of one civil remedy under this act shall not preclude the application of any other remedy, civil, administrative or criminal, under this act or any other provision of law.  Such other remedies under this act may be supplemental and not mutually exclusive to the remedies under this act, or may be alternate remedies.  The Attorney General may elect to pursue its claim through an alternate remedy, including any administrative proceeding to determine a civil monetary penalty.  If any such alternate remedy is pursued in another proceeding, the plaintiff shall have the same rights in that proceeding as the plaintiff would have had if the action had continued under this act.  Any finding of fact or conclusion of law made in any such proceeding that has become final shall be conclusive on all parties to an action initiated under section 5 of this act.  As used in this subsection, the term "final" means that the finding of fact or conclusion of law has been finally determined on appeal to the appropriate court, all time for filing such an appeal with respect to the finding or conclusion has expired, or the finding or conclusion is not subject to judicial review.
 
	L.2007, c.265, s.6; amended 2023, c.73, s.4.

2A:32C-7  Distribution of proceeds.
	7. a. If the Attorney General proceeds with and prevails in an action brought by a person under this act, except as provided in subsection b., the court shall order the distribution to the person of at least 15% but not more than 25% of the proceeds recovered under any judgment obtained by the Attorney General under this act or of the proceeds of any settlement of the claim, depending upon the extent to which the person substantially contributed to the prosecution of the action.
 
	b.	If the Attorney General proceeds with an action which the court finds to be based primarily on disclosures of specific information, other than that provided by the person bringing the action, relating to allegations or transactions in a criminal, civil, or administrative hearing; a legislative, administrative, or inspector general report, hearing, audit, or investigation; or from the news media, the court may award such sums as it considers appropriate, taking into account the significance of the information and the role of the person bringing the action in advancing the case to litigation.
 
	c.	The Attorney General shall receive from the State's share of the proceeds recovered under any judgment under this act or settlement of the claim in an action brought by a person under this act a fixed 10% of the proceeds calculated based on the entire amount of the proceeds including the amount ordered distributed under subsection a. of this section, which shall be deposited in the "False Claims Prosecution Fund" established in section 13 of this act and shall only be used to support its ongoing investigation and prosecution of false claims pursuant to the provisions of this act.
 
	d.	If the Attorney General does not proceed with an action under this section, the person bringing the action or settling the claim shall receive an amount which the court decides is reasonable for collecting the civil penalty and damages.  The amount shall be not less than 25% and not more than 30% of the proceeds of the action or settlement of a claim under this act.
 
	e.	Following any distributions under subsection a., b., c. or d. of this section the State entity injured by the submission of a false claim shall be awarded an amount not to exceed its compensatory damages.  Any remaining proceeds, including civil penalties awarded under this act, shall be deposited in the General Fund.
 
	f.	Any payment under this section to the person bringing the action shall be paid only out of the proceeds recovered from the defendant.
 
	g.	Whether or not the Attorney General proceeds with the action, if the court finds that the action was brought by a person who knowingly planned and initiated the violation of this act upon which the action was brought, the court may, to the extent the court considers appropriate, reduce the share of the proceeds of the action which the person would otherwise receive under this section, taking into account the role of the person in advancing the case to litigation and any relevant circumstances pertaining to the violation.  If the person bringing the action is convicted of criminal conduct arising from his role in the violation of this act the person shall be dismissed from the civil action and shall not receive any share of the proceeds of the action.  Such dismissal shall not prejudice the right of the Attorney General to continue the action.
 
	L.2007, c.265, s.7; amended 2023, c.73, s.5.

2A:32C-8  Awarding of attorney's fees, expenses and costs.
  
	8. a. If the Attorney General initiates an action under this act or assumes control of an action brought by a person under this act, the Attorney General shall be awarded reasonable attorney's fees, expenses, and costs.  All such expenses, fees, and costs shall be awarded against the defendant.
 
	b.	If the court awards proceeds to the person bringing the action under this act, the person shall also be awarded an amount for reasonable attorney's fees, expenses, and costs.  All such expenses, fees, and costs shall be awarded against the defendant.
 
	c.	If the Attorney General does not proceed with an action under this act and the defendant is the prevailing party, the court may award the defendant reasonable attorney's fees, expenses, and costs against the person bringing the action if the court finds that the claim of the person bringing the action was clearly frivolous, clearly vexatious, or brought primarily for purposes of harassment. 
 
	d.	No liability shall be incurred by the State or the Attorney General for any expenses, attorney's fees, or other costs incurred by any person in bringing or defending an action under this act.
 
	L.2007, c.265, s.8; amended 2009, c.265, s.2.

2A:32C-9  Immunity from civil liability; limitations on bringing an action.
	9. a. No member of the Legislature, member of the Judiciary, or senior Executive branch official may be civilly liable if the basis for an action is premised on evidence or information known to the State when the action was brought.
 
	b.	A person may not bring an action under this act based upon allegations or transactions that are the subject of a civil suit or administrative civil monetary penalty proceeding to which the State is already a party.
 
	c.	The court shall dismiss an action or claim under this act, unless opposed by the Attorney General, if substantially the same allegations or transactions as alleged in the action or claim were publicly disclosed in a criminal, civil, or administrative hearing in which the State or an agent of the State is a party, in an investigation, report, hearing or audit conducted by the Legislature or by the news media, unless the action is brought by the Attorney General, or unless the person bringing the action is an original source of the information.  For purposes of this subsection, the term "original source" means an individual who either (1) prior to a public disclosure as described in this paragraph has voluntarily disclosed to the State the information on which allegations or transactions in a claim are based, or (2) has knowledge that is independent of and materially adds to the publicly disclosed allegations or transactions, and who has voluntarily provided the information to the State before filing an action under this act.
 
	d.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2023, c.73)
 
	L.2007, c.265, s.9; amended 2009, c.265, s.3; 2023, c.73, s.6.

2A:32C-10  Disclosure of information by employee, employee protections.
	10. a. No employer shall make, adopt, or enforce any rule, regulation, or policy preventing an employee, contractor, or agent from disclosing information to a State or law enforcement agency or from acting to further a false claims action, including investigating, initiating, testifying, or assisting in an action filed or to be filed under this act.
 
	b.	Any employee, contractor, or agent shall be entitled to all relief necessary to make that employee, contractor, or agent whole, if that employee, contractor, or agent is discharged, demoted, suspended, threatened, harassed, or in any other manner discriminated against in the terms and conditions of employment because of lawful acts done by the employee, contractor, agent, or associated others in furtherance of an action under this act, or in other efforts to stop one or more violations of this act.
 
	c.	Relief under subsection b. of this section shall include reinstatement with the same seniority status such employee, contractor, or agent would have had but for the discrimination, two times the amount of back pay, interest on the back pay, compensation for any special damages sustained as a result of the discrimination, and, where appropriate, punitive damages.  In addition, the defendant shall be required to pay litigation costs and reasonable attorney's fees associated with an action brought under this section.  An action may be brought in the Superior Court for the relief provided in this subsection.
 
	d.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2023, c.73)
 
	e.	A civil action under this subsection may not be brought more than three years after the date when the retaliation occurred.
 
	L.2007, c.265, s.10; amended 2023, c.73, s.7.

2A:32C-11  Statute of limitations for bringing civil action.
 
 	11.	A civil action under this act may not be brought:

	a.	More than six years after the date on which the violation of the act is committed; or
 
	b.	More than three years after the date when facts material to the right of action are known or reasonably should have been known by the State official charged with responsibility to act in the circumstances, but in no event more than 10 years after the date on which the violation is committed, whichever occurs last.
 
	L.2007, c.265, s.11.

2A:32C-12  Evidence required for action, preponderance.
	12.	In any action brought under this act, the State or the person bringing the action shall be required to prove all essential elements of the cause of action, including damages, by a preponderance of the evidence.
 
	L.2007, c.265, s.12.

2A:32C-12.1  Final judgement rendered, fraud, false statements, denial, essential elements, offense.
	10.	Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the State or federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, or the State or federal Rules of Evidence, a final judgment rendered in favor of the State or of the United States in any criminal proceeding charging fraud or false statements, whether upon a verdict after trial or upon a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, shall estop the defendant from denying the essential elements of the offense in any action which involves the same transaction as in the criminal proceeding and which is brought under subsection a. or b. of section 5 of P.L.2007, c.265 (C.2A:32C-5).
 
L.2023, c.73, s.10.

2A:32C-13  "False Claims Prosecution Fund."
	13. a. There is established in the General Fund the "False Claims Prosecution Fund" as a nonlapsing revolving fund in the Department of the Treasury.  Monies deposited in the fund shall be utilized by the Attorney General for the exclusive purpose of investigating and prosecuting false claims.  The State Treasurer shall deposit 10% of the proceeds recovered by the Attorney General pursuant to subsection c. of section 7 of P.L.2007, c.265 (C.2A:32C-7) in the False Claims Prosecution Fund.
 
	b.	The State Treasurer shall deposit 25% of the State share of monies recovered from actions related to false or fraudulent Medicaid claims brought pursuant to this act in the "Medicaid Fraud Control Fund" established by section 10 of P.L.2007, c.58 (C.30:4D-62).
 
	c.	Except as provided in subsections a. and b. of this section, the State share of moneys recovered by the Attorney General in accordance with the provisions of this act, other than the awarded amount provided to the State entity injured by the submission of a false claim, shall be deposited in the General Fund.
 
	L.2007, c.265, s.13; amended 2023, c.73, s.8.

2A:32C-14  Issuance of subpoenas, warrant for arrest; other power of Attorney General.
	14. a. If the Attorney General has reason to believe that a person within or outside of this State has engaged in, or is engaging in, an act or practice which violates this act, or any other relevant statute or regulation, the Attorney General or the Attorney General's designee may administer oaths and affirmations, and request or compel the attendance of witnesses or the production of documents.  The Attorney General may make a civil investigative demand requiring a party to answer, in writing, written interrogatories with respect to such documentary material or information.  The Attorney General may issue, or designate another to issue, subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, records, accounts, papers and documents.  Witnesses shall be put on oath or affirmation and their testimony shall be taken stenographically and shall be transcribed.  Witnesses shall be entitled to receive the same fees and mileage as persons summoned to testify in the courts of the State.
 
	If a person subpoenaed pursuant to this section shall neglect or refuse to obey the command of the subpoena, a judge of the Superior Court may, on proof by affidavit of service of the subpoena, of payment or tender of the fees required and of refusal or neglect by the person to obey the command of the subpoena, issue a warrant for the arrest of said person to bring that person before the judge, who is authorized to proceed against the person as for a contempt of court.
 
	b.	If the matter that the Attorney General seeks to obtain by request is located outside the State, the person so required may provide the matter or otherwise make it available to the Attorney General or the Attorney General's representative to examine the matter at the place where it is located.  The Attorney General shall have the authority to issue subpoenas to compel witnesses located outside the State to attend investigative interviews pursuant to this act, and such witnesses may make themselves available to the Attorney General or the Attorney General's representative to be interviewed at the place where the witness is located.  The Attorney General may designate representatives, including officials of the state in which the matter is located, to inspect the matter on behalf of the Attorney General, and the Attorney General may respond to similar requests from officials of other states.
 
	c.	If a licensed professional or an owner, administrator or employee of a licensed professional, including but not limited to an owner, administrator or employee of any hospital, an insurance company, an insurance producer, solicitor or adjuster, or any other person licensed or certified by a licensing authority of this State, or an agent, representative or employee of any of them is found to have violated any provision of this section, the Attorney General shall notify the appropriate licensing authority of the violation so that the licensing authority may take appropriate administrative action.
 
	d.	State investigators shall not be subject to subpoena in civil actions by any court of this State to testify concerning any matter of which they have knowledge pursuant to a pending false claims investigation by the State, or a pending claim for civil penalties initiated by the State.
 
	L.2007, c.265, s.14; amended 2023, c.73, s.9.

2A:32C-15  Sovereign immunity preserved.
 
	15.	This act shall not be construed as waiving the sovereign immunity of the State and its officers and employees as otherwise provided by law. 
 
	L.2007, c.265, s.15.

2A:32C-16  Existing law, certain, unaffected.
  
	17.	This act shall not abrogate or modify any existing statutory or common law privileges or immunities. 
 
	L.2007, c.265, s.17.

2A:32C-17  Liberal construction, severability.
  
	18.	This act shall be liberally construed to effectuate its remedial and deterrent purposes.  If any provision of this act or its application to any particular person or circumstance is held invalid, that provision or its application is severable and does not affect the validity of other provisions or applications of this act.
 
	L.2007, c.265, s..18.

2A:32C-18  Report to Legislature.
 
	4.	On the 30th day after the effective date of P.L.2009, c.265 (C.2A:32C-18 et al.) and annually on the anniversary of the effective date of P.L.2009, c.265 (C.2A:32C-18 et al.), the Attorney General, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), shall submit to the Legislature, a report containing the following information:
 
	a.	The number of cases the Attorney General filed during the previous calendar year under the "New Jersey False Claims Act," P.L.2007, c.265 (C.2A:32C-1 et seq.);
 
	b.	The number of cases private individuals filed under the "New Jersey False Claims Act," P.L.2007, c.265 (C.2A:32C-1 et seq.) during the previous calendar year, including those cases that remain under seal, and specifying for those cases no longer under seal:
 
	(1)	the State or federal courts in which those cases were filed and the number in each court;
 
	(2)	the State program or agency that is involved in each case; and 
 
	(3)	where the information is available, the number of cases filed by private individuals who previously had filed an action based on the same or similar transactions or allegations under the federal False Claims Act or the False Claims Act of another state;
 
	c.	The amount that was recovered by the State under the "New Jersey False Claims Act," P.L.2007, c.265 (C.2A:32C-1 et seq.) in settlement, in damages, penalties, and litigation costs, if known, and specifying for each the following:
 
	(1)	the case number and parties for each case in which there was a recovery; 
 
	(2)	the separate amounts of any funds recovered for damages, penalties, and litigation costs; and 
 
	(3)	the percentage of the recovery and the amount awarded to any private person who brought the action.
 
	L.2009, c.265, s.4.

2A:33-1.  Authorized distraints;  liability for wrongful distraint; prohibition on money owed on lease of residence
    Distraints may be taken when authorized by law;  but no unreasonable, excessive or wrongful distraint shall be taken, and for any such taking, the distraining party shall be liable in damages to the party aggrieved.

    No distraint shall be permitted for money owed on a lease or other agreement  for the occupation of any real property used solely as a residence of the  tenant.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1971, c. 228, s. 1.

2A:33-2.  Place of impounding chattels
    Chattels distrained or taken by distress, at one time, for any cause whatsoever, shall be impounded together or the distraining party shall be liable in treble damages to the party aggrieved.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:33-3.  Exemptions
    Property to the value of $500, to be selected by the person distrained against or as provided in section 2A:33-12 of this title, and all wearing apparel shall be exempt from distraint.  This section shall be inapplicable in the case of the impounding and distraint of straying domestic animals.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:33-4.  Impounding of strays
    Cattle or other domestic animals found straying on the property of any person other than their owner, causing damage to such property, may be distrained and impounded to secure reimbursement for such damage.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:33-5.  Distraint for levying of penalty inflicted or money directed to be  paid by law;  warrant and sale by judge or magistrate
    Where any judge or magistrate is required or authorized to issue a warrant of distress for the levying of a penalty inflicted, or sum of money directed to  be paid by any law, and no mode is provided for the disposal of the distress,  the judge or magistrate may order the chattels, to be so distrained, sold and  disposed of within the time to be limited in the warrant, which time shall not  be less than 4 nor more than 10 days, unless the penalty or sum of money,  together with reasonable charges, to be taxed by the judge or magistrate, of  taking and keeping the distress, be sooner paid.

    Reasonable charges of taking, keeping and selling the distress, to be taxed  as aforesaid, shall be deducted by the officer making the distress out of  moneys arising from the sale, and the overplus, if any, after such charges, and  also said penalty or sum of money shall be satisfied and paid, shall be  returned on demand to the owner of the chattels so distrained. The officer  executing the warrant shall show the same to the person whose chattels are  distrained, and give him a copy thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:33-6.  Property subject to distraint for rent
    A landlord or his duly authorized agent may, for arrears of rent, distrain:

    a.  The goods and chattels of his tenant, found upon the demised premises, except such as are by law exempt from distraint and except the goods and chattels of another in possession of the tenant;

    b.  The live stock of his tenant, found upon the demised premises or upon premises appurtenant thereto, except the property of another in the tenant's possession;  and

    c.  All products of the soil severed from the soil and remaining upon any part of the land charged with such rent;  and

    d.  All fruits or products of the soil, growing or being upon the demised premises, which the landlord or his agent may sever and remove from such premises to a safe and proper place on the premises or, if there be no such place thereon, to some other place to be procured by the landlord, due notice of which place shall be given to the tenant or left at his place of abode.

    The property so subject to distraint shall be appraised, sold and disposed of at the time and in the manner provided in this chapter.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:33-7.  Limitation of right to distrain for rent
    No landlord shall at one time distrain for more than 1 year's arrears of rent, and such distraint shall be made within 6 months after the rent becomes due, or, if the rent is payable in installments, within 6 months after the entire year's rent has become due.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:33-8.  Distraint after term or estate ended
    A person having rent in arrear and due upon a lease for term of life, years,  or at will ended or determined, may distrain for the same after determination  of the respective leases, in the same manner as he might have done if the lease  had not been ended or determined.

    The distress shall be made within 6 calendar months after the determination  of the lease, and during the continuance of the landlord's title or interest,  and during the possession of the tenant from whom the arrears became due, or if  the landlord's title and interest shall have ceased, or the tenant has removed  from the leasehold premises, then within 30 days after the end and  determination of the term of tenancy, but not thereafter.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:33-9.  Time for owner of distrained property to take action; inventory and appraisal;  aid of officers.
	2A:33-9.	If the tenant or owner of property distrained for rent shall not, within 10 days next after the distress taken and after notice thereof, and of the cause of the taking, has been left at the main dwelling house or other most conspicuous place on the premises charged with the rent distrained for, commence an action or otherwise lawfully proceed to recover possession of said property or set aside or end the distraint, the person distraining may, after the distress, notice and expiration of 10 days, on two days' notice to the tenant, cause the goods and chattels to be inventoried and appraised by three sworn appraisers.
 
	The sheriff of the county of the place wherein the distress shall be taken, shall aid and assist therein and shall summon three appraisers for such service and shall swear them well and truly to appraise the same, at the true and intrinsic value thereof, according to their best understanding.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 2023, c.250, s.2.

2A:33-10.  Sale of distrained property;  notice.
	2A:33-10.	After the inventory and appraisement, the person distrained for rent shall sell at public vendue the property so distrained.  He shall give five days' public notice by advertising the articles to be sold and the time and place of sale, in at least three of the most public places in the municipality where the distress shall be made, and sell the same for the best price that can be secured towards satisfaction of the rent and charges of the distress, appraisement and sale, leaving the overplus, if any, with the sheriff for the owner's use.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 2023, c.250, s.3.

2A:33-11.  Impounding and sale on premises.
    A person lawfully distraining for rent may impound or otherwise secure the articles distrained so made, on the part of the premises most convenient for the purpose, and may appraise, sell and dispose of the same thereon in like manner as a distress taken for rent off the premises.  A person may go upon the  place where the articles are impounded or secured, in order to view, appraise,  buy or remove the same on account of the purchaser thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:33-12.  Selection of articles to be exempted;  when by appraisers.
    From the inventory of the property appraised, the tenant, or in his absence,  his agent, attorney, or member of his family, may select articles, the value of  which, according to the appraisement, shall not exceed $500. If the tenant, or  member of his family, his agent or attorney, cannot readily be found, the  selection may be made by the appraisers to be reserved for the family's use.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:33-13.  Procedure if landlord fails to proceed with appraisement; selection.
	2A:33-13.	If the landlord, his attorney or agent shall not, within two days after being served with a written request from his tenant so to do, proceed and have the distrained property appraised, the tenant may, after five days' notice thereof to his landlord, his attorney or agent, apply to the sheriff of the county and have the property inventoried and appraised.  The property reserved for the use of the family of the tenant may thereupon be selected as provided by section 2A:33-12 of this title.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 2023, c.250, s.4.

2A:33-14.  Officers aiding in execution;  fees.
    All sheriffs and constables shall aid in the execution of the provisions of  this chapter, and for such services they, and the appraisers therein mentioned,  shall be entitled to the fees provided for in Title 22, Fees and Costs, of the  Revised Statutes.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:33-15.  Distress for residue.
    When the value of the property distrained shall not amount to the full value  of the arrears further distraints may be made from time to time, for the  residue of the arrears.  Any such further distress shall be made within the  time limited by this chapter.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:33-16.  Pound breach or rescue;  remedy;  damages
    A person aggrieved by any pound breach or rescue of any property distrained  for rent and impounded or otherwise secured by virtue of this chapter, shall in  an action at law recover treble damages and costs of any action against the  offender or the owner of the property distrained, if it be afterwards found to  have come into his use or possession.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:33-17.  Wrongful distress and sale for rent;  remedy
    If a distress and sale shall be made for rent not in fact due the person distraining or for whom the distress is taken, the owner of the property distrained, shall be entitled to recover double the value of the property so distrained and sold, together with full costs of any action.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:33-18.  Wrongful acts after distraint for rent;  remedy;  damages
    When a distress is made for rent justly due and an irregularity or unlawful  act shall afterwards be done by the party distraining, or his agent, the  distress shall not therefore be deemed unlawful nor the party making it deemed  a trespasser ab initio.  The party aggrieved thereby shall be entitled to  recover full satisfaction for the special damage sustained thereby, and no more.  When the plaintiff shall recover such damages, he shall be entitled to his full costs, the same as in other cases of costs.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:33-19.  Actions against distrainor;  double costs in certain cases
    In any action brought to recover damages for an alleged wrongful distress or  wrongful act after distraint, a defendant, in whose favor judgment is rendered,  shall be entitled to recover double costs.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:33-20.  Distraint of property removed;  bona fide purchasers
    Where property of a tenant, subject to be distrained for accrued and unpaid  rent, payable or to become payable, is removed from the demised premises, the  landlord may, within thirty days next after such removal, distrain such  property notwithstanding its removal, unless it shall have been sold to a  purchaser for a valuable consideration without knowledge of the landlord's  right to distrain.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:33-21.  Liability of tenant for removing or concealing property subject to distraint
    Any tenant who removes or conceals any of his personal property subject to distraint by his landlord, with intent to delay, hinder, or defraud said landlord, shall be liable for the damages resulting therefrom, to his landlord;   and in any action to recover such damages if it shall appear that the action  of the tenant was willful, the landlord shall be entitled to recover double  damages.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:33-22.  Seizure of property locked up;  breaking and entering
	2A:33-22.	When property is removed by a tenant and put in any place locked up, fastened or otherwise secured, to prevent the said property from being distrained for arrears of rent, the landlord, first calling to his assistance a peace officer, who shall aid and assist therein, may, in the daytime, break open and enter the place, and distrain the said property for the arrears of rent as he might have done if the said property had been put in an open place.
 
	If the place where the said property is secured is a dwelling house, oath shall first be made before some judge or magistrate, of a reasonable ground to suspect that the said property is therein.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 2023, c.250, s.5.

2A:33-23.  Remedy where rent apportionable
    Wherever rent is legally or equitably apportionable between successive owners or landlords or their representatives, any person entitled to a proportion of such rent shall be entitled to distrain therefor in the same manner as though such person was entitled to receive the full rent.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:34-1  Causes for judgments of nullity.
 	2A:34-1.	Causes for judgments of nullity.

	(1)	Judgments of nullity of marriage may be rendered in all cases, when:
 
	a.	Either of the parties has another wife, husband, partner in a civil union couple or domestic partner living at the time of a second or other marriage.
 
	b.	The parties are within the degrees prohibited by law.  If any such marriage shall not have been annulled during the lifetime of the parties the validity thereof shall not be inquired into after the death of either party.
 
	c.	The parties, or either of them, were at the time of marriage physically and incurably impotent, provided the party making the application shall have been ignorant of such impotency or incapability at the time of the marriage, and has not subsequently ratified the marriage.
 
	d.	The parties, or either of them, lacked capacity to marry due to want of understanding because of mental condition, or the influence of intoxicants, drugs, or similar agents; or where there was a lack of mutual assent to the marital relationship; duress; or fraud as to the essentials of marriage; and has not subsequently ratified the marriage.
 
	e.	The demand for such a judgment is by the wife or husband who was under the age of 18 years at the time of the marriage.
 
	f.	Allowable under the general equity jurisdiction of the Superior Court.
 
	(2)	Judgments of nullity of a civil union may be rendered in all cases, when:
 
	a.	Either of the parties has another wife, husband, partner in a civil union couple or domestic partner living at the time of establishing the new civil union.
 
	b.	The parties are within the degrees prohibited by the law from entering into a marriage or establishing a civil union or domestic partnership.  If any such civil union shall not have been annulled during the lifetime of the parties the validity thereof shall not be inquired into after the death of either party.
 
	c.	The parties, or either of them, lacked capacity to enter into a civil union due to want of understanding because of mental condition, or the influence of intoxicants, drugs, or similar agents; or where there was a lack of mutual assent to the civil union; duress; or fraud as to the essentials of a civil union; and has not subsequently ratified the civil union.
 
	d.	The demand for such a judgment is by the party who was under the age of 18 years at the time of the civil union.
 
	e.	Allowable under the general equity jurisdiction of the Superior Court. 
 
	amended 1971, c.212, s.1; 2006, c.103, s.63; 2018, c.42, s.2.

2A:34-2  Causes for divorce from bond of matrimony.
 
 	2A:34-2.  Divorce from the bond of matrimony may be adjudged for the following causes heretofore or hereafter arising:
 
	a.	Adultery;
 
	b.	Willful and continued desertion for the term of 12 or more months, which may be established by satisfactory proof that the parties have ceased to cohabit as man and wife;
 
	c.	Extreme cruelty, which is defined as including any physical or mental cruelty which endangers the safety or health of the plaintiff or makes it improper or unreasonable to expect the plaintiff to continue to cohabit with the defendant; provided that no complaint for divorce shall be filed until after 3 months from the date of the last act of cruelty complained of in the complaint, but this provision shall not be held to apply to any counterclaim;
 
	d.	Separation, provided that the husband and wife have lived separate and apart in different habitations for a period of at least 18 or more consecutive months and there is no reasonable prospect of reconciliation; provided, further that after the 18-month period there shall be a presumption that there is no reasonable prospect of reconciliation;
 
	e.	Voluntarily induced addiction or habituation to any narcotic drug as defined in the New Jersey Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, P.L.1970, c.226 or habitual drunkenness for a period of 12 or more consecutive months subsequent to marriage and next preceding the filing of the complaint;
 
	f.	Institutionalization for mental illness for a period of 24 or more consecutive months subsequent to marriage and next preceding the filing of the complaint;
 
	g.	Imprisonment of the defendant for 18 or more consecutive months after marriage, provided that where the action is not commenced until after the defendant's release, the parties have not resumed cohabitation following such imprisonment;
 
	h.	Deviant sexual conduct voluntarily performed by the defendant without the consent of the plaintiff;
 
	i.	Irreconcilable differences which have caused the breakdown of the marriage for a period of six months and which make it appear that the marriage should be dissolved and that there is no reasonable prospect of reconciliation.

	Amended 1971, c.212, s.2; 1971, c.217, s.11; 2007, c.6. 

2A:34-2.1  Dissolution of a civil union, causes.
 
	64.	The dissolution of a civil union may be adjudged for the following causes:

	a.	voluntary sexual intercourse between a person who is in a civil union and an individual other than the person's  partner in a civil union couple;
 
	b.	willful and continued desertion for a period of 12 or more consecutive months, which may be established by satisfactory proof that the parties have ceased to cohabit as  partners in a civil union couple;
 
	c.	extreme cruelty, which is defined as including any physical or mental cruelty that endangers the safety or health of the plaintiff or makes it improper or unreasonable to expect the plaintiff to continue to cohabit with the defendant; except that no complaint for termination shall be filed until after three months from the date of the last act of cruelty complained of in the complaint, but this provision shall not be held to apply to any counterclaim;
 
	d.	separation, provided that the  partners in a civil union couple have lived separate and apart in different habitations for a period of at least 18 or more consecutive months and there is no reasonable prospect of reconciliation; and provided further that, after the 18-month period, there shall be a presumption that there is no reasonable prospect of reconciliation;
 
	e.	voluntarily induced addiction or habituation to any narcotic drug, as defined in section 2 of the "New Jersey Controlled Dangerous Substances Act," P.L.1970, c.226 (C.24:21-2) or in N.J.S.2C:35-2 of the "Comprehensive Drug Reform Act of 1987," N.J.S.2C:35-1 et al., or habitual drunkenness for a period of 12 or more consecutive months subsequent to establishment of the civil union and next preceding the filing of the complaint;
 
	f.	institutionalization for mental illness for a period of 24 or more consecutive months subsequent to establishment of the civil union and next preceding the filing of the complaint; or
 
	g.	imprisonment of the defendant for 18 or more consecutive months after establishment of the civil union, provided that where the action is not commenced until after the defendant's release, the parties have not resumed cohabitation following the imprisonment.
 
	L.2006, c.103, s.64.

2A:34-3  Causes for divorce from bed and board or legal separation from  partner in a civil union couple.
 
 	2A:34-3.  Causes for divorce from bed and board or legal separation from  partner in a civil union couple.
 
	a.	Divorce from bed and board may be adjudged for the same causes as divorce from the bonds of matrimony whenever both parties petition or join in requesting such relief and they or either of them present sufficient proof of such cause or causes to warrant the entry of a judgment of divorce from the bonds of matrimony, provided further that in the case of a reconciliation thereafter the parties may apply for a revocation or suspension of the judgment, and provided further that the granting of a bed and board divorce shall in no way prejudice either party from thereafter applying to the court for a conversion of said divorce to a divorce from the bonds of matrimony, which application shall be granted as a matter of right.
 
	b.	Legal separation from a  partner in a civil union couple may be adjudged for the same causes as dissolution of a civil union whenever both parties petition or join in requesting such relief and they or either of them present sufficient proof of such cause or causes to warrant the entry of a judgment of dissolution of a civil union, provided further that in the case of a reconciliation thereafter the parties may apply for a revocation or suspension of the judgment, and provided further that the granting of a legal separation from a partner in a civil union couple shall in no way prejudice either party from thereafter applying to the court for a conversion of said legal separation from a  partner in a civil union couple to a dissolution of a civil union, which application shall be granted as a matter of right.
 
	Amended 1971, c.212, s.3; 2006, c.103, s.65.

2A:34-6  Divorce from bed and board or legal separation from a civil union; property rights.
  
	2A:34-6.  Divorce from bed and board or legal separation from a civil union; property rights.
 
	For and during the time that any judgment for divorce from bed and board or legal separation from a partner in a civil union couple shall remain in force and effect all property rights of the parties shall be as though a judgment of absolute divorce or dissolution had been entered.
 
	In any property transaction by either of the parties in such status the fact of the existence of such judgment shall be distinctly recited and reference to the public record thereof shall be clearly set forth.
 
	Amended 2006, c.103, s.66.

2A:34-7  Certain defenses abolished.
 
 	2A:34-7.  Certain defenses abolished.

	Recrimination, condonation and the clean hands doctrine are hereby abolished as defenses to divorce from the bonds of matrimony, dissolution of a civil union, divorce from bed and board or legal separation from a  partner in a civil union couple, and if both parties make out grounds for a divorce, dissolution or legal separation, a decree may be granted to each; provided that nothing herein shall preclude or abrogate the responsibility of a party for the penalty provided by law for perjury or the subornation of perjury.
 
	Amended 1971, c.212, s.4; 2006, c.103, s.67.

2A:34-8  Jurisdiction stated.
 
 	2A:34-8.  Jurisdiction stated.

	The Superior Court shall have jurisdiction of all causes of divorce, dissolution of a civil union, bed and board divorce, legal separation from a partner in a civil union couple or nullity when either party is a bona fide resident of this State.  The Superior Court shall have jurisdiction of an action for alimony and maintenance when the defendant is subject to the personal jurisdiction of the court, is a resident of this State, or has tangible or intangible real or personal property within the jurisdiction of the court. The Superior Court may afford incidental relief as in other cases of an equitable nature and by rule of court may determine the venue of matrimonial and civil union actions.
 
	Amended 1971, c.212, s.5; 2006, c.103, s.68.

2A:34-9  Jurisdiction in nullity proceedings or dissolution proceedings; residence requirements; service of process.
 
	2A:34-9. Jurisdiction in nullity proceedings or dissolution proceedings; residence requirements; service of process.
 
	Jurisdiction in actions for nullity of marriage or dissolution of a civil union may be acquired when:
 
	a.	Either party is a bona fide resident of this State at the time of the commencement of the action; and
 
	b.	Process is served upon the defendant as prescribed by the rules of the Supreme Court.
 
	Amended 2006, c.103, s.69.

2A:34-10  Jurisdiction in divorce proceedings, dissolution of a civil union, legal separation from a  partner in a civil union couple; service of process; residence requirements.
 
 	2A:34-10.  Jurisdiction in divorce proceedings, dissolution of a civil union, legal separation from a  partner in a civil union couple; service of process; residence requirements.
 
	Jurisdiction in actions for divorce, either absolute or from bed and board, and in actions for dissolution of a civil union or legal separation from a  partner in a civil union couple may be acquired when process is served upon the defendant as prescribed by the rules of the Supreme Court, and
 
	1.	When, at the time the cause of action arose, either party was a bona fide resident of this State, and has continued so to be down to the time of the commencement of the action; except that no action for absolute divorce or dissolution of a civil union shall be commenced for any cause other than adultery, unless one of the parties has been for the 1 year next preceding the commencement of the action a bona fide resident of this State; or
 
	2.	When, since the cause of action arose, either party has become, and for  at least 1 year next preceding the commencement of the action has continued to  be, a bona fide resident of this State.
 
	Amended 1971, c.212, s.6,(1971, c.212 title amended 1971, c.217, s.10); 2006, c.103, s.70.

2A:34-11  Jurisdiction by acknowledgment of service of process, appearance, etc.
 
 	2A:34-11. Jurisdiction by acknowledgment of service of process, appearance, etc.

	In divorce, dissolution and nullity actions, the jurisdiction of the court over the defendant's person for all purposes of the action shall be fully established by the filing of an acknowledgment of service of process, or of an appearance, or of an answer by the defendant pro se, or on his behalf by a duly authorized attorney, in such manner as may be prescribed by rules of the Supreme Court.
 
	Amended 2006, c.103, s.71.

2A:34-12  Counterclaims.
 
 	2A:34-12.  Counterclaims.

	Whenever the court shall have acquired jurisdiction of any action under the provisions of this chapter or P.L.2006, c.103 (C.37:1-28 et al.), the defendant therein may, by counterclaim, state any cause of action under this chapter or P.L.2006, c.103 (C.37:1-28 et al.) which exists at the time of the service of the counterclaim.
 
	Amended 2006, c.103, s.72.

2A:34-12.1.  Short title
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Parents' Education Act."

	L.1999,c.111,s.1.

2A:34-12.2.  "Parents' Education Fund"
	2.	There is hereby established a separate, nonlapsing, revolving fund in the General Fund to be known as the "Parents' Education Fund."  The Clerk of the Superior Court shall forward the $25 registration fee collected pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1999, c.111(C.2A:34-12.5) for deposit in the fund.  The fund shall be administered by the Administrative Office of the Courts and dedicated to the development, establishment, operation and maintenance of the "Parents' Education Program" created pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1999, c.111(C.2A:34-12.3).

	L.1999,c.111,s.2.

2A:34-12.3.  "Parent's Education program"
	3.  a.  There is hereby established a mandatory education program to be known as the "Parents' Education Program." 

	b.	The program shall be designed to assist and advise divorced parents on issues concerning divorce, separation and custody.  The program shall be made available twice a month.  The program shall be administered by the Administrative Office of the Courts.  The Assignment Judge shall appoint appropriate staff to act as a program representative or representatives, as necessary, for each county.

	c.	The purpose of the program shall be to promote cooperation between the parties and to assist parents in resolving issues which may arise during the divorce or separation process, including, but not limited to:

	(1)	Understanding the legal process and cost of divorce or separation, including arbitration and mediation;

	(2)	Understanding the financial responsibilities for the children;

	(3)	Understanding the interaction between parent and child, the family relationship and any other areas of adjustment and concern during the process of divorce or separation;

	(4)	Understanding how children react to divorce or separation, how to spot problems, what to tell them about divorce or separation, how to keep communication open and how to answer questions and concerns the children may have about the process;

	(5)	Understanding how parents can help their children during the divorce or separation, specific strategies, ideas, tools, and resources for assistance;

	(6)	Understanding how parents can help children after the divorce or separation and how to deal with new family structures and different sets of rules; and

	(7)	Understanding that cooperation may sometimes be inappropriate in cases of domestic violence.


	L.1999,c.111,s.3.

2A:34-12.5.  Attendance at program required; fee; exceptions
	5.  a.  The court shall order every person who has filed an action for divorce, nullity or separate maintenance where the custody, visitation or support of the minor child is an issue to attend the "Parents' Education Program" established pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1999, c.111(C.2A:34-12.3).  Each party shall attend separate sessions of the program.

	b.	Each party shall be required to pay a fee of $25 for registration in the "Parents' Education Program" which shall be forwarded by the Clerk of the Superior Court for deposit in the "Parents' Education Program Fund" established pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1999, c.111(C.2A:34-12.2). 

	c.	Except as provided in subsections d. and e. of this section, the court shall require all parties who have filed an action for divorce, nullity or separate maintenance where the custody, visitation or support of the minor child is an issue to complete the program prior to entry of judgment.  Failure of a party to participate in the program shall be considered as a factor by the court in making any custody and visitation determinations.

	d.	The court may exempt a party from attending the program, if the court finds good cause for an exemption.

	e.	The court shall not refer a party to the program if a temporary or final order restraining either party from contact with the other has been issued pursuant to the "Prevention of Domestic Violence Act of 1991," P.L. 1991, c. 261 (C.2C:25-17 et seq.), or if either party is restrained from contact with the other party, or a child of the other party, under the criminal or civil laws of this or any other state.

	L.1999,c.111,s.5.

2A:34-12.6.  Program representatives, immunity, employment restrictions
	6.  a.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person serving as a program representative in the "Parents' Education Program" established pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1999, c.111(C.2A:34-12.3) shall be liable for damages resulting from any exercise of judgment or discretion in connection with the person's duties unless the actions  are fraudulent or evidence a reckless disregard for the duties imposed by the position.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to grant immunity to any program representative  causing damage by that person's wilful, wanton or grossly negligent act of commission or omission.

	b.	No person serving as a program representative in the program shall solicit, accept employment from or counsel a program participant for a period of one year after the program participant has completed the program.

	L.1999,c.111,s.6.

2A:34-12.7.  Confidentiality of communications
	7.	All communications made by any program participant during the course of attending the "Parents' Education Program," established pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1999, c.111(C.2A:34-12.3) are confidential and shall not be admissible as evidence in any court proceeding.

	L.1999,c.111,s.7.

2A:34-12.8.  Adoption of Rules by Court
	8.	The Supreme Court of New Jersey may adopt Rules of Court appropriate or necessary to effectuate the purpose of this act.

	L.1999,c.111,s.8.

2A:34-13  Matrimonial or civil union action.
  
	2A:34-13.  Matrimonial or civil union action. 

	A person who has attained the age of 16 years may prosecute or defend any matrimonial or civil union action in person or by attorney. 
 
	Amended 1988, c.153, s.1; 2006, c.103, s.73.

2A:34-14  Parent or guardian may prosecute or defend.
 
 	2A:34-14.  Parent or guardian may prosecute or defend.

	A parent or guardian shall not be precluded by the provisions of this chapter from prosecuting or defending any action respecting the marriage or civil union status or relation of his minor child or ward.
 
	Amended 2006, c.103, s.74.

2A:34-15  Co-respondent in adultery or dissolution of a civil union actions.
 
 	2A:34-15.  Co-respondent in adultery or dissolution of civil union actions.

	Where a person is named as co-respondent in a charge of adultery or in a charge giving rise to a cause of action for dissolution of a civil union pursuant to subsection a. of section 64 of P.L.2006, c.103 (C.2A:34-2.1), the party making the charge shall give the co-respondent written notice of the charge within the time and in the manner prescribed by the rules of the Supreme Court.
 
	Any such co-respondent shall be entitled to intervene in the action on this particular issue.
 
	Amended 2006, c.103, s.75.

2A:34-18  Final judgment; appeal.
 
	2A:34-18.  Final judgment; appeal.

	If after the hearing of any cause the court shall determine that the plaintiff or counterclaimant is entitled to a judgment of nullity of marriage or nullity of a civil union or a judgment for divorce from the bonds of matrimony or judgment for dissolution of a civil union, a final judgment shall be entered.
 
	Appeals shall be taken only from the final judgment.
 
	Amended 1969, c.82, s.1; 2006, c.103, s.76.

2A:34-20.  Effect of judgment
    A child heretofore or hereafter born of parents who prior or subsequent to the birth of such child have entered into a civil or religious marriage, or shall have consummated a common-law marriage where such marriage is recognized as valid, in the manner authorized by the law of the place where such marriage takes place, is the legitimate child of both natural parents notwithstanding that such marriage is void or voidable or has been or shall hereafter be annulled or judicially declared void.

    Nothing in this amendatory act shall be deemed to affect the construction of  any will or instrument heretofore executed or any property right or interest or  right of action vested or accrued or to limit the operation of any judicial  determination containing an express provision or provisions with respect to the  legitimacy, maintenance or custody of any child, or to affect any adoption  proceeding heretofore commenced, or limit the effect of any judgment or order  entered in such adoption proceedings.

     	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1971, c. 212, s. 7.

2A:34-21  Surname.
  
	2A:34-21.  Surname.  

	The court, upon or after granting a divorce from the bonds of matrimony to either spouse or dissolution of a civil union to either partner in a civil union couple, may allow either spouse or partner in a civil union couple to resume any name used by the spouse or partner in a civil union couple before the marriage or civil union, or to assume any surname. 
 
	Amended 1988, c.153, s.2; 2006, c.103, s.77.

2A:34-23  Alimony, maintenance.
	2A:34-23.  Alimony, maintenance.
 
Pending any matrimonial action or action for dissolution of a civil union brought in this State or elsewhere, or after judgment of divorce or dissolution or maintenance, whether obtained in this State or elsewhere, the court may make such order as to the alimony or maintenance of the parties, and also as to the care, custody, education and maintenance of the children, or any of them, as the circumstances of the parties and the nature of the case shall render fit, reasonable and just, and require reasonable security for the due observance of such orders, including, but not limited to, the creation of trusts or other security devices, to assure payment of reasonably foreseeable medical and educational expenses. Upon neglect or refusal to give such reasonable security, as shall be required, or upon default in complying with any such order, the court may award and issue process for the immediate sequestration of the personal estate, and the rents and profits of the real estate of the party so charged, and appoint a receiver thereof, and cause such personal estate and the rents and profits of such real estate, or so much thereof as shall be necessary, to be applied toward such alimony and maintenance as to the said court shall from time to time seem reasonable and just; or the performance of the said orders may be enforced by other ways according to the practice of the court. Orders so made may be revised and altered by the court from time to time as circumstances may require.
 
	The court may order one party to pay a retainer on behalf of the other for expert and legal services when the respective financial circumstances of the parties make the award reasonable and just. In considering an application, the court shall review the financial capacity of each party to conduct the litigation and the criteria for award of counsel fees that are then pertinent as set forth by court rule.  Whenever any other application is made to a court which includes an application for pendente lite or final award of counsel fees, the court shall determine the appropriate award for counsel fees, if any, at the same time that a decision is rendered on the other issue then before the court and shall consider the factors set forth in the court rule on counsel fees, the financial circumstances of the parties, and the good or bad faith of either party. The court may not order a retainer or counsel fee of a party convicted of an attempt or conspiracy to murder the other party to be paid by the party who was the intended victim of the attempt or conspiracy.
 
	a.	In determining the amount to be paid by a parent for support of the child and the period during which the duty of support is owed, the court in those cases not governed by court rule shall consider, but not be limited to, the following factors:
 
	(1)	Needs of the child;
 
	(2)	Standard of living and economic circumstances of each parent;
 
	(3)	All sources of income and assets of each parent;
 
	(4)	Earning ability of each parent, including educational background, training, employment skills, work experience, custodial responsibility for children including the cost of providing child care and the length of time and cost of each parent to obtain training or experience for appropriate employment;
 
	(5)	Need and capacity of the child for education, including higher education;
 
	(6)	Age and health of the child and each parent;
 
	(7)	Income, assets and earning ability of the child;
 
	(8)	Responsibility of the parents for the court-ordered support of others;
 
	(9)	Reasonable debts and liabilities of each child and parent; and
 
	(10) Any other factors the court may deem relevant.
 
	The obligation to pay support for a child who has not been emancipated by the court shall not terminate solely on the basis of the child's age if the child suffers from a severe mental or physical incapacity that causes the child to be financially dependent on a parent.  The obligation to pay support for that child shall continue until the court finds that the child is relieved of the incapacity or is no longer financially dependent on the parent.  However, in assessing the financial obligation of the parent, the court shall consider, in addition to the factors enumerated in this section, the child's eligibility for public benefits and services for people with disabilities and may make such orders, including an order involving the creation of a trust, as are necessary to promote the well-being of the child.
 
	As used in this section "severe mental or physical incapacity" shall not include a child's abuse of, or addiction to, alcohol or controlled substances.
 
	b.	In all actions brought for divorce, dissolution of a civil union, divorce from bed and board, legal separation from a partner in a civil union couple, or nullity, the court may award one or more of the following types of alimony: open durational alimony; rehabilitative alimony; limited duration alimony or reimbursement alimony to either party.  In so doing the court shall consider, but not be limited to, the following factors:
 
	(1)	The actual need and ability of the parties to pay;
 
	(2)	The duration of the marriage or civil union;
 
	(3)	The age, physical and emotional health of the parties;
 
	(4)	The standard of living established in the marriage or civil union and the likelihood that each party can maintain a reasonably comparable standard of living, with neither party having a greater entitlement to that standard of living than the other;
 
	(5)	The earning capacities, educational levels, vocational skills, and employability of the parties;
 
	(6)	The length of absence from the job market of the party seeking maintenance;
 
	(7)	The parental responsibilities for the children;
 
	(8)	The time and expense necessary to acquire sufficient education or training to enable the party seeking maintenance to find appropriate employment, the availability of the training and employment, and the opportunity for future acquisitions of capital assets and income;
 
	(9)	The history of the financial or non-financial contributions to the marriage or civil union by each party including contributions to the care and education of the children and interruption of personal careers or educational opportunities;
 
	(10) The equitable distribution of property ordered and any payouts on equitable distribution, directly or indirectly, out of current income, to the extent this consideration is reasonable, just and fair; 
 
	(11) The income available to either party through investment of any assets held by that party;
 
	(12) The tax treatment and consequences to both parties of any alimony award, including the designation of all or a portion of the payment as a non-taxable payment; 
 
	(13) The nature, amount, and length of pendente lite support paid, if any; and
 
	(14) Any other factors which the court may deem relevant.
 
	In each case where the court is asked to make an award of alimony, the court shall consider and assess evidence with respect to all relevant statutory factors.  If the court determines that certain factors are more or less relevant than others, the court shall make specific written findings of fact and conclusions of law on the reasons why the court reached that conclusion.  No factor shall be elevated in importance over any other factor unless the court finds otherwise, in which case the court shall make specific written findings of fact and conclusions of law in that regard.
 
	When a share of a retirement benefit is treated as an asset for purposes of equitable distribution, the court shall not consider income generated thereafter by that share for purposes of determining alimony.
 
	c.	In any case in which there is a request for an award of alimony, the court shall consider and make specific findings on the evidence about all of the statutory factors set forth in subsection b. of this section.
 
	For any marriage or civil union less than 20 years in duration, the total duration of alimony shall not, except in exceptional circumstances, exceed the length of the marriage or civil union.  Determination of the length and amount of alimony shall be made by the court pursuant to consideration of all of the statutory factors set forth in subsection b. of this section.  In addition to those factors, the court shall also consider the practical impact of the parties' need for separate residences and the attendant increase in living expenses on the ability of both parties to maintain a standard of living reasonably comparable to the standard of living established in the marriage or civil union, to which both parties are entitled, with neither party having a greater entitlement thereto.
 
	Exceptional circumstances which may require an adjustment to the duration of alimony include:
 
	(1)	The ages of the parties at the time of the marriage or civil union and at the time of the alimony award;
 
	(2)	The degree and duration of the dependency of one party on the other party during the marriage or civil union;
 
	(3)	Whether a spouse or partner has a chronic illness or unusual health circumstance;
 
	(4)	Whether a spouse or partner has given up a career or a career opportunity or otherwise supported the career of the other spouse or partner;
 
	(5)	Whether a spouse or partner has received a disproportionate share of equitable distribution;
 
	(6)	The impact of the marriage or civil union on either party's ability to become self-supporting, including but not limited to either party's responsibility as primary caretaker of a child;
 
	(7)	Tax considerations of either party;
 
	(8)	Any other factors or circumstances that the court deems equitable, relevant and material.
 
	An award of alimony for a limited duration may be modified based either upon changed circumstances, or upon the nonoccurrence of circumstances that the court found would occur at the time of the award.  The court may modify the amount of such an award, but shall not modify the length of the term except in unusual circumstances.
 
	In determining the length of the term, the court shall consider the length of time it would reasonably take for the recipient to improve his or her earning capacity to a level where limited duration alimony is no longer appropriate.
 
	d.	Rehabilitative alimony shall be awarded based upon a plan in which the payee shows the scope of rehabilitation, the steps to be taken, and the time frame, including a period of employment during which rehabilitation will occur.  An award of rehabilitative alimony may be modified based either upon changed circumstances, or upon the nonoccurrence of circumstances that the court found would occur at the time of the rehabilitative award.
 
	This section is not intended to preclude a court from modifying alimony awards based upon the law.
 
	e.	Reimbursement alimony may be awarded under circumstances in which one party supported the other through an advanced education, anticipating participation in the fruits of the earning capacity generated by that education.  An award of reimbursement alimony shall not be modified for any reason.
 
	f.	Except as provided in subsection i., nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the court's authority to award open durational alimony, limited duration alimony, rehabilitative alimony or reimbursement alimony, separately or in any combination, as warranted by the circumstances of the parties and the nature of the case.
 
	g.	In all actions for divorce or dissolution other than those where judgment is granted solely on the ground of separation the court may consider also the proofs made in establishing such ground in determining an amount of alimony or maintenance that is fit, reasonable and just.  In all actions for divorce, dissolution of civil union, divorce from bed and board, or legal separation from a partner in a civil union couple where judgment is granted on the ground of institutionalization for mental illness the court may consider the possible burden upon the taxpayers of the State as well as the ability of the party to pay in determining an amount of maintenance to be awarded.
 
	h. (1) Except as provided in this subsection, in all actions where a judgment of divorce, dissolution of civil union, or divorce from bed and board is entered the court may make such award or awards to the parties, in addition to alimony and maintenance, to effectuate an equitable distribution of the property, both real and personal, which was legally and beneficially acquired by them or either of them during the marriage or civil union. However, all such property, real, personal or otherwise, legally or beneficially acquired during the marriage or civil union by either party by way of gift, devise, or intestate succession shall not be subject to equitable distribution, except that interspousal gifts or gifts between partners in a civil union couple shall be subject to equitable distribution.
 
	(2) If a complaint not dismissed pursuant to R.4:6-2 of the Rules of Court has been filed for an action under paragraph (1) of this section, and (a) either party to the litigation dies prior to the entry of the final judgment, or (b) if the parties had and remained entered into a validly executed equitable distribution cut-off agreement, termination agreement, or marital settlement agreement where the underlying subject matter of the agreement is divorce, dissolution of civil union, termination of domestic partnership, or divorce from bed and board at the time of death of the decedent occurring prior to the entry of the final judgment, the court's authority to effectuate an equitable distribution of the property shall not abate.  Pursuant to subparagraph (a)(3) of R.4:3-1 of the Rules of Court, all such matters shall be filed and heard in the Family Part of the Chancery Division of the Superior Court.
 
	(3) The court may not make an award concerning the equitable distribution of property on behalf of a party barred from inheriting under subsection a. of section 58 of P.L.2004, c.132 (C.3B:7-1.1) or on behalf of a party responsible for an attempt or conspiracy to murder the other party.
 
	i.	No person convicted of Murder, N.J.S.2C:11-3; Manslaughter, N.J.S.2C:11-4; Criminal Homicide, N.J.S.2C:11-2; Aggravated Assault, under subsection b. of N.J.S.2C:12-1; or a substantially similar offense under the laws of another jurisdiction, may receive alimony if: (1) the crime results in death or serious bodily injury, as defined in subsection b. of N.J.S.2C:11-1, to a family member of a divorcing party; and (2) the crime was committed after the marriage or civil union. A person convicted of an attempt or conspiracy to commit murder may not receive alimony from the person who was the intended victim of the attempt or conspiracy.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit the authority of the court to deny alimony for other bad acts.
 
	As used in this subsection:
 
	"Family member" means a spouse, partner in a civil union, child, parent, sibling, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, first cousin, grandparent, grandchild, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, stepparent, stepchild, stepbrother, stepsister, half-brother, or half-sister, whether the individual is related by blood, marriage or civil union, or adoption.
 
	j.	Alimony may be modified or terminated upon the prospective or actual retirement of the obligor. 
 
	(1)	There shall be a rebuttable presumption that alimony shall terminate upon the obligor spouse or partner attaining full retirement age, except that any arrearages that have accrued prior to the termination date shall not be vacated or annulled. The court may set a different alimony termination date for good cause shown based on specific written findings of fact and conclusions of law. 
 
	The rebuttable presumption may be overcome if, upon consideration of the following factors and for good cause shown, the court determines that alimony should continue:
 
	(a)	The ages of the parties at the time of the application for retirement;
 
	(b)	The ages of the parties at the time of the marriage or civil union and their ages at the time of entry of the alimony award;
 
	(c)	The degree and duration of the economic dependency of the recipient upon the payor during the marriage or civil union;
 
	(d)	Whether the recipient has foregone or relinquished or otherwise sacrificed claims, rights or property in exchange for a more substantial or longer alimony award;
 
	(e)	The duration or amount of alimony already paid;
 
	(f)	The health of the parties at the time of the retirement application;
 
	(g)	Assets of the parties at the time of the retirement application;
 
	(h)	Whether the recipient has reached full retirement age as defined in this section;
 
	(i)	Sources of income, both earned and unearned, of the parties;
 
	(j)	The ability of the recipient to have saved adequately for retirement; and
 
	(k)	Any other factors that the court may deem relevant.
 
	If the court determines, for good cause shown based on specific written findings of fact and conclusions of law, that the presumption has been overcome, then the court shall apply the alimony factors as set forth in subsection b. of this section to the parties' current circumstances in order to determine whether modification or termination of alimony is appropriate. If the obligor intends to retire but has not yet retired, the court shall establish the conditions under which the modification or termination of alimony will be effective.
 
	(2)	Where the obligor seeks to retire prior to attaining the full retirement age as defined in this section, the obligor shall have the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that the prospective or actual retirement is reasonable and made in good faith.  Both the obligor's application to the court for modification or termination of alimony and the obligee's response to the application shall be accompanied by current Case Information Statements or other relevant documents as required by the Rules of Court, as well as the Case Information Statements or other documents from the date of entry of the original alimony award and from the date of any subsequent modification.
 
	In order to determine whether the obligor has met the burden of demonstrating that the obligor's prospective or actual retirement is reasonable and made in good faith, the court shall consider the following factors:
 
	(a)	The age and health of the parties at the time of the application;
 
	(b)	The obligor's field of employment and the generally accepted age of retirement for those in that field;
 
	(c)	The age when the obligor becomes eligible for retirement at the obligor's place of employment, including mandatory retirement dates or the dates upon which continued employment would no longer increase retirement benefits;
 
	(d)	The obligor's motives in retiring, including any pressures to retire applied by the obligor's employer or incentive plans offered by the obligor's employer;
 
	(e)	The reasonable expectations of the parties regarding retirement during the marriage or civil union and at the time of the divorce or dissolution;
 
	(f)	The ability of the obligor to maintain support payments following retirement, including whether the obligor will continue to be employed part-time or work reduced hours;
 
	(g)	The obligee's level of financial independence and the financial impact of the obligor's retirement upon the obligee; and
 
	(h)	Any other relevant factors affecting the obligor's decision to retire and the parties' respective financial positions.
 
	If the obligor intends to retire but has not yet retired, the court shall establish the conditions under which the modification or termination of alimony will be effective.
 
	(3)	When a retirement application is filed in cases in which there is an existing final alimony order or enforceable written agreement established prior to the effective date of this act, the obligor's reaching full retirement age as defined in this section shall be deemed a good faith retirement age.  Upon application by the obligor to modify or terminate alimony, both the obligor's application to the court for modification or termination of alimony and the obligee's response to the application shall be accompanied by current Case Information Statements or other relevant documents as required by the Rules of Court, as well as the Case Information Statements or other documents from the date of entry of the original alimony award and from the date of any subsequent modification. In making its determination, the court shall consider the ability of the obligee to have saved adequately for retirement as well as the following factors in order to determine whether the obligor, by a preponderance of the evidence, has demonstrated that modification or termination of alimony is appropriate:
 
	(a)	The age and health of the parties at the time of the application;
 
	(b)	The obligor's field of employment and the generally accepted age of retirement for those in that field;
 
	(c)	The age when the obligor becomes eligible for retirement at the obligor's place of employment, including mandatory retirement dates or the dates upon which continued employment would no longer increase retirement benefits;
 
	(d)	The obligor's motives in retiring, including any pressures to retire applied by the obligor's employer or incentive plans offered by the obligor's employer;
 
	(e)	The reasonable expectations of the parties regarding retirement during the marriage or civil union and at the time of the divorce or dissolution;
 
	(f)	The ability of the obligor to maintain support payments following retirement, including whether the obligor will continue to be employed part-time or work reduced hours;
 
	(g)	The obligee's level of financial independence and the financial impact of the obligor's retirement upon the obligee; and
 
	(h)	Any other relevant factors affecting the parties' respective financial positions.
 
	(4)	The assets distributed between the parties at the time of the entry of a final order of divorce or dissolution of a civil union shall not be considered by the court for purposes of determining the obligor's ability to pay alimony following retirement.
 
	k.	When a non-self-employed party seeks modification of alimony, the court shall consider the following factors:
 
	(1)	The reasons for any loss of income;
 
	(2)	Under circumstances where there has been a loss of employment, the obligor's documented efforts to obtain replacement employment or to pursue an alternative occupation;
 
	(3)	Under circumstances where there has been a loss of employment, whether the obligor is making a good faith effort to find remunerative employment at any level and in any field;
 
	(4)	The income of the obligee; the obligee's circumstances; and the obligee's reasonable efforts to obtain employment in view of those circumstances and existing opportunities;
 
	(5)	The impact of the parties' health on their ability to obtain employment;
 
	(6)	Any severance compensation or award made in connection with any loss of employment;
 
	(7)	Any changes in the respective financial circumstances of the parties that have occurred since the date of the order from which modification is sought;
 
	(8)	The reasons for any change in either party's financial circumstances since the date of the order from which modification is sought, including, but not limited to, assessment of the extent to which either party's financial circumstances at the time of the application are attributable to enhanced earnings or financial benefits received from any source since the date of the order;
 
	(9)	Whether a temporary remedy should be fashioned to provide adjustment of the support award from which modification is sought, and the terms of any such adjustment, pending continuing employment investigations by the unemployed spouse or partner; and
 
	(10)  Any other factor the court deems relevant to fairly and equitably decide the application.
 
	Under circumstances where the changed circumstances arise from the loss of employment, the length of time a party has been involuntarily unemployed or has had an involuntary reduction in income shall not be the only factor considered by the court when an application is filed by a non-self-employed party to reduce alimony because of involuntary loss of employment.  The court shall determine the application based upon all of the enumerated factors, however, no application shall be filed until a party has been unemployed, or has not been able to return to or attain employment at prior income levels, or both, for a period of 90 days.  The court shall have discretion to make any relief granted retroactive to the date of the loss of employment or reduction of income.
 
	l.	When a self-employed party seeks modification of alimony because of an involuntary reduction in income since the date of the order from which modification is sought, then that party's application for relief must include an analysis that sets forth the economic and non-economic benefits the party receives from the business, and which compares these economic and non-economic benefits to those that were in existence at the time of the entry of the order.
 
	m.	When assessing a temporary remedy, the court may temporarily suspend support, or reduce support on terms; direct that support be paid in some amount from assets pending further proceedings; direct a periodic review; or enter any other order the court finds appropriate to assure fairness and equity to both parties.
 
	n.	Alimony may be suspended or terminated if the payee cohabits with another person. Cohabitation involves a mutually supportive, intimate personal relationship in which a couple has undertaken duties and privileges that are commonly associated with marriage or civil union but does not necessarily maintain a single common household.
 
	When assessing whether cohabitation is occurring, the court shall consider the following:
 
	(1)	Intertwined finances such as joint bank accounts and other joint holdings or liabilities;
 
	(2)	Sharing or joint responsibility for living expenses;
 
	(3)	Recognition of the relationship in the couple's social and family circle;
 
	(4)	Living together, the frequency of contact, the duration of the relationship, and other indicia of a mutually supportive intimate personal relationship;
 
	(5)	Sharing household chores;
 
	(6)	Whether the recipient of alimony has received an enforceable promise of support from another person within the meaning of subsection h. of R.S.25:1-5; and
 
	(7)	All other relevant evidence.
 
	In evaluating whether cohabitation is occurring and whether alimony should be suspended or terminated, the court shall also consider the length of the relationship.  A court may not find an absence of cohabitation solely on grounds that the couple does not live together on a full-time basis.
 
	As used in this section:
 
	"Full retirement age" shall mean the age at which a person is eligible to receive full retirement for full retirement benefits under section 216 of the federal Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. s.416). 
 
	amended 1971, c.212, s.8; 1980, c.181; 1983, c.519; 1988, c.153, s,3; 1997, c.302; 1999, c.199, s.1; 2005, c.171, s.1; 2006, c.103, s.78; 2009, c.43, s.1; 2014, c.42; 2023, c.238, s.6.

2A:34-23a.   Payment of counsel fees incurred in collection of child support  
     If a party in any action to enforce and collect child support ordered by a court pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S. 2A:34-23 has incurred counsel fees, the court shall require the defaulting party to pay those counsel fees unless the court finds that the default was substantially justified or that other circumstances make an award of counsel fees unjust.  The court shall determine the appropriate award for counsel fees and shall consider the financial circumstances of the parties and whether each acted in good faith.  

    L.1989, c.212, s.1.  

2A:34-23b.   Direct payments to health care provider  
    1. a. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, if a child support order or separation agreement requires the non-custodial parent to provide health care insurance, the payment of benefits for any covered services under that insurance shall, upon submission of the relevant section of the order or agreement by the custodial parent to the insurer, be made directly to the health care provider.  

   b.   Every child support order issued or separation agreement executed on or after the effective date of this act shall provide notice of the right of the custodial parent to have health insurance benefits paid directly to the health care provider pursuant to subsection a. of this section.  

   L.1993,c.14,s.1.  

2A:34-23c.  Child support order; health care coverage provisions
	1.	Any order or judgment that includes child support shall include provisions indicating the party responsible for maintaining health care coverage for the child and the terms and conditions by which that coverage is to be maintained.

	The provisions of the order or judgment relating to health care coverage shall be enforced through the National Medical Support Notice, upon its adoption by federal regulation pursuant to the "Child Support Performance and Incentive Act of 1998," Pub.L. 105-200.

	L.1995,c.58,s.1; amended 2001, c.188, s.2.

2A:34-23d  Maintenance of certain insurance coverage in action for divorce or dissolution.
  
	1.	a.	Upon filing of a complaint for an action for divorce, dissolution, nullity or separate maintenance, where the custody, visitation or support of a minor child is an issue, the party who has maintained all existing insurance coverage or coverage traditionally maintained during the marriage or civil union, including but not limited to, all health, disability, home or life insurance, shall continue to maintain or continue to share in the cost of maintaining the coverage.
 
	b.	If a party who has maintained the existing insurance coverage or has shared in the cost of maintaining the coverage has had a voluntary or involuntary change in employment status, which may cause the existing insurance coverage to terminate, then that party shall notify the other party that it may be necessary to reallocate the financial responsibilities of maintaining the coverage.
 
	c.	Upon receipt of this notice, the party may petition the court to reallocate financial responsibilities.
 
	d.	The court may take any action it deems appropriate to reallocate financial responsibilities including but not limited to ordering a party to obtain comparable coverage or releasing a party from the obligation or any other order.
 
	L.1997, c.405, s.1; amended 2006, c.103, s.79.

2A:34-23e  Delinquent child support obligors, community service in addition to incarceration for contempt.

	1.	In addition to incarceration of a person found by the court to be in contempt of a support order issued by the Superior Court, Chancery Division, Family Part, the court may order such person to perform community service for part, or all, of the person's period of incarceration.

	L.2000,c.19,s.1.

2A:34-23.1  Equitable distribution criteria.
 
	4.	In making an equitable distribution of property, the court shall consider, but not be limited to, the following factors:
 
	a.	The duration of the marriage or civil union;
 
	b.	The age and physical and emotional health of the parties;
 
	c.	The income or property brought to the marriage or civil union by each party;
 
	d.	The standard of living established during the marriage or civil union;
 
	e.	Any written agreement made by the parties before or during the marriage or civil union concerning an arrangement of property distribution;
 
	f.	The economic circumstances of each party at the time the division of property becomes effective;
 
	g.	The income and earning capacity of each party, including educational background, training, employment skills, work experience, length of absence from the job market, custodial responsibilities for children, and the time and expense necessary to acquire sufficient education or training to enable the party to become self-supporting at a standard of living reasonably comparable to that enjoyed during the marriage or civil union;
 
	h.	The contribution by each party to the education, training or earning power of the other;
 
	i.	The contribution of each party to the acquisition, dissipation, preservation, depreciation or appreciation in the amount or value of the marital property, or the property acquired during the civil union as well as the contribution of a party as a homemaker;
 
	j.	The tax consequences of the proposed distribution to each party;
 
	k.	The present value of the property;
 
	l.	The need of a parent who has physical custody of a child to own or occupy the marital residence or residence shared by the partners in a civil union couple and to use or own the household effects;
 
	m.	The debts and liabilities of the parties;
 
	n.	The need for creation, now or in the future, of a trust fund to secure reasonably foreseeable medical or educational costs for a spouse, partner in a civil union couple or children;
 
	o.	The extent to which a party deferred achieving their career goals; and
 
	p.	Any other factors which the court may deem relevant.
 
	In every case, except cases where the court does not make an award concerning the equitable distribution of property pursuant to subsection h. of N.J.S.2A:34-23, the court shall make specific findings of fact on the evidence relevant to all issues pertaining to asset eligibility or ineligibility, asset valuation, and equitable distribution, including specifically, but not limited to, the factors set forth in this section.
 
	It shall be a rebuttable presumption that each party made a substantial financial or nonfinancial contribution to the acquisition of income and property while the party was married.
 
	L.1988, c.153, s.4; amended 1997, c.407; 2006, c.103, s.80; 2009, c.43, s.2.

2A:34-23.2  Findings, declarations relative to violation of visitation orders.


	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	There has been an increase in the filings of dissolutions of marriages in the recent years; and

	b.	The best interests of the children of these marriages in maintaining close relationships with both parents regardless of which parent has the physical custody of the child is paramount; and

	c.	Proceeding criminally in cases where the terms of an order of visitation with a child has failed to be honored may be both difficult and inappropriate; and

	d.	Bolstering the statutory civil remedies available to a judge hearing these types of matters may provide an indication of legislative intent to promote the enforcement of these matters.

	L.1997,c.300,s.1.

2A:34-23.3  Available remedies.

	2.	A judge who sanctions a party for failure to comply with an order of visitation shall have these remedies available:

	a.	The awarding of counsel fees of the aggrieved party against the party who violated the terms of the order;

	b.	Community service;

	c.	The awarding of compensatory time for the time with the child for which the party was deprived;

	d.	The awarding of monetary compensation for additional costs incurred when a parent fails to appear for scheduled visitation; and

	e.	Other economic sanctions which may be decided on a case-by-case basis.

	L.1997,c.300,s.2.

2A:34-24  Lien, security.

	2A:34-24.  If an obligor shall abandon an obligee or separate from the obligee and refuse or neglect to maintain and provide for the obligee, the court may order suitable support and maintenance to be paid and provided by the obligor for the obligee and their children in the manner provided in N.J.S.2A:34-23, as applicable.  If the obligor fails to comply with the order of the court, entered in New Jersey or another jurisdiction, the court may impose a lien against the real and personal property of the obligor who lives in or owns property in New Jersey to secure payment of the overdue support and for such time as the nature of the case and circumstances of the parties render suitable and proper; such lien shall have priority from the time of the proper filing or recording.

	If the circumstances warrant, for such overdue support or maintenance, upon reasonable notice, the court may compel the obligor to give reasonable security, post a bond, or other guarantee for such overdue support and for present and future support and maintenance and may, from time to time, make further orders touching the same as shall be just and equitable and enforce such judgment and orders in the manner provided in N.J.S.2A:34-23.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1985, c.278, s.9; 1987, c.109; 2005, c.171, s.2.

2A:34-24.1  Court-orders for support, maintenance despite absence of personal jurisiction.
 
 	1.	Court-ordered support, maintenance. 

	When a spouse or  partner in a civil union couple has secured a judgment or decree of divorce, whether absolute or from bed and board,  dissolution of a civil union, legal separation from a  partner in a civil union couple, or of nullity or annulment of marriage or civil union, in an action whether brought in this State or elsewhere, wherein jurisdiction over the person of the other spouse or the other  partner in a civil union couple was not obtained, the court may make the same orders and judgments touching the suitable support and maintenance to be paid and provided by the spouse or  partner in a civil union couple, or to be made out of the spouse's or partner's property, for the other spouse or partner and their children, or any of them, by their marriage or civil union and for such time, as the nature of the case and circumstances of the parties render suitable and proper, pursuant to the provisions of chapter 34 of Title 2A of the New Jersey Statutes notwithstanding the securing of such judgment or decree. 
 
	L.1954, c.187, s.1; (title amended 1988, c.153, s.5) amended 1988, c.153, s.6; 2006, c.103, s.81.

2A:34-25.  Termination of alimony.
 
	2A:34-25.  If after the judgment of divorce or dissolution a former spouse shall remarry or a former partner shall enter into a new civil union, permanent and limited duration alimony shall terminate as of the date of remarriage or new civil union except that any arrearages that have accrued prior to the date of remarriage or new civil union shall not be vacated or annulled. A former spouse or former partner in a civil union couple who remarries or enters into a new civil union shall promptly so inform the spouse or partner paying permanent or limited duration alimony as well as the collecting agency, if any.  The court may order such alimony recipient who fails to comply with the notification provision of this act to pay any reasonable attorney fees and court costs incurred by the recipient's former spouse or partner as a result of such non-compliance.
 
	The remarriage or establishment of a new civil union of a former spouse or partner receiving rehabilitative or reimbursement alimony shall not be cause for termination of such alimony by the court unless the court finds that the circumstances upon which the award was based have not occurred or unless the payer spouse or partner demonstrates an agreement or good cause to the contrary.
 
	Alimony shall terminate upon the death of the payer spouse or partner, except that any arrearages that have accrued prior to the date of the payer spouse's or partner's death shall not be vacated or annulled.
 
	Nothing in this act shall be construed to prohibit a court from ordering either spouse or partner to maintain life insurance for the protection of the former spouse, partner, or the children of the marriage or civil union in the event of the payer spouse's or partner's death.
 
	Amended 1988, c.153, s.7; 1997, c.301; 1999, c.199, s.2; 2006, c.103, s.82.

2A:34-26  Attachment of property. 

	When a spouse or one partner in a civil union couple cannot be found within this State to be served with process, the spouse's or partner's estate, property and effects within this State and the rents and profits thereof may be attached to compel the spouse's or partner's appearance and performance of any judgment or order which may be made in the action.  Where the proceedings are by process of attachment and the defendant does not appear, the judgment shall be enforceable only out of and against the property attached. 
 
	Amended 1988, c.153, s.8; 2006, c.103, s.83.

2A:34-27.  Bond for costs
    In any action under sections 2A:34-24 and 2A:34-26 of this title the court may order a bond to be given in the sum of $100 with 1 or more sufficient sureties, with condition to pay such costs as may be awarded by the court to the defendant.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:34-53  Short title.

	1.	Short Title.

	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction and Enforcement Act."

	L.2004,c.147,s.1.

2A:34-54  Definitions.

	2.	Definitions. 

	As used in this act:

	"Abandoned" means left without provision for reasonable and necessary care or supervision.

	"Child" means an individual who has not attained 18 years of age.

	"Child custody determination" means a judgment, decree, or other order of a court providing for the legal custody, physical custody or visitation with respect to a child.  The term includes a permanent, temporary, initial and modification order.  The term does not include a provision relating to child support or other monetary obligation of an individual.

	"Child custody proceeding" means a proceeding in which legal custody, physical custody or visitation with respect to a child is an issue.  The term includes a proceeding for divorce, separation, neglect, abuse, dependency, guardianship, paternity, termination of parental rights, and protection from domestic violence, in which the issue may appear.  The term does not include a proceeding involving juvenile delinquency, contractual emancipation or enforcement under article 3 of this act.

	"Commencement" means the filing of the first pleading in a proceeding.

	"Court" means an entity authorized under the law of a state to establish, enforce or modify a child custody determination.

	"Home state" means the state in which a child lived with a parent or a person acting as a parent for at least six consecutive months immediately before the commencement of a child custody proceeding.  In the case of a child less than six months of age, the term means the state in which the child lived from birth with any of the persons mentioned.  A period of temporary absence of any of the mentioned persons is part of the period.

	"Initial determination" means the first child custody determination concerning a particular child.

	"Issuing court" means the court that makes a child custody determination for which enforcement is sought under this act.

	"Issuing state" means the state in which a child custody determination is made.

	"Modification" means a child custody determination that changes, replaces, supersedes, or is otherwise made after a previous determination concerning the same child, whether or not it is made by the court that made the previous determination.

	"Person" means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint venture, government, governmental subdivision, agency, or instrumentality, public corporation or any other legal or commercial entity.

	"Person acting as a parent" means a person, other than a parent, who:

	a.	has physical custody of the child or has had physical custody for a period of six consecutive months, including any temporary absence, within one year immediately before the commencement of a child custody proceeding; and

	b.	has been awarded legal custody by a court or claims a right to legal custody under the laws of this State.

	"Physical custody" means the physical care and supervision of a child.

	"State" means a state of the United States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, or any territory or insular possession subject to the jurisdiction of the United States.

	"Tribe" means an Indian tribe or band, or Alaskan Native village, which is recognized by federal law or formally acknowledged by a state.

	"Warrant" means an order issued by a court authorizing law enforcement officers to take physical custody of a child.

	L.2004,c.147,s.2.

2A:34-55  Proceedings governed by other law.

	3.	Proceedings Governed by Other Law.  

	This act does not govern an adoption proceeding or a proceeding pertaining to the authorization of emergency medical care for a child.

	L.2004,c.147,s.3.

2A:34-56  Application to Indian tribes.

	4.	Application to Indian Tribes.  

	a.	A child custody proceeding that pertains to an Indian child as defined in the Indian Child Welfare Act, 25 U.S.C.1901 et seq., is not subject to this act to the extent that it is governed by the Indian Child Welfare Act.

	b.	A court of this State shall treat a tribe as if it were a state of the United States for purposes of articles 1 and 2 of this act.

	c.	A child custody determination made by a tribe under factual circumstances in substantial conformity with the jurisdictional standards of this act shall be recognized and enforced under the provisions of article 3 of this act.

	L.2004,c.147,s.4.

2A:34-57  International application of act.

	5.	International Application of Act. 

	a.	A court of this State shall treat a foreign country as if it were a state of the United States for the purpose of applying articles 1 and 2 of this act if the foreign court gives notice and an opportunity to be heard to all parties before making child custody determinations.

	b.	A child custody determination made in a foreign country under factual circumstances in substantial conformity with the jurisdictional standards of this act shall be recognized and enforced under article 3 of this act.

	c.	A court of this State need not apply this act if the child custody law of a foreign country violates fundamental principles of human rights or does not base custody decisions on evaluation of the best interests of the child.

	L.2004,c.147,s.5.

2A:34-58  Effect of custody determination.

	6.	Effect of Custody Determination.

	A child custody determination made by a court of this State that had jurisdiction under this act binds all persons who have been served in accordance with the laws of this State or notified in accordance with section 8 of this act or who have submitted to the jurisdiction of the court, and who have been given an opportunity to be heard.  As to those persons, the determination is conclusive as to all decided issues of law and fact except to the extent the determination is modified.

	L.2004,c.147,s.6.

2A:34-59  Priority.

	7.	Priority.

	If a question of existence or exercise of jurisdiction under this act is raised in a child custody proceeding, the question, upon request of a party, shall be given priority on the calendar and handled expeditiously.

	L.2004,c.147,s.7.

2A:34-60  Notice of persons outside state.

	8.	Notice of Persons Outside State.

	a.	Notice required for the exercise of jurisdiction when a person is outside this State may be given in a manner prescribed by the law of this State for the service of process or by the law of the state in which the service is made.  Notice shall be given in a manner reasonably calculated to give actual notice, but may be by publication if other means are not effective.

	b.	Proof of service may be made in the manner prescribed by the law of this State or by the law of the state in which the service is made.

	c.	Notice is not required for the exercise of jurisdiction with respect to a person who submits to the jurisdiction of the court.

	L.2004,c.147,s.8.

2A:34-61  Appearance and limited immunity.

	9.	Appearance and Limited Immunity.

	a.	A party to a child custody proceeding, including a modification proceeding, or a petitioner or a respondent in a proceeding to enforce or register a child custody determination,  is not subject to personal jurisdiction in this State for another proceeding or purpose solely by reason of having participated, or of having been physically present for the purpose of participating in the proceeding.

	b.	A party who is subject to personal jurisdiction in this State on a basis other than physical presence is not immune from service of process in this State.  A party present in this State who is subject to the jurisdiction of another state is not immune from service of process allowable under the laws of that state.

	c.	The immunity granted by subsection a. of this section does not extend to civil litigation based on acts unrelated to the participation in a proceeding under this act committed by an individual while present in this State.

	L.2004,c.147,s.9.

2A:34-62  Communication between courts.

	10.  Communication Between Courts.

	a.	A court of this State may communicate with a court in another state concerning a proceeding arising under this act.

	b.	The court may allow the parties to participate in the communication.  If the parties are not able to participate in the communication, the parties shall be given the opportunity to present facts and legal arguments before a decision on jurisdiction is made.

	c.	Communication between courts on schedules, calendars, court records and similar matters may occur without informing the parties.  A record need not be made of that communication.

	d.	Except as provided in subsection c. of this section, a record shall be made of a communication under this section.  The parties shall be informed promptly of the communication and granted access to the record.

	e.	For the purposes of this section, "record" means information that is inscribed on a tangible medium or that which is stored in an electronic or other medium and is retrievable in perceivable form.

	L.2004,c.147,s.10.

2A:34-63 Taking testimony in another state.

	11.  Taking Testimony in Another State.

	a.	In addition to other procedures available to a party, a party to a child custody proceeding may offer testimony of witnesses who are located in another state, including testimony of the parties and the child, by deposition or other means allowable in this State for testimony taken in another state.  The court on its own motion may order that the testimony of a person be taken in another state and may prescribe the manner in which and the terms upon which the testimony is taken.

	b.	A court of this State may permit an individual residing in another state to be deposed or to testify by telephone, audiovisual means or other electronic means before a designated court or at another location in that state.  A court of this State shall cooperate with courts of other states in designating an appropriate location for the deposition or testimony.

	c.	Documentary evidence transmitted from another state to a court of this State by technological means that do not produce an original writing may not be excluded from evidence on an objection based on the means of transmission.

	L.2004,c.147,s.11.

2A:34-64  Cooperation between courts; preservation of records.

	12.  Cooperation Between Courts; Preservation of Records.

	a.	A court of this State may request the appropriate court of another state to:

	(1)	hold an evidentiary hearing;

	(2)	order a person to produce or give evidence under procedures of that state;

	(3)	order that an evaluation be made with respect to the custody of a child involved in a pending proceeding;

	(4)	forward to the court of this State a certified copy of the transcript of the record of the hearing, the evidence otherwise presented, and any evaluation prepared in compliance with the request; and

	(5)	order a party to a child custody proceeding or any person having physical custody of the child to appear in the proceeding with or without the child.

	b.	Upon request of a court of another state, a court of this State may hold a hearing or enter an order described in subsection a. of this section.

	c.	Travel and other necessary and reasonable expenses incurred under subsections a. and b. of this section may be assessed against the parties according to the laws of this State.

	d.	A court of this State shall preserve the pleadings, orders, decrees, records of hearings, evaluations and other pertinent records with respect to a child custody proceeding until the child attains 18 years of age.  Upon appropriate request by a court or law enforcement official of another state, the court shall forward a certified copy of these records.

	L.2004,c.147,s.12.

2A:34-65  Initial child custody jurisdiction.
 
 	13.	Initial Child Custody Jurisdiction.

	a.	Except as otherwise provided in section 16 of this act , or section 1 of P.L.2013, c.7 (C.9:2-12.1) concerning a service member's absence due to a deployment or service-related treatment as set forth in that section, a court of this State has jurisdiction to make an initial child custody determination only if:
 
	(1)	this State is the home state of the child on the date of the commencement of the proceeding, or was the home state of the child within six months before the commencement of the proceeding and the child is absent from this State but a parent or person acting as a parent continues to live in this State;
 
	(2)	a court of another state does not have jurisdiction under paragraph (1) of this subsection, or a court of the home state of the child has declined to exercise jurisdiction on the ground that this State is the more appropriate forum under section 19 or 20 of this act and:
 
	(a)	the child and the child's parents, or the child and at least one parent or a person acting as a parent have a significant connection with this State other than mere physical presence; and
 
	(b)	substantial evidence is available in this State concerning the child's care, protection, training and personal relationships;
 
	(3)	all courts having jurisdiction under paragraph (1) or (2) of this subsection have declined to exercise jurisdiction on the ground that a court of this State is the more appropriate forum to determine the custody of the child under section 19 or 20 of this act; or
 
	(4)	no state would have jurisdiction under paragraph (1), (2) or (3) of this subsection.
 
	b.	Subsection a. of this section is the exclusive jurisdictional basis for making a child custody determination by a court of this State.
 
	c.	Physical presence of, or personal jurisdiction over, a party or a child is neither necessary nor sufficient to make a child custody determination.
 
	d.	A court of this State may assume temporary emergency jurisdiction in accordance with section 16 of this act.
 
	L.2004, c.147, s.13; amended 2013, c.7, s.2.

2A:34-66  Exclusive, continuing jurisdiction.
 
	14.	Exclusive, Continuing Jurisdiction.  

	a.	Except as otherwise provided in section 16 of this act, or section 1 of P.L.2013, c.7 (C.9:2-12.1) concerning a service member's absence due to a deployment or service-related treatment as set forth in that section, a court of this State that has made a child custody determination consistent with section 13 or 15 of this act has exclusive, continuing jurisdiction over the determination until:
 
	(1)	a court of this State determines that neither the child, the child and one parent, nor the child and a person acting as a parent have a significant connection with this State and that substantial evidence is no longer available in this State concerning the child's care, protection, training, and personal relationships; or
 
	(2)	a court of this State or a court of another state determines that neither the child, nor a parent, nor any person acting as a parent presently resides in this State.
 
	b.	A court of this State which has made a child custody determination and does not have exclusive, continuing jurisdiction under this section may modify that determination only if it has jurisdiction to make an initial determination under section 13 of this act.
 
	L.2004, c.147, s.14; amended 2013, c.7, s.3.

2A:34-67  Jurisdiction to modify determination.

	15.  Jurisdiction to Modify Determination.

	Except as otherwise provided in section 16 of this act, a court of this State may not modify a child custody determination made by a court of another state unless a court of this State has jurisdiction to make an initial determination under paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection a. of section 13 of this act and:

	a.	the court of the other state determines it no longer has exclusive, continuing jurisdiction under section 14 of this act or that a court of this State would be a more convenient forum under section 19 of this act; or

	b.	a court of this State or a court of the other state determines that the child, the child's parents, and any person acting as a parent do not presently reside in the other state.

	L.2004,c.147,s.15.

2A:34-68  Temporary emergency jurisdiction.

	16.  Temporary Emergency Jurisdiction.

	a.	A court of this State has temporary emergency jurisdiction if the child is present in this State and the child has been abandoned or it is necessary in an emergency to protect the child because the child, or a sibling or parent of the child, is subjected to or threatened with mistreatment or abuse.

	b.	If there is no previous child custody determination that is entitled to be enforced under this act, and if no child custody proceeding has been commenced in a court of a state having jurisdiction under sections 13 through 15 of this act, a child custody determination made under this section remains in effect until an order is obtained from a court of a state having jurisdiction under sections 13 through 15 of this act.  If a child custody proceeding has not been or is not commenced in a court of a state having jurisdiction under sections 13 through 15 of this act, a child custody determination made under this section becomes a final determination if:

	(1)	it so provides; and

	(2)	this State becomes the home state of the child.

	c.	If there is a previous child custody determination that is entitled to be enforced under this act, or a child custody proceeding has been commenced in a court of a state having jurisdiction under sections 13 through 15 of this act, any order issued by a court of this State under this section must specify in the order a period of time which the court considers adequate to allow the person seeking an order to obtain an order from the state having jurisdiction under sections 13 through 15 of this act.  The order issued in this State remains in effect until an order is obtained from the other state within the period specified or the period expires.

	d.	A court of this State which has been asked to make a child custody determination under this section, upon being informed that a child custody proceeding has been commenced in, or a child custody determination has been made,  by a court of a state having jurisdiction under sections 13 through 15 of this act, shall immediately communicate with the other court.  A court of this State which is exercising jurisdiction pursuant to sections 13 through 15 of this act, upon being informed that a child custody proceeding has been commenced in, or a child custody determination has been made by, a court of another state under a statute similar to this section shall immediately communicate with the court of that state to resolve the emergency, protect the safety of the parties and the child, and determine a period for the duration of the temporary order.

	L.2004,c.147,s.16.

2A:34-69  Notice; opportunity to be heard; joinder.

	17.  Notice; Opportunity to be Heard; Joinder.

	a.	Before a child custody determination is made under this act, notice and an opportunity to be heard in accordance with the standards of section 8 of this act shall be given to all persons entitled to notice under the law of this State as in child custody proceedings between residents of this State, any parent whose parental rights have not been previously terminated, and any person having physical custody of the child.

	b.	This act does not govern the enforceability of a child custody determination made without notice and an opportunity to be heard.

	c.	The obligation to join a party and the right to intervene as a party in a child custody proceeding under this act are governed by the law of this State as in child custody proceedings between residents of this State.

	L.2004,c.147,s.17.

2A:34-70  Simultaneous proceedings.

	18.  Simultaneous Proceedings.

	a.	Except as otherwise provided in section 16 of this act, a court of this State may not exercise its jurisdiction under this article if at the time of the commencement of the proceeding a proceeding concerning the custody of the child had been commenced in a court of another state having jurisdiction substantially in conformity with this act, unless the proceeding has been terminated or is stayed by the court of the other state because a court of this State is a more convenient forum under section 19 of this act.

	b.	Except as otherwise provided in section 16 of this act, a court of this State, before hearing a child custody proceeding, shall examine the court documents and other information supplied by the parties pursuant to section 21 of this act.  If the court determines that a child custody proceeding was previously commenced in a court in another state having jurisdiction substantially in accordance with this act, the court of this State shall stay its proceeding and communicate with the court of the other state.  If the court of the state having jurisdiction substantially in accordance with this act does not determine that the court of this State is a more appropriate forum, the court of this State shall dismiss the proceeding.

	c.	In a proceeding to modify a child custody determination, a court of this State shall determine whether a proceeding to enforce the determination has been commenced in another state.  If a proceeding to enforce a child custody determination has been commenced in another state, the court may:

	(1)	stay the proceeding for modification pending the entry of an order of a court of the other state enforcing, staying, denying or dismissing the proceeding for enforcement;

	(2)	enjoin the parties from continuing with the proceeding for enforcement; or

	(3)	proceed with the modification under conditions it considers appropriate.

	L.2004,c.147,s.18.

2A:34-71  Inconvenient forum.

	19.  a.  Inconvenient Forum.

	A court of this State that has jurisdiction under this act to make a child custody determination may decline to exercise its jurisdiction at any time if it determines that it is an inconvenient forum under the circumstances and that a court of another state is a more appropriate forum.  The issue of inconvenient forum may be raised upon the court's own motion, request of another court or motion of a party.

	b.	Before determining whether it is an inconvenient forum, a court of this State shall consider whether it is appropriate for a court of another state to exercise jurisdiction.  For this purpose, the court shall allow the parties to submit information and shall consider all relevant factors, including:

	(1)	whether domestic violence has occurred and is likely to continue in the future and which state could best protect the parties and the child;

	(2)	the length of time the child has resided outside this State;

	(3)	the distance between the court in this State and the court in the state that would assume jurisdiction;

	(4)	the relative financial circumstances of the parties;

	(5)	any agreement of the parties as to which state should assume jurisdiction;

	(6)	the nature and location of the evidence required to resolve the pending litigation, including the testimony of the child;

	(7)	the ability of the court of each state to decide the issue expeditiously and the procedures necessary to present the evidence; and

	(8)	the familiarity of the court of each state with the facts and issues of the pending litigation.

	c.	If a court of this State determines that it is an inconvenient forum and that a court of another state is a more appropriate forum, it shall stay the proceedings upon condition that a child custody proceeding be promptly commenced in another designated state and may impose any other condition the court considers just and proper.

	d.	A court of this State may decline to exercise its jurisdiction under this act if a child custody determination is incidental to an action for divorce or another proceeding while still retaining jurisdiction over the divorce or other proceeding.

	L.2004,c.147,s.19.

2A:34-72  Jurisdiction declined by reason of conduct.

	20.  Jurisdiction Declined by Reason of Conduct.

	a.	Except as otherwise provided in section 16 of this act or by other law of this State, if a court of this State has jurisdiction under this act because a person invoking the jurisdiction has engaged in unjustifiable conduct, the court shall decline to exercise its jurisdiction unless:

	(1)	the parents and all persons acting as parents have acquiesced in the exercise of jurisdiction;

	(2)	a court of the state otherwise having jurisdiction under sections 13 through 15 of this act determines that this State is a more appropriate forum under section 19 of this act; or

	(3)	no other State would have jurisdiction under sections 13 through 15 of this act.

	b.	If a court of this State declines to exercise its jurisdiction pursuant to subsection a. of this section, it may fashion an appropriate remedy to ensure the safety of the child and prevent a repetition of the wrongful conduct, including staying the proceeding until a child custody proceeding is commenced in a court having jurisdiction under sections 13 through 15 of this act.

	c.	If a court dismisses a petition or stays a proceeding because it declines to exercise its jurisdiction pursuant to subsection a. of this section, it shall charge the party invoking the jurisdiction of the court with necessary and reasonable expenses including costs, communication expenses, attorney's fees, investigative fees, expenses for witnesses, travel expenses, and child care during the course of the proceedings, unless the party from whom fees are sought establishes that the award would be inappropriate.  The court may not assess fees, costs, or expenses against this State except as otherwise provided by law other than this act.   No fees, costs or expenses shall be assessed against a party who is fleeing an incident or pattern of domestic violence or mistreatment or abuse of a child or sibling, unless the court is convinced by a preponderance of evidence that such assessment would be clearly appropriate.

	d.	In making a determination under this section, a court shall not consider as a factor weighing against the petitioner any taking of the child or retention of the child from the person who has rights of legal custody, physical custody or visitation, if there is evidence that the taking or retention of the child was to protect the petitioner from domestic violence or to protect the child or sibling from mistreatment or abuse.

	L.2004,c.147,s.20.

2A:34-73  Information to be submitted to court.

	21.  Information to be Submitted to Court.

	a.	Unless a party seeks an exception to disclosure of information as provided by subsection e. of this section,  each party, in its first pleading or in an attached affidavit, shall give information, if reasonably ascertainable, under oath as to the child's present address, the places where the child has lived during the last five years, and the names and present addresses of the persons with whom the child has lived during that period.  The pleading or affidavit shall state whether the party:

	(1)	has participated, as a party or witness or in any other capacity, in any other proceeding concerning the custody of or visitation with the child and, if so, identify the court, the case number of the proceeding, and the date of the child custody determination, if any;

	(2)	knows of any proceeding that could affect the current proceeding, including proceedings for enforcement and proceedings relating to domestic violence, protective orders, termination of parental rights and adoptions and, if so, identify the court and the case number and the nature of the proceeding; and

	(3)	knows the names and addresses of any person not a party to the proceeding who has physical custody of the child or claims rights of legal custody or physical custody of, or visitation with, the child and, if so, the names and addresses of those persons.

	b.	If the information required by subsection a. of this section is not furnished, the court, upon its own motion or that of a party, may stay the proceeding until the information is furnished.

	c.	If the declaration as to any of the items described in subsection a. of this section is in the affirmative, the declarant shall give additional information under oath as required by the court.  The court may examine the parties under oath as to details of the information furnished and other matters pertinent to the court's jurisdiction and the disposition of the case.

	d.	Each party has a continuing duty to inform the court of any proceeding in this or any other state that could affect the current proceeding.

	e.	If a party alleges in an affidavit or a pleading under oath that the health, safety, or liberty of a party or child would be put at risk by the disclosure of identifying information, that information shall be sealed and not disclosed to the other party or the public unless the court orders the disclosure to be made after a hearing in which the court takes into consideration the health, safety, or liberty of the party or child and determines that the disclosure is in the interest of justice.

	L.2004,c.147,s.21.

2A:34-74  Appearance of parties and child.

	22.  Appearance of Parties and Child.

	a.	In a child custody proceeding in this State, the court may order a party to a child custody proceeding who is in this State to appear before the court in person with or without the child.  The court may order any person who is in this State and who has physical custody or control of the child to appear physically with the child.

	b.	If a party to a child custody proceeding whose presence is desired by the court is outside this state, the court may order that a notice given pursuant to section 8 of this act include a statement directing the party to appear personally with or without the child and declaring that failure to appear may result in a decision adverse to the party.

	c.	The court may enter any orders necessary to ensure the safety of the child and of any person ordered to appear under this section.

	d.	If a party to a child custody proceeding who is outside this state is directed to appear under subsection b. of this section or desires to appear personally before the court with or without the child, the court may require another party to pay reasonable and necessary travel and other expenses of the party so appearing and of the child.

	L.2004,c.147,s.22.

2A:34-75  Definitions.

	23.  Definitions.  

	As used in this article:

	"Petitioner" means a person who seeks enforcement of a child custody determination or enforcement of an order for the return of the child under the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction.

	"Respondent" means a person against whom a proceeding has been commenced for enforcement of a child custody determination or enforcement of an order for return of a child under the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction.

	L.2004,c.147,s.23.

2A:34-76  Enforcement under Hague Convention.

	24.  Enforcement Under Hague Convention.

	Under this article, a court of this State may enforce an order for the return of a child made under the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction as if it were a child custody determination.

	L.2004,c.147,s.24.

2A:34-77  Duty to enforce.

	25.  Duty to Enforce.

	a.	A court of this State shall recognize and enforce a child custody determination of a court of another state if the latter court exercised jurisdiction in substantial conformity with this act or the determination was made under factual circumstances meeting the jurisdictional standards of this act and the determination has not been modified in accordance with this act.

	b.	A court of this State may utilize any remedy available under other law of this State to enforce a child custody determination made by a court of another state.  The remedies provided in this article are cumulative and do not affect the availability of other remedies to enforce a child custody determination.

	L.2004,c.147,s.25.

2A:34-78  Temporary visitation.

	26.  Temporary Visitation.

	a.	A court of this State which does not have jurisdiction to modify a child custody determination may issue a temporary order enforcing:

	(1)	a visitation schedule made by a court of another state; or

	(2)	the visitation provisions of a child custody determination of another state that does not provide for a specific visitation schedule.

	b.	If a court of this State makes an order under paragraph (2) of subsection a. of this section, it shall specify in the order a period  that it considers adequate to allow the petitioner to obtain an order from a court having jurisdiction under the criteria specified in article 2 of this act.  The order remains in effect until an order is obtained from the other court or the period expires.

	L.2004,c.147,s.26.

2A:34-79  Registration of child custody determination.

	27.  Registration of Child Custody Determination.

	a.	A child custody determination issued by a court of another state may be registered in this State, with or without a simultaneous request for enforcement, by sending to the Superior Court in this State:

	(1)	a letter or other document requesting registration;

	(2)	two copies, including one certified copy, of the determination sought to be registered, and a statement under penalty of perjury that to the best of the knowledge and belief of the person seeking registration the order has not been modified; and

	(3)	except as otherwise provided in section 21 of this act, the name and address of the person seeking registration and any parent or person acting as a parent who has been awarded custody or visitation in the child custody determination sought to be registered.

	b.	On receipt of the documents required by subsection a. of this section, the registering court shall:

	(1)	cause the determination to be filed as a foreign judgment, together with one copy of any accompanying documents and information, regardless of their form; and

	(2)	serve notice upon the persons named pursuant to paragraph (3) of subsection a. of this section and provide them with an opportunity to contest the registration in accordance with this section.

	c.	The notice required by paragraph (2) of subsection b. of this section shall state that:

	(1)	a registered determination is enforceable as of the date of the registration in the same manner as a determination issued by a court of this State;

	(2)	a hearing to contest the validity of the registered determination shall be requested within 20 days after service of notice; and

	(3)	failure to contest the registration will result in confirmation of the child custody determination and preclude further contest of that determination with respect to any matter that could have been asserted.

	d.	A person seeking to contest the validity of a registered order shall request a hearing within 20 days after service of the notice.  At that hearing, the court shall confirm the registered order unless the person contesting registration establishes that:

	(1)	the issuing court did not have jurisdiction under article 2 of this act;

	(2)	the child custody determination sought to be registered has been vacated, stayed, or modified by a court of a state having jurisdiction to do so under article 2 of this act; or

	(3)	the person contesting registration was entitled to notice, but notice was not given in accordance with the standards of section 8 of this act in the proceedings before the court that issued the order for which registration is sought.

	e.	If a timely request for a hearing to contest the validity of the registration is not made, the registration is confirmed as a matter of law and the person requesting registration and all persons served must be notified of the confirmation.

	f.	Confirmation of a registered order, whether by operation of law or after notice and hearing, precludes further contest of the order with respect to any matter which could have been asserted at the time of registration.

	L.2004,c.147,s.27.

2A:34-80  Enforcement of registered determination.

	28.  Enforcement of Registered Determination.

	a.	A court of this State may grant any relief normally available under the law of this State to enforce a registered child custody determination made by a court of another state.

	b.	A court of this State shall recognize and enforce, but may not modify, except in accordance with article 2 of this act, a registered child custody determination of another state.

	L.2004,c.147,s.28.

2A:34-81  Simultaneous proceedings.

	29.  Simultaneous Proceedings.

	If a proceeding for enforcement under this article has been or is commenced in a court of this State and the court determines that a proceeding to modify the determination is pending in a court of another state having jurisdiction to modify the determination under article 2 of this act, the enforcing court shall immediately communicate with the modifying court. The proceeding for enforcement continues unless the enforcing court, after consultation with the modifying court, stays or dismisses the proceeding. 

	L.2004,c.147,s.29.

2A:34-82  Expedited enforcement of child custody determination.

	30.  Expedited Enforcement of Child Custody Determination.

	a.	A petition under this article shall be verified.  Certified copies of all orders sought to be enforced and of the order confirming registration, if any, shall be attached to the petition.  A copy of a certified copy of an order may be attached instead of the original.

	b.	A petition for enforcement of a child custody determination shall state:

	(1)	whether the court that issued the determination identified the jurisdictional basis it relied upon in exercising jurisdiction and, if so, what the basis was;

	(2)	whether the determination for which enforcement is sought has been vacated, stayed, or modified by a court whose decision must be enforced under this act and, if so, identify the court, the case number, and the nature of the proceeding;

	(3)	whether any proceeding has been commenced that could affect the current proceeding, including proceedings relating to domestic violence, protective orders, termination of parental rights, and adoptions and, if so, identify the court and the case number and the nature of the proceeding;

	(4)	the present physical address of the child and the respondent, if known; and

	(5)	whether relief in addition to the immediate physical custody of the child and attorney's fees is sought, including a request for assistance from law enforcement officials and, if so, the relief sought: and

	(6)	if the child custody determination has been registered and confirmed under section 27 of this act, the date and place of registration.

	c.	Upon the filing of a petition, the court shall issue an order directing the respondent to appear in person with or without the child at a hearing and may enter any orders necessary to ensure the safety of the parties and the child.  The hearing shall be held on the next judicial day following service of process unless that date is impossible. In that event, the court shall hold the hearing on the first day possible. The court may extend the date of hearing at the request of the petitioner.

	d.	An order issued under subsection c. of this section shall state the time and place of the hearing and advise the respondent that at the hearing the court will order that the petitioner may take immediate physical custody of the child and the payment of fees, costs, and expenses under section 34 of this act, and may schedule a hearing to determine whether further relief is appropriate, unless the respondent appears and establishes that:

	(1)	the child custody determination has not been registered and confirmed under section 27 of this act, and that

	(a)	the issuing court did not have jurisdiction under article 2 of this act;

	(b)	the child custody determination for which enforcement is sought has been vacated, stayed, or modified by a court of a state having jurisdiction to do so under article 2 of this act; or

	(c)	the respondent was entitled to notice, but notice was not given in accordance with the standards of section 8 in the proceedings before the court that issued the order for which enforcement is sought; or

	(2)	the child custody determination for which enforcement is sought was registered and confirmed under section 27 of this act, but has been vacated, stayed or modified by a court of a state having jurisdiction to do so under article 2 of this act or federal law.

	L.2004,c.147,s.30.

2A:34-83  Service of petition and order.

	31.  Service of Petition and Order.

	Except as otherwise provided in section 33 of this act, the petition and order shall be served, by any method authorized by the law of this State, upon the respondent and any person who has physical custody of the child.

	L.2004,c.147,s.31.

2A:34-84  Hearing and order.

	32.  Hearing and Order.

	a.	Unless the court enters a temporary emergency order pursuant to section 16 of this act, upon a finding that a petitioner is entitled to the physical custody of the child immediately, the court shall order the child delivered to the petitioner unless the respondent establishes that:

	(1)	the child custody determination has not been registered and confirmed under section 27 of this act, and that

	(a)	the issuing court did not have jurisdiction under article 2 of this act;

	(b)	the child custody determination for which enforcement is sought has been vacated, stayed or modified by a court of a state having jurisdiction to do so under article 2 of this act or federal law; or

	(c)	the respondent was entitled to notice, but notice was not given in accordance with the standards of section 8 of this act in the proceedings before the court that issued the order for which enforcement is sought; or

	(2)	the child custody determination for which enforcement is sought was registered and confirmed under section 27 of this act, but has been vacated, stayed or modified by a court of a state having jurisdiction to do so under article 2 of this act or federal law.

	b.	The court shall award the fees, costs, and expenses authorized under section 34 of this act and may grant additional relief, including a request for the assistance of law enforcement officials, and set a further hearing to determine whether additional relief is appropriate.

	c.	If a party called to testify refuses to answer on the ground that the testimony may be self-incriminating, the court may draw an adverse inference from the refusal.

	d.	A privilege against disclosure of communications between spouses and a defense of immunity based on the relationship of husband and wife or parent and child may not be invoked in a proceeding under this article.

	L.2004,c.147,s.32.

2A:34-85  Warrant to take physical custody of child.

	33.  Warrant to Take Physical Custody of Child.

	a.	Upon the filing of a petition seeking enforcement of a child custody determination, the petitioner may file a verified application for the issuance of a warrant to take physical custody of the child if the child is likely to suffer serious imminent physical harm or removal from this State.

	b.	If the court, upon the testimony of the petitioner or other witness, finds that the child is likely to suffer serious imminent physical harm or be imminently removed from this State, it may issue a warrant to take physical custody of the child.  The petition shall be heard on the next judicial day after the warrant is executed.  The warrant shall include the statements required by subsection b. of section 30 of this act.

	c.	A warrant to take physical custody of a child shall:

	(1)	recite the facts upon which a conclusion of serious imminent physical harm or removal from the jurisdiction is based;

	(2)	direct law enforcement officers to take physical custody of the child immediately;

	(3)	provide for the placement of the child pending final relief.

	d.	The respondent shall be served with the petition, warrant and order immediately after the child is taken into physical custody.

	e.	A warrant to take physical custody of a child is enforceable throughout this State.  If the court finds on the basis of the testimony of the petitioner or other witness that a less intrusive remedy is not effective, it may authorize law enforcement officers to enter private property to take physical custody of the child.  If required by the exigency of the case, the court may authorize law enforcement officers to make a forcible entry at any hour.

	f.	The court may impose conditions upon placement of a child to ensure the appearance of the child and the child's custodian.  After the issuance of any temporary or permanent order determining custody or visitation of a minor child, a law enforcement officer having reasonable cause to believe that a person is likely to flee the State with the child or otherwise by flight or concealment evade the jurisdiction of the courts of this State may take a child into protective custody and return the child to the parent having lawful custody, or to a court in which a custody hearing concerning the child is pending.

	g.	After the issuance of any temporary or permanent order determining custody or visitation of a minor child, a law enforcement officer having reasonable cause to believe that a person is likely to flee the State with the child or otherwise by flight or concealment evade the jurisdiction of the courts of this State may take a child into protective custody and deliver the child to a court in which a custody hearing concerning the child is pending.

	L.2004,c.147,s.33.

2A:34-86  Costs, fees and expenses.

	34.  Costs, Fees and Expenses.

	a.	The court shall award the prevailing party, including a state, necessary and reasonable expenses incurred by or on behalf of the party, including costs, communication expenses, attorney's fees, investigative fees, expenses for witnesses, travel expenses, and child care during the course of the proceedings, unless the party from whom fees or expenses are sought establishes that the award would be clearly inappropriate.

	b.	The court may not assess fees, costs, or expenses against a state except as otherwise provided by law other than this act.

	L.2004,c.147,s.34.

2A:34-87  Recognition and Enforcement.

	35.  Recognition and enforcement.

	A court of this State shall accord full faith and credit to an order made consistently with this act which enforces a child custody determination by a court of another state unless the order has been vacated, stayed, or modified by a court authorized to do so under article 2 of this act.


	L.2004,c.147,s.35.

2A:34-88  Appeals.

	36.  Appeals.

	An appeal may be taken from a final order in a proceeding under this article in accordance with expedited appellate procedures in other civil cases.  Unless the court enters a temporary emergency order under section 16 of this act, the enforcing court may not stay an order enforcing a child custody determination pending appeal.

	L.2004,c.147,s.36.

2A:34-89  Role of prosecutor or other appropriate public official.

	37.  Role of Prosecutor or Other Appropriate Public Official.

	a.	In a case arising under this act or involving the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction, the prosecutor or other appropriate public official may take any lawful action, including resort to a proceeding under this article or any other available civil proceeding to locate a child, obtain the return of a child, or enforce a child custody determination if there is:

	(1)	an existing child custody determination;

	(2)	a request from a court in a pending child custody case;

	(3)	a reasonable belief that a criminal statute has been violated; or

	(4)	a reasonable belief that the child has been wrongfully removed or retained in violation of the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction.

	b.	A prosecutor or other appropriate public official acts on behalf of the court and may not represent any party to a child custody determination.

	L.2004,c.147,s.37.

2A:34-90  Role of law enforcement.

	38.  Role of Law Enforcement.

	At the request of a prosecutor or other appropriate public official acting under section 37 of this act, a law enforcement officer may take any lawful action reasonably necessary to locate a child or a party and assist a prosecutor or other appropriate public official with responsibilities under section 37 of this act.

	L.2004,c.147,s.38.

2A:34-91  Costs and expenses.

	39.  Costs and Expenses.

	If the respondent is not the prevailing party, the court may assess against the respondent all direct expenses and costs incurred by the prosecutor or other appropriate public official and law enforcement officers under section 37 or 38 of this act.

	L.2004,c.147,s.39.

2A:34-92  Application and construction.

	40.  Application and Construction.

	In applying and construing this uniform act, consideration shall be given to the need to promote uniformity of the law with respect to its subject matter among states that enact it.

	L.2004,c.147,s.40.

2A:34-93  Severability.

	41.  Severability.

	If any provision of this act or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this act which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this act are severable.

	L.2004,c.147,s.41.

2A:34-94  Transitional provision.

	42.  Transitional Provision.

	A motion or other request for relief made in a child custody or enforcement proceeding which was commenced before the effective date of this act is governed by the law in effect at the time the motion or other request was made.

	L.2004,c.147,s.42.

2A:34-95  Notice of penalties for order violation.

	43.  Notice of Penalties for Order Violation.

	Every order of a court involving custody or visitation shall include a written notice, in both English and Spanish, advising the persons affected as to the penalties provided in N.J.S.2C:13-4 for violating that order.

	L.2004,c.147,s.43.

2A:35-1.     Jurisdiction in real property possessory actions  
     2A:35-1. Any person claiming the right of possession of real property in the possession of another, or claiming title to such real property, shall be entitled to have his rights determined in an action in the Superior Court.  

    	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.85.  

2A:35-2.  Damages;  limitations
    In any such action, the plaintiff shall be entitled to recover from the defendant any and all incidental damages, including mesne profits, and the full  value of the use and occupation of the premises for the time, not exceeding 6  years, before the commencement of the action, during which the defendant was in  possession thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:35-3.  Allowances for improvements;  limitations
    Where permanent improvements have been made on the premises in good faith, under circumstances entitling the defendant to have the value thereof allowed to him, the court may allow the same to be set off against the damages of the plaintiff, but only to the extent of such damages.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:35A-1.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the  "Environmental Rights Act."

     L.1974, c. 169, s. 1, eff. Dec. 9, 1974.

2A:35A-2.  Legislative findings and determinations
    The Legislature finds and determines that the integrity of the State's environment is continually threatened by pollution, impairment and destruction,  that every person has a substantial interest in minimizing this condition, and  that it is therefore in the public interest to enable ready access to the  courts for the remedy of such abuses.

     L.1974, c. 169, s. 2, eff. Dec. 9, 1974.

2A:35A-3.  Definitions
    For the purposes of this act, the following words and phrases shall have the  following meanings:

    a.   "Person"  includes corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms, partnerships and joint stock companies, individuals, the State, any political subdivision of the State and any agency or instrumentality of the State or of any political subdivision of the State.

    b.   "Pollution, impairment or destruction of the environment"  means any actual pollution, impairment or destruction to any of the natural resources of the State or parts thereof.  It shall include, but not be limited to, air pollution, water pollution, improper sewage disposal, pesticide pollution, excessive noise, improper disposal of refuse, impairment and eutrophication of rivers, streams, flood plains, lakes, ponds or other water resources, destruction of seashores, dunes, wetlands, open spaces, natural areas, parks or  historic areas.

     L.1974, c. 169, s. 3, eff. Dec. 9, 1974.

2A:35A-4.    Action in court; declaratory and equitable relief; dismissal
     a.   Any person may commence a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction against any other person alleged to be in violation of any statute, regulation or ordinance which is designed to prevent or minimize pollution, impairment or destruction of the environment.  The action may be for injunctive or other equitable relief to compel compliance with a statute, regulation or ordinance, or to assess civil penalties for the violation as provided by law.  The action may be commenced upon an allegation that a person is in violation, either continuously or intermittently, of a statute, regulation or ordinance, and that there is a likelihood that the violation will recur in the future.  

    b.   Except in those instances where the conduct complained of constitutes a violation of a statute, regulation or ordinance which establishes a more specific standard for the control of pollution, impairment or destruction of the environment, any person may commence a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction for declaratory and equitable relief against any other person for the protection of the environment, or the interest of the public therein, from pollution, impairment or destruction.  

    c.   The court may, on the motion of any party, or on its own motion, dismiss any action brought pursuant to this act which on its face appears to be patently frivolous, harassing or wholly lacking in merit.  

    L.1974,c.169,s.4; amended 1990,c.28,s.16.  

2A:35A-5.  Rebuttal to prima facie evidence or affirmative defense; rules of evidence
    In any action brought pursuant to section 4 hereof, when the plaintiff in the action has made a prima facie showing that the conduct of the defendant has, or is polluting, impairing or destroying the environment or the interest of the public therein, the defendant may rebut such showing by the submission of competent evidence to the contrary, and defendant may show as an affirmative  defense that his conduct does not violate any statute, regulation or ordinance  designed to minimize pollution or impairment of the environment and is in  compliance in good faith with any pollution abatement schedule if applicable  the purpose of which is alleviation of the damage to the environment complained  of.  The rules concerning burden of proof and weight of evidence generally  applicable in civil actions in the Superior Court shall apply to actions  brought under this act.

     L.1974, c. 169, s. 5, eff. Dec. 9, 1974.

2A:35A-6.  Temporary or permanent equitable relief
    A court of competent jurisdiction may grant temporary and permanent equitable relief, including the imposition of such conditions as may be necessary to protect the environment, or the interest of the public therein, from pollution, impairment or destruction.

     L.1974, c. 169, s. 6, eff. Dec. 9, 1974.

2A:35A-7.  Determination and adjudication of impact of conduct on environment
    a.  In an action brought pursuant to section 4 b. hereof any alleged pollution, impairment or destruction of the environment, or the interest of the  public therein, shall be determined, and no conduct shall be authorized or  approved which does, or is likely to, have such effect so long as there is a  feasible and prudent alternative consistent with the reasonable requirements of  the public health, safety and welfare.

    b.  Upon completion of such proceedings in any action brought pursuant to section 4 b. hereof, the court shall adjudicate the impact of the defendant's conduct on the environment and on the interest of the public therein in accordance with this act.  In such adjudication the court may order that additional evidence be taken to the extent necessary to protect the rights recognized in this act.

     L.1974, c. 169, s. 7, eff. Dec. 9, 1974.

2A:35A-8.  Remittitur for administrative or other proceedings; retention of  jurisdiction;  temporary equitable relief
    If administrative or other proceedings are required or available to determine the legality of the defendant's conduct, the court shall remit the parties to such proceedings, except where immediate and irreparable damage will  probably result, which proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with and  subject to the applicable provision of law providing for such proceedings and  the provisions of the  "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c. 410 (C.  52:14B-1 et seq.)  In so remitting the court may grant temporary equitable  relief where necessary for the protection of the environment or the interest of  the public therein from pollution, impairment or destruction.  In so remitting  the court shall retain jurisdiction of the action pending completion thereof  for the purpose of determining whether the administrative findings made in such  proceedings are supported by substantial evidence and the agency action is in conformance with the law.

     L.1974, c. 169, s. 8, eff. Dec. 9, 1974.

2A:35A-9.  Security as condition for grant of injunction
    In any action in which a temporary restraining order or an interlocutory injunction is sought the court may, as a condition of granting such relief, require reasonable security, not exceeding $10,000.00 or cash not exceeding $500.00.

     L.1974, c. 169, s. 9, eff. Dec. 9, 1974.

2A:35A-10.   Counsel and expert witness fees; application of collateral estoppel and res judicata; dismissal of action, use of payments  
     a.   In any action under this act the court may in appropriate cases award to the prevailing party reasonable counsel and expert witness fees, but not to exceed a total of $50,000 in an action brought against a local agency or the Department of Environmental Protection, where the prevailing party achieved reasonable success on the merits.  The fees shall be based on the number of hours reasonably spent and a reasonable hourly rate for the counsel or expert in the action taking into account the prevailing rate in the venue of the action and the skill and experience of the counsel or expert.  

    b.   The doctrines of collateral estoppel and res judicata may be applied by the court to prevent multiplicity of suits.  

    c.   An action commenced pursuant to the provisions of this act may not be dismissed without the express consent of the court in which the action was filed.  

    d.   Except as provided in subsection e. of this section, any payments made pursuant to a settlement or judgment entered in a case brought pursuant to this act shall be used to fund institutions, entities, or activities for purposes consistent with the purposes and goals of the statute, regulation or ordinance at issue in the case. No payment of a settlement or judgment shall be made except upon the submission of a plan to the court by the prevailing party specifying the uses for which the payment will be put, any person or organization that will receive all or part of the payment, and the dollar amounts to be given to each person or organization and the dollar amounts allocated for each use.  Recipients of any payments made pursuant to a settlement or judgment shall report to the court on the use of such funds.  

    e.   Any payments made pursuant to a settlement or judgment entered in a case brought against a local agency pursuant to this act to enforce the "Water Pollution Control Act," P.L.1977, c.74 (C.58:10A-1 et seq.) shall be deposited in the "Wastewater Treatment Fund" established pursuant to subsection a. of section 15 of P.L.1985, c.329.  

    f.   As used in this section "local agency" means a political subdivision of the State or an agency or instrumentality thereof, that owns or operates a municipal treatment works; "treatment works" means any device or systems, whether public or private, used in the storage, treatment, recycling, or reclamation of municipal or industrial waste of a liquid nature including intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, cooling towers and ponds, pumping, power and other equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any other works including sites for the treatment process or for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment. "Treatment works" includes any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating, or disposing of pollutants, including storm water runoff, or industrial waste in combined or separate storm water and sanitary sewer systems; and "municipal treatment works" means the treatment works of any municipal, county, or State agency or any agency or subdivision created by one or more municipal, county or State governments and the treatment works of any public utility as defined in R.S.48:2-13.  

    L.1974,c.169,s.10; amended 1981,c.339,s.1; 1985,c.531; 1990,c.28,s.17.  

2A:35A-11.  Notice of intention to commence action;  persons to whom sent; waiver;  exemptions
    No action may be commenced pursuant to this act unless the person seeking to  commence such suit shall, at least 30 days prior to the commencement thereof,  direct a written notice of such intention by certified mail, to the Attorney  General, the Department of Environmental Protection, the governing body of the  municipality in which the alleged conduct has, or is likely to occur, and to  the intended defendant; provided, however, that if the plaintiff in an action  brought in accordance with the  "N.J. Court Rules, 1969,"  can show that  immediate and irreparable damage will probably result, the court may waive the  foregoing requirement of notice.  The provisions of this section shall not  apply to actions brought by the State, any political subdivision of the State  and any agency or instrumentality of the State or of any political subdivision of the State.

     L.1974, c. 169, s. 11, eff. Dec. 9, 1974.

2A:35A-12.  Act as additional remedy
    This act shall be in addition to existing administrative and regulatory procedures provided by law.  No existing civil or criminal remedy now or hereafter available to any person or governmental entity shall be superseded by  this act.

     L.1974, c. 169, s. 12, eff. Dec. 9, 1974.

2A:35A-13.  Construction of act, rules, regulations and orders
    This act and any rules, regulations and orders adopted hereunder shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purpose and intent thereof.

     L.1974, c. 169, s. 13, eff. Dec. 9, 1974.

2A:35A-14.  Severability
    If the provisions of any section or clause of this act or any rule, regulation or order adopted hereunder or the application thereof to any person shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall be confined in its operation to the controversy in which it was rendered, and shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any provision of any section or clause of this act or any rule, regulation or order adopted hereunder or the application of any part thereof to any other person or circumstance and to this end, the provisions of each section and clause of this  act and rule, regulation or order are hereby declared to be severable.

     L.1974, c. 169, s. 14, eff. Dec. 9, 1974.

2A:36-1.  What constitutes escape
    Any person committed to a county jail or other place of detention upon process issued in a civil action, shall be actually detained therein until lawfully discharged.  If, at any time, the officer to whom such process was issued permits any person committed to his custody thereunder to go or to be at  large out of the jail or other place of detention, except by virtue of a writ  of habeas corpus or court order, such going or being at large shall be deemed  to be an escape.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:36-2.  Safe-keeping of persons taken under body execution
    Every officer to whom a body execution has been issued and who shall have taken the person directed to be taken shall safely keep such person in jail, or  other place of detention, without bail, except as authorized by law, until the  requirements of such execution shall be satisfied.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:36-3.  Liability for escape of person committed under body execution
    If a sheriff or other officer in authority permits or allows any person committed to go out of jail or other place of detention or be at large by bail or otherwise, except as authorized by law, without the consent of the execution  creditor, he shall be liable to the execution creditor for the amount required  to be paid by said execution to satisfy the same and for which such person has  been committed, recoverable by the execution creditor from the sheriff or other  officer, with costs.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:36-4.  Defense of retaking on fresh pursuit in action of escape
    In an action for an escape against a sheriff or other officer no retaking on  fresh pursuit shall be a defense unless the sheriff, or other officer shall  show that the person for whose escape the action is brought escaped without his  consent or knowledge.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:37-1.  Action in superior court by attorney general;  jury;  title of state
    When the attorney general is informed or has reason to believe that any person has died seized of real estate within the state, without having devised it and without heirs capable of inheriting the same, he shall bring an action, summary or otherwise, in the superior court to establish whether or not such real estate has escheated to the state.  The action shall be tried with a jury,  and it shall be determined in the action what real estate, if any, escheated to  the state.  Title to real estate escheating to the state shall pass to the  state on the death of such person.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:37-2.  Seizure by sheriff upon judgment for the state
    If the judgment shall be for the state, a writ shall issue out of the superior court to the sheriff of the county, commanding him to seize and take into his hands the real estate adjudged to have escheated to the state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:37-3.  Exemplification of proceedings deposited with secretary of state;   sale by state treasurer
    Upon the return of the writ of seizure the attorney general shall cause the  record and proceedings to be exemplified under the seal of the court and deposit the exemplification in the office of the secretary of state. The state treasurer shall thereupon cause the affected real estate to be sold at a public  sale.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:37-4.  Notice of sale;  publication
    The state treasurer shall give at least 6 weeks' previous notice of the time  and place of such sale, by publishing the same in 1 of the newspapers printed  at Trenton, in this state, and also in a newspaper published or circulated in  the county, where the affected real estate is situate, 4 times, once in each  week, during 4 consecutive calendar weeks next preceding the time of such sale.   Such sale shall be subject to adjournment by the state treasurer for any time  not exceeding in the whole 2 months. The proofs of such publication shall be  filed in the office of the secretary of state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:37-5.  Certificate of sale;  payment of purchase price
    The state treasurer shall give to the purchaser at the sale a certificate, containing the name of the purchaser, a description of the boundaries of the real estate purchased and the price to be paid therefor.

    Within 30 days after the delivery to him of the certificate the purchaser shall pay to the state treasurer the price designated in the certificate, and the state treasurer shall thereupon indorse upon the certificate a receipt for the purchase price.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:37-6.  Deed and delivery of possession to purchaser
    The attorney general shall, upon the production to him of the certificate and receipt mentioned in section 2A:37-5 of this title, in the name of the state, execute and deliver to the purchaser at the sale a deed of the real estate described in the certificate of sale, granting and conveying an estate of inheritance to such real estate to the purchaser, his heirs and assigns forever.

    Upon the presentation to the sheriff of the deed, he shall deliver the possession of the real estate therein described to the purchaser.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:37-7.  Expenses of proceedings;  payment
    The state treasurer shall make a statement of the expenses of conducting the  proceedings taken under this article and, when approved by the director of the  division of budget and accounting, shall pay the same.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:37-8.  Claims against escheated estate;  filing, allowance and payment
    Any person who has any claim or claims against the estate of any such intestate whose real estate has so escheated to the state, may give notice thereof, under oath, to the state treasurer.  Thereupon the treasurer shall hold any moneys which may or shall come into his hands, derived from the sale of such real estate, for the period of 1 year.  No claim shall be received by the treasurer which shall not be filed with him within the year aforesaid. When such claims shall be proven to the satisfaction of the treasurer and audited by the director of the division of budget and accounting, they shall be  paid by the treasurer.  If, however, such estate shall prove to be insolvent,  the treasurer shall be empowered to pay the claims against such estate  ratably.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:37-9.  State party defendant to action to foreclose lien on escheated property;  service of process
    When any real estate which has escheated or may escheat to the state of New  Jersey, on which, prior to such escheat, there has existed or may exist any  lien of any mortgage, pledge or hypothecation in such real estate, the holder  of such mortgage, pledge or hypothecation may make the state of New Jersey a  party defendant to his action for the foreclosure thereof, whether instituted  in a state court, or in a federal court.  The state of New Jersey shall be  considered to be served with proper and sufficient process and brought within  the jurisdiction of any such court when a summons shall have been served on the  attorney general of this state, the state of New Jersey being named as a party  defendant in such summons.

    If the attorney general shall refuse to acknowledge service on the summons the physical delivery of a true copy thereof and the exhibition to the attorney  general of the original summons shall be considered a good and sufficient  service to comply with the provisions of this section.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:37-10.  Waste or trespass;  restraint;  damages, action for
    If any waste is done or committed on any real estate which has escheated or  may escheat to the state, the attorney general shall apply to the superior court to restrain such waste.  Any person doing or committing any waste or other trespass upon such property shall be liable in damages therefor, to be sued for and recovered in the name of the state, by an action in any court having jurisdiction thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:37-41.1.  Loan of moneys in separate fund to Rutgers University
    From the fund established by section 2A:37-41 of the New Jersey Statutes, the State Treasurer is hereby authorized to lend to Rutgers, the State University, a sum not exceeding $1,000,000.00 for the purpose of constructing student dormitories and related capital facilities.  Any such loan shall be repaid in equal annual installments over a period of 20 years commencing July 1, 1962 at a rate of interest equal to 4% per annum computed over the life of the loan.

     L.1961, c. 31, p. 123, s. 1, eff. May 25, 1961.

2A:37B-1  Civil action against fraudulent filer.
  
	8.	Any current or former officer or employee of any federal, state, county, or other local governmental unit, including members of the Legislative Branch, Executive Branch, Judicial Branch, and all law enforcement entities, or the current or former officer's or employee's immediate family or estate injured by a filing or recording that relates to the performance or non-performance of the officer's or employee's public duties, and for which the filer does not hold a properly executed security agreement or judgment from a court of competent jurisdiction or for which the initial filer was not entitled to file the initial financing statement under N.J.S.12A:9-509 may bring a civil action against the person or entity who filed or recorded the documents.  Upon a showing that a filing is false or contains any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or representations, or with the intent to harass, hinder, defraud, retaliate against, or in any way impede the performance of that officer's or employee's duties, the court may do any one or more of the following:
 
	a.	order the defendant to pay a sum of not less than $2000 for each fraudulent filing, or the actual damages caused by the filing or recording, whichever is greater;
 
	b.	enjoin the defendant from making any future liens, encumbrances, court actions, or claims against persons specified by the court without approval of the court;
 
	c.	award the plaintiff court costs and reasonable attorney's fees; or
 
	d.	order any other relief as is required to clear title to the real or personal property.
 
	L.2015, c.59, s.8.

2A:37B-2  Rules, regulations.
  
	9.	The Division of Revenue in the Department of the Treasury may adopt, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), rules and regulations to effectuate the provisions of this act.
 
	L.2015, c.59, s.9.

2A:38-1.  Liability for damages
    Any person who wrongfully damages a municipal or other public fire alarm system, or any part thereof, or tampers or interferes with any such system, shall be liable for the damages directly or indirectly caused thereby, recoverable in a civil action by the person injured or damaged.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:38A-1.  Definitions
    As used in this act:

    a.   "Access"  means to instruct, communicate with, store data in, retrieve  data from, or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer, computer  system, or computer network.

    b.   "Computer"  means an electronic device or another similar device capable of executing a computer program, including arithmetic, logic, memory or  input-output operations, by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses  and includes all computer equipment connected to such a device in a computer  system or network.

    c.   "Computer equipment"  means any equipment or devices including all input, output, processing, storage, software, or communications facilities, intended to interface with the computer.

    d.   "Computer network"  means the interconnection of communication lines, including microwave or other means of electronic communications, with a computer through remote terminals, or a complex consisting of two or more interconnected computers.

    e.   "Computer program"  means a series of instructions or statements executable on a computer which directs the computer system in a manner to produce a desired result.

    f.   "Computer software"  means a set of computer programs, data, procedures, and associated documentation concerned with the operation of a computer system.

    g.   "Computer system"  means a set of interconnected computer equipment intended to operate as a cohesive system.

    h.   "Data"  means information, facts, concepts, or instructions prepared for use in a computer, computer system, or computer network.

    i.   "Data base"  means a collection of data.

     j.   "Financial instrument"  includes but is not limited to a check, draft,  warrant, money order, note, certificate of deposit, letter of credit, bill of  exchange, credit or debit card, transaction authorization mechanism, marketable  security and any computer representation of these items.

    k.   "Property"  includes but is not limited to financial instruments, information, data, and computer software in either human readable or computer readable form, copies or originals, and any other tangible or intangible item of value.

      l  .   "Services"  includes but is not limited to the use of a computer system, computer network, computer programs, data prepared for computer use and  data contained within a computer system or computer network.

     L.1984, c. 182, s. 1.

2A:38A-2.  Value of property or services
    For the purposes of this act, the value of any property or services, including the use of computer time, shall be their fair market value if it is determined that a willing buyer and willing seller exist. Alternatively, value shall include but not be limited to the cost of generating or obtaining data and storing it within a computer or computer system.

     L.1984, c. 182, s. 2.

2A:38A-3.  Computer-related offenses;  compensatory and punitive damages; costs and expenses
    A person or enterprise damaged in business or property as a result of any of  the following actions may sue the actor therefor in the Superior Court and may  recover compensatory and punitive damages and the cost of the suit including a  reasonable attorney's fee, costs of investigation and litigation:

    a.  The purposeful or knowing, and unauthorized altering, damaging, taking or destruction of any data, data base, computer program, computer software or computer equipment existing internally or externally to a computer, computer system or computer network;

    b.  The purposeful or knowing, and unauthorized altering, damaging, taking or destroying of a computer, computer system or computer network;

    c.  The purposeful or knowing, and unauthorized accessing or attempt to access any computer, computer system or computer network;

    d.  The purposeful or knowing, and unauthorized altering, accessing, tampering with, obtaining, intercepting, damaging or destroying of a financial instrument;  or

    e.  The purposeful or knowing accessing and reckless altering, damaging, destroying or obtaining of any data, data base, computer, computer program, computer software, computer equipment, computer system or computer network.

     L.1984, c. 182, s. 3.

2A:38A-4.  Value of loss;  finding of fact
    The value of damage, loss, property or income involved in any lawsuit shall  be determined by the trier of fact.

     L.1984, c. 182, s. 4.

2A:38A-5.  Injunctions
    In addition to any other action or proceeding authorized by law, the Attorney General, or a person or enterprise alleging injury or loss may bring an action in Superior Court to enjoin actions causing damage as described in this act or to enjoin any acts in furtherance thereof.

     L.1984, c. 182, s. 5.

2A:38A-6.  Venue of action
    Actions brought under this act may be filed in the Superior Court of the county in which the computer which is accessed is located, or where the terminal used in the accessing is situated, or where the actual damage occurs.

     L.1984, c. 182, s. 6.

2A:39-1  Unlawful entry prohibited.

	2A:39-1.  No person shall enter upon or into any real property or estate therein and detain and hold the same, except where entry is given by law, and then only in a peaceable manner.  With regard to any real property occupied solely as a residence by the party in possession, such entry shall not be made in any manner without the consent of the party in possession unless the entry and detention is made pursuant to legal process as set out in N.J.S.2A:18-53 et seq., as amended and supplemented; P.L.1974, c.49 (C.2A:18-61.1 et al.), as amended and supplemented; P.L.1975, c.311 (C.2A:18-61.6 et al.), as amended and supplemented; P.L.1978, c.139 (C.2A:18-61.6 et al.), as amended and supplemented; the "Tenant Protection Act of 1992," P.L.1991, c.509 (C.2A:18-61.40 et al.); or N.J.S.2A:35-1 et seq. and "The Fair Eviction Notice Act," P.L.1974, c.47 (C.2A:42-10.15 et al.).  A person violating this section regarding entry of rental property occupied solely as a residence by a party in possession shall be a disorderly person.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1971, c.227, s.1; 2005,c.319,s.1.

2A:39-2.  Forcible or unlawful entry and detainer defined
    If any person shall enter upon or into any real property and detain or hold  the same with force, whether or not any person be in it, by any kind of violence whatsoever, or by threatening to kill, maim or beat the party in possession, or by such words, circumstances or action as have a natural tendency to excite fear or apprehension of danger, or by putting out of doors, or carrying away the goods of the party in possession, or by entering peaceably  and then, by force or frightening by threats, or by other circumstances of  terror, turning the party out of possession, such person shall be guilty of a  forcible entry and detainer within the meaning of this chapter.  With regard to  any real property occupied solely as a residence by the party in possession, if  any person shall enter upon or into said property and detain or hold same in  any manner without the consent of the party in possession unless the entry is  made pursuant to legal process as set out in N.J.S. 2A:18-53 et seq. or 2A:35-1  et seq., such person shall be guilty of an unlawful entry and detainer within  the meaning of this chapter.

     	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1971, c. 227, s. 2, eff. June 21, 1971.

2A:39-3.  Forcible detainer defined
    No person lawfully or peaceably entering upon or into any real property shall hold or keep the same with force;  and whatever words or circumstances, conduct or actions, as will make an entry forcible under this chapter shall also make a detainer forcible.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:39-4.  Unlawful detainer defined
    If any tenant or other person in possession of any real property under a tenant, shall willfully and without force, hold over any such real property after demand and notice in writing given for the delivery of the possession thereof by a lessor or the person to whom the remainder or reversion of such real estate shall belong, such tenant or other person, so holding over, shall be guilty of an unlawful detainer.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:39-5.  Unlawful detainer;  notice
    A person taking possession of real property, without the consent of the owner or without color of title, and willfully and without force holding or detaining the same after demand and written notice given for the delivery of the possession thereof, by the owner or person entitled to possession or right to possession shall be guilty of an unlawful detainer.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:39-6.     Actions cognizable before Superior Court  
     2A:39-6. Any forcible unlawful entry and detainer, forcible detainer and unlawful detainer as defined in this chapter shall be cognizable before the Superior Court, and the court may hear and determine an action therefor in a summary manner.  

   	 L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1971,c.227,s.3; 1991,c.91,s.86.  

2A:39-7.  Title not inquired into;  defense of 3 years possession
    Title shall not be an issue in any action commenced under this chapter. 3 years peaceable possession by the defendant shall be a defense to the action.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:39-8.  Recovery of damages and possession of property;  treble damages in  lieu of possession
    In any action under this chapter, a plaintiff recovering judgment shall be entitled to possession of the real property and shall recover all damages proximately caused by the unlawful entry and detainer including court costs and  reasonable attorney's fees.  When a return to possession would be an inappropriate remedy, treble damages shall be awarded in lieu thereof.  The judgment may be enforced against either party in a summary manner by any process necessary to secure complete compliance therewith, including the payment of the costs.

     L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1971, c. 227, s. 4, eff. June 21, 1971.

2A:40-1.  Gaming transactions unlawful
    All wagers, bets or stakes made to depend upon any race or game, or upon any  gaming by lot or chance, or upon any lot, chance, casualty or unknown or contingent event, shall be unlawful.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:40-2.  Liability of stakeholder or person receiving wager
    Whoever pays, delivers or deposits any money, property or thing in action upon the event of any wager or bet prohibited by this chapter or by any law of this state, may sue for and recover the same of the winner, or person to whom the same shall be paid or delivered, or of the stakeholder or other person in whose hands the same shall be deposited, or any part thereof, whether or not the same shall have been delivered or paid over by such depositary or stakeholder and whether or not any such wager or bet be lost.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:40-3.  Gaming transactions, obligations and securities void
    All promises, agreements, notes, bills, bonds, contracts, judgments, mortgages, leases or other securities or conveyances which shall be made, given, entered into or executed by any person, the whole or part of the consideration of which is for any money, property or thing in action whatsoever  laid, won or bet in violation of section 2A:40-1 of this title, or for  reimbursing or repaying any money knowingly lent or advanced to help or facilitate such violation, shall be utterly void and of no effect.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:40-4.  Transfer of property on gaming consideration to vest title in heirs or representatives of transferor
    If any sale, conveyance, lease or mortgage of either real or personal estate  as is made void by section 2A:40-3 of this title shall be made, the same shall  inure to the use of the heirs or legal representatives of the vendor, lessor or  mortgagor, and shall vest the whole estate and interest so attempted to be  transferred in such property, to all intents and purposes, in such heirs or  legal representatives in the same manner as though the vendor, bargainor,  lessor or mortgagor had died intestate.  All conveyances or other devices made  to evade this section shall be utterly void.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:40-5.  Action by loser to recover money or property lost at gaming, with  costs;  limitation
    If any person shall lose any money, goods, chattels or other valuable thing,  in violation of section 2A:40-1 of this title, and shall pay or deliver the  same or any part thereof to the winner, or to any person to his use, or to a  stakeholder, such person may sue for and recover such money, or the value of  such goods, chattels, or other valuable thing, from such winner, or from such  depositary, or from such stakeholder, whether the same has been delivered or  paid over by such stakeholder or not, in a civil action provided such action is  brought within 6 calendar months after payment or delivery.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:40-6.  Informer action to recover money or property lost at gaming; limitation;  costs
    If the person who shall lose and pay such money, or lose and deliver such thing or things as aforesaid, shall not, within the time aforesaid, without collusion, sue for the money or other thing or things so lost and paid, or delivered, any other person may sue for and recover the same, with costs of suit, from such winner, depositary or stakeholder as aforesaid; the one moiety thereof to the use of the person suing for the same, and the other moiety to the use of the state;  provided the action is instituted within 6 calendar months from and after the expiration of the time limited in section 2A:40-5 of this title for the loser to sue for the same.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:40-7.  Discovery of money or property lost at gaming
    Every person who, under this chapter, shall or may be liable to be sued for  moneys or other things so won, paid or deposited, as aforesaid, shall make  discovery pursuant to an order of a court of competent jurisdiction either  before or after action is commenced, concerning the money or other things so  won, paid or deposited.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:40-8.  Penalty for erecting, etc., lottery;  action by common informer; disposition of penalty;  jurors and witnesses
    No person shall, within this state, publicly or privately, erect, set up, open, make or draw any lottery prohibited by the laws of this state; and any person so doing shall forfeit, for each such offense, a penalty of $2,000, to be recovered with costs in a civil action by any person who shall sue for the same.

    Of each and every penalty recovered under this section there may be appropriated a portion, which shall not exceed 1% of such penalty, to be assessed by the jury hearing the cause, or by the court if the cause be determined without a jury, to the informer, and the residue of such penalty not  so appropriated to the informer shall be appropriated to the use of the county  in which the action for the recovery thereof shall have been prosecuted.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:40-9.  Conveyances or transfers of property in pursuance of lottery void
    Every conveyance or other transfer of any property, real or personal, made in pursuance of any lottery prohibited by the laws of this state, shall be void  and of no effect.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:40A-1.  Construction, alteration, repair, maintenance, servicing or security of building, highway, railroad, appurtenance and appliance; invalidity
    A covenant, promise, agreement or understanding in, or in connection with or  collateral to a contract, agreement or purchase order, relative to the construction, alteration, repair, maintenance, servicing, or security of a building, structure, highway, railroad, appurtenance and appliance, including moving, demolition, excavating, grading, clearing, site preparation or development of real property connected therewith, purporting to indemnify or hold harmless the promisee against liability for damages arising out of bodily injury to persons or damage to property caused by or resulting from the sole negligence of the promisee, his agents, or employees, is against public policy and is void and unenforceable; provided that this section shall not affect the validity of any insurance contract, workmen's compensation or agreement issued by an authorized insurer.

     L.1981, c. 317, s. 1, eff. Dec. 3, 1981.  Amended by L.1983, c. 107, s. 1, eff. March 14, 1983.

2A:40A-2.  Architect, engineer, surveyor of agents for damages, claims, losses or expenses arising out of preparation or approval of maps, opinions, change orders, designs or specifications, or giving of or failure to give directions or instructions;  invalidity
    A covenant, promise, agreement or understanding in, or in connection with or  collateral to a contract, agreement or purchase order, whereby an architect,  engineer, surveyor or his agents, servants, or employees shall be indemnified  or held harmless for damages, claims, losses or expenses including attorneys'  fees caused by or resulting from the sole negligence of an architect, engineer,  surveyor or his agents, servants, or employees and arising either out of (1)  the preparation or approval by an architect, engineer, surveyor or his agents,  servants, employees or invitees, of maps, drawings, opinions, reports, surveys,  change orders, designs or specifications, or (2) the giving of or the failure  to give directions or instructions by the architect, engineer, surveyor or his  agents, servants or employees;  provided such giving or failure to give is the  cause of the damage, claim, loss or expense, is against public policy and is  void and unenforceable.

     L.1981, c. 317, s. 2, eff. Dec. 3, 1981.  Amended by L.1983, c. 107, s. 2, eff. March 14, 1983.

2A:40A-3.  Inapplicability of act to railroads, and state and state agencies
    This act shall not apply to a covenant, promise or agreement made directly with a railroad relative to construction, alteration, repair, maintenance or access upon, under or across the right of way of an operating railroad.  This act shall not apply to any contract, agreement, understanding or purchase order  to which the State of New Jersey or any of its departments, agencies, or  authorities is a party.

     L.1981, c. 317, s. 3, eff. Dec. 3, 1981.

2A:40A-4.  Date of application
    This act shall take effect with respect to covenants, promises, agreements or understandings which are subject hereof made or executed from and after the effective date of this act.

     L.1981, c. 317, s. 4, eff. Dec. 3, 1981.

2A:41A-1.  Interstate Compact on Interpleader
    The Governor is hereby authorized and directed to execute a compact in the following form on behalf of this State with any other State or States as defined in said compact when entered into in accordance with the terms of said compact by said other State or States and not disapproved by the Governor of this State under paragraph (c) of article 7 of such compact:

       Interstate Compact on Interpleader

     The contracting States solemnly agree:

       Article I--Purpose.

     The aims of this compact are to promote comity and judicial cooperation among the States party thereto;  and to relieve from undue risk and uncertainty, a person who may be subject to double or multiple liability because of the existence of adverse claimants, 1 or more of whom in the absence  of this compact may not be subject to the jurisdiction of the adjudicating  court, when such person makes all reasonable efforts to secure judicial  determination and discharge of his liability.

       Article II--Definitions.

     For the purpose of this compact the following definitions shall apply:

    (a) A State shall mean (1) a State of the United States or any territory or  possession of the United States and the District of Columbia acting under Article 1, section 10, clause 3, of the Constitution of the United States in entering this compact with an American or a foreign jurisdiction, or (2) a State of the community of nations and any component governmental unit of such a  State which under the laws thereof may validly become party to this compact.

    (b) A person shall include any entity capable of suing or being sued in the  State in which the interpleader is pending.

    (c) Interpleader shall mean a judicial procedure by which 2 or more persons  who have adverse claims against a third person may be required to litigate  these claims in 1 proceeding.

       Article III--Service of Process.

     (a) Service of process sufficient to acquire personal jurisdiction may be made within a State party to this compact, by a person who institutes an interpleader proceeding or interpleader part of a proceeding in another State, party to this compact, provided that such service shall fulfill the requirements for service of process of the State in which the service is made and provided further that such service shall meet the minimum standards for service of the jurisdiction where the proceeding is pending.

    (b) No such service of process shall be valid unless either:  (1) the subject matter of the proceeding is specific real property or tangible personal  property situated within the State in which the proceeding is pending;  or (2)  1 or more of the claimants shall be either a permanent resident or domiciliary  of the State in which the proceeding is pending; or (3) a significant portion  of the transaction out of which the proceeding shall have arisen shall have  taken place in the State in which the proceeding is pending;  or (4) 1 of the  claimants shall have initiated the action.

       Article IV--Scope of Interpleader Unaffected.

     Nothing in this compact shall be construed to change any requirement or limitation on the scope of interpleader of the State in which the interpleader proceeding is pending except in relation to acquisition of personal jurisdiction.

       Article V--Finality of Judgment.

     No judgment obtained against any person in any proceeding to which he had become a party by reason of service of process effected pursuant to the provisions of this compact shall be subject to attack on the ground that the adjudicating court did not have personal jurisdiction over such person.

       Article VI--Enactment.

     (a) This compact shall enter into force and effect as to a State 1 year from  the date it has taken whatever action may be necessary pursuant to its required  processes to make this compact part of the laws of such State and the  appropriate authority of such State shall have deposited a duly authenticated  copy of its statute, proclamation, order, or similar official pronouncement  having the force of law and embodying this compact as law with the appropriate  officer or agency of each of the States party thereto. In the statute,  proclamation, order or similar act by which a State adopts this compact, it  shall specify the officer or agency with whom the documents referred to in this  article shall be deposited.

    (b) Unless the statute, proclamation, order, or similar act by which a State  adopts this compact shall specify otherwise, and name the States with which the  State intends to compact, such adoption shall apply to all other States then  party to or who may subsequently become party to this compact. In the event  that a State shall enter this compact with some States but not with others, the  deposit of documents required by paragraph (a) of this article shall be  effected only with those States to which the adopting State specifies an  intention to be bound.

       Article VII--Withdrawal.

     (a) This compact shall continue in force and remain binding on a party State  until such State shall withdraw therefrom.  To be valid and effective, any  withdrawal must be preceded by a formal notice in writing of 1 year from the  appropriate authority of that State.  Such notice shall be communicated to the  same officer or agency in each party State with which the notice of adoption  was deposited pursuant to article 6 of this compact. In the event that a State  wishes to withdraw with respect to 1 or more States, but wishes to remain a  party to this compact with other States party thereto, its notice of withdrawal  shall be communicated only to those States with respect to which withdrawal is  contemplated.

    (b) Withdrawal shall not be effective as to service of process accomplished  pursuant to this compact prior to the actual date of withdrawal.

    (c) Any State receiving a notice of adoption from another State may by action of its executive head within a year from the receipt of such notice in the manner provided for withdrawal in paragraph (a) of this article specify its  intention not to be bound to the State depositing such notice and such adoption  thereupon shall not be binding upon the State so acting.

       Article VIII--Severability and Construction.

     The provisions of this compact shall be severable and if any phrase, clause,  sentence or provision of this compact is declared to be contrary to the  constitution of any participating State, or in the case of a component governmental unit, to the constitution of the State of which it is a part, or the applicability thereof to any government, agency, person, or circumstance is  held invalid, the validity of the remainder of this compact and the applicability thereof to any government, agency, person or circumstance shall not be affected thereby;  provided that if this compact shall be held invalid or contrary to the constitution of any government participating therein the compact shall remain in full force and effect as to the remaining governments and in full force and effect as to the government affected to all severable matters.  It is the intent that the provisions of this compact shall be reasonably and liberally construed.

     L.1957, c. 97, p. 187, s. 1, eff. June 21, 1957.

2A:41A-2.  Receipt of documents by Secretary of State;  duties
    The Secretary of State is hereby designated as the officer to receive all documents deposited pursuant to articles 6 and 7 of the interpleader compact. The Secretary of State is also directed hereby to act as the repository for all such documents and to keep and make available upon request a complete list of the States with which this State is party to the interpleader compact, together with such other information as may be in his possession concerning the  status of such compact in respect to enactment and withdrawals therefrom.

     L.1957, c. 97, p. 192, s. 2.

2A:41A-3.  Executive head defined;  duties of governor on receipt of notice  of adoption from another state
    As used in paragraph (c) of article 7 of the interpleader compact, the phrase  "executive head"  shall mean the Governor of this State.  In the event that the Governor shall take any action pursuant to paragraph (c) of article 7 of such interpleader compact, he shall promptly notify the Secretary of State and shall deposit with him copies of any and all official communications and documents relating to such action.  The Governor shall take appropriate action pursuant to paragraph (c) of article 7 of the interpleader compact so as not to  become party thereto with any State not recognized by the United States of America or with any State the features of whose legal system make the equitable  operation of said compact impractical.

     L.1957, c. 97, p. 192, s. 3.

2A:42-1.  Landlord's lien for rent;  amount;  taking goods or chattels to satisfy
    No goods or chattels whatsoever, in or upon any real property leased for any  term of life or lives, year or years, at will or otherwise, shall be liable to  be taken, by virtue of any execution, attachment or other process, unless the  party suing out the same shall, before the removal of such goods or chattels  from the premises by virtue of such process, pay to the landlord of such  premises all rent, not exceeding 1 year's rent, due for such premises at the  time of the taking of such goods or chattels by virtue of such process, or  which shall have accrued up to the day of the removal of the goods and chattels  from the premises.  If by the terms of the tenancy, the day of payment of the  rent shall not have arrived, a rebate of interest shall be made on the sum not  payable.

    If the arrears of rent shall exceed 1 year's rent, the party at whose action  such process is sued out may, upon paying the landlord 1 year's rent, proceed  to execute his process.

    The sheriff or other officer shall levy and pay to the plaintiff, as well the money so paid for rent as the money to be made by virtue of such process.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:42-2.  Levy subject to landlord's lien;  time of sale;  notice
    If any goods or chattels, in or upon any real property as provided by section 2A:42-1 of this title, shall be taken by virtue of any execution, attachment or other process and removed from the premises, the same shall not be sold by the sheriff or other officer so taking and removing them until 10 days after such removal, and not then unless the party at whose action such goods or chattels are so taken shall, before the sale thereof, pay to the landlord of such premises, such sum as he may be entitled to receive for rent under the provisions of said section 2A:42-1, provided the landlord shall, before the expiration of the 10 days above-mentioned, give notice to the sheriff or other officer holding such process of the amount of rent in arrear, and claim the same.  Such notice may be served by delivering the same to the sheriff or other officer, or by leaving a copy thereof at his usual place of abode.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:42-3.  Goods and chattels removed openly and in daytime;  notice to defendant
    No such goods and chattels shall be removed from the leased premises by the  sheriff or other officer, except openly and in the daytime, and not then unless  such officer shall, at the time of such removal, give notice thereof to the  defendant, or, in his absence, to some person of his family residing on such  premises, of such removal.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:42-4.  Undertenant's liability for rent
    When premises shall be underlet by any tenant, the undertenant shall be liable to the lessor or landlord for the rent which shall accrue from and after  notice in writing served for that purpose upon the undertenant, or which shall  be unpaid by the undertenant at the time of such notice, and the lessor or  landlord shall have all the remedy for the recovery of the same by distress;   but the rent to be paid by such undertenant shall in no case exceed the amount  agreed to be paid by the first tenant.  If only a part of the premises shall be  underlet, payment shall be required only for the part underlet, at a rate  proportioned to the rent agreed to be paid by the first tenant or lessee.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:42-5.  Holding over by tenant after giving notice of quitting; double rent recoverable
    If a tenant of real estate shall give notice of his intention to quit the premises by him held at a time specified in such notice, and shall not deliver up the possession of such real estate at the time specified in the notice, such  tenant, his executors or administrators, shall, from such time, pay to his  landlord or lessor, his heirs or assigns, double the rent which he should otherwise have paid, to be levied, sued for and recovered at the same times and  in the same manner as the single rent before the giving of such notice could be  levied, sued for and recovered.  Such double rent shall continue to be paid  during all the time such tenant shall continue in possession after the giving  of such notice.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:42-6.  Willful holding over by tenant after expiration of term; notice to deliver possession;  penalty
    When a tenant for any term or any other person coming into possession of any  real estate by, from or under, or by collusion with such tenant, willfully  holds over any such real estate after the determination of such term and after  demand made and notice in writing for delivering the possession thereof, given  by his landlord or lessor, or by the person to whom the remainder or reversion  of such real estate shall belong, the person so holding over shall, for and  during the time he so holds over or keeps the person entitled out of possession  of such real estate pay to the person so kept out of possession, his executors,  administrators or assigns, at the rate of double the yearly value of the real  estate so detained, for so long a time as the same is detained.  Such amount  shall be recoverable by an action in any court of competent jurisdiction.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:42-6.1.  Grace period for payment of rent
	1.	A person to whom rent is due and payable on the first of the month upon a lease or other agreement shall allow a period of five business days grace in which the rent due shall be paid.  No delinquency or other late charge shall be made which includes the grace period of five business days.

	As used in this section, "business day" means any day other than a Saturday, Sunday or State or federal holiday.

	L.1976,c.100,s.1; amended 2001, c.142, s.1.

2A:42-6.2.  Violations;  disorderly persons
    Any person violating the provisions of this act shall be a disorderly person.

     L.1976, c. 100, s. 2, eff. Oct. 7, 1976.

2A:42-6.3.  Applicability of act
	3.	The provisions of this act shall only be applicable to premises rented or leased by senior citizens receiving Social Security Old Age Pensions, Railroad Retirement Pensions or other governmental pensions in lieu of Social Security Old Age Pensions, and by recipients of Social Security Disability Benefits, Supplemental Security Income or benefits under Work First New Jersey.

	L.1976,c.100,s.3; amended 2001, c.142, s.2.

2A:42-7.  Action for possession for nonpayment of rent;  service of summons
    A landlord or lessor to whom 1 year's rent in arrear is due, and who shall have the right to re-enter the demised premises for nonpayment thereof, may without a formal demand or re-entry, institute an action for the possession of such premises.  If the summons in the action cannot be served in the usual manner, the landlord or lessor may affix the same upon the demised premises in a conspicuous place thereon, which affixing shall be deemed legal service thereof.  The service or affixing shall take the place of a demand and re-entry.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:42-8.  Judgment and execution bar to relief, except appeal
    A lessee or other person claiming or deriving title under a lease who suffers judgment in said action for possession and execution to be executed thereon, without paying the rent and arrears, together with costs and without filing any complaint for equitable relief within 6 months after the execution is executed, shall be barred and foreclosed from all relief or remedy other than by appeal from the judgment, and the landlord or lessor shall, from thenceforth hold the demised premises discharged from the lease.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:42-9.  Dismissal on payment of rent and costs;  resumption of lease
    If the tenant or his assignee shall at any time before the trial in the action for possession of the demised premises, pay or tender to the lessor or landlord, his executor, administrator or attorney, or pay into the court where the action for possession of the demised premises shall be pending, all the rents and arrears, together with the costs, all further proceedings in the action shall be dismissed.  If the lessee, his executors, administrators or assigns, shall be granted equitable relief, he shall have, hold and enjoy the demised lands, according to the lease thereof made, without a new lease being made to him, provided the court shall so adjudge.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:42-10.  Rights of mortgagee;  payment of rent and costs
    Nothing contained in sections 2A:42-7 and 2A:42-8 of this title shall extend  to bar the right of a mortgagee of such lease, or any part thereof, who shall  not be in possession, if he shall, within 6 months after judgment is obtained  and execution executed, pay all rent in arrear, costs and damages sustained by  the lessor, or person entitled to the remainder or reversion and perform the  covenants and agreements which on the part and behalf of the first lessee  should be performed.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:42-10.1.  Warrant or writ for removal;  writ of possession; issuance; stays
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, in any action brought by a landlord against a tenant to recover possession of premises or unit used for dwelling purposes, to which this act is applicable, whether by summary dispossess proceedings, civil action for the possession of land, or otherwise, the judge of the court having jurisdiction shall use sound discretion in the issuance of a warrant or writ for removal or writ of possession, and if it shall appear that by the issuance of the warrant or writ the tenant will suffer  hardship because of the unavailability of other dwelling accommodations the  judge may stay the issuance of the warrant or writ and cause the same to issue  at such time as he shall deem proper under the circumstances, but in no case  shall such judge stay the issuance of any such warrant or writ for possession  for a longer period than 6 months after the date of entry of the judgment of  possession;  provided, however, that in no case shall the issuance of the  warrant or writ be stayed or the stay thereof be longer continued, as the case  may be, if the tenant should (a) fail to pay to the landlord all arrears in  rent and the amount that would have been payable as rent if the tenancy had  continued, together with the accrued costs of the action;  or (b) during the  stay, fail to continue to pay to the landlord the amount of rent that would be  due if the tenancy had continued; or (c) during the stay, become so disorderly  as to destroy the peace and quiet of the other tenants living in the same  building or in the neighborhood;  or (d) during the stay, willfully destroy,  damage or injure the premises.

     L.1956, c. 81, p. 168, s. 1.

2A:42-10.2.  Rent payments not to create new tenancy
    In no event shall any payment made by the tenant to the landlord for continued occupancy of any premises or unit, as provided in section 1 of this act, be deemed to create a new tenancy.

     L.1956, c. 81, p. 169, s. 2.

2A:42-10.3.  Applicability
    This act shall be applicable only to those premises or units which on June 30, 1956, shall be subject to rent controls pursuant to the State Rent Control Act of 1953, as amended and supplemented, and municipal ordinances enacted thereunder and to any action or proceeding by a landlord against a tenant to recover possession of any such premises or unit.

     L.1956, c. 81, p. 169, s. 3.

2A:42-10.4.  Repealer
     "An act concerning the issuance of warrants for removal and writs of possession in actions to recover possession of premises used for dwelling purposes,"  approved April 11, 1949, is repealed.

     L.1956, c. 81, p. 170, s. 4.

2A:42-10.5.  Effective date
    This act shall take effect June 30, 1956.

     L.1956, c. 81, p. 170, s. 5.  Amended by L.1958, c. 90, p. 534, s. 1; L.1959,  c. 27, p. 118, s. 1, eff. May 11, 1959.

2A:42-10.6.  Judge to use sound discretion in issuing warrants or writs for removal or writs of possession; stay of issuance; limitation  
     1.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, in any action brought by a landlord against a tenant to recover possession of premises or unit used for dwelling purposes, to which this act is applicable, whether by summary dispossess proceedings, civil action for the possession of land, or otherwise, the judge of the court having jurisdiction shall use sound discretion in the issuance of a warrant or writ for removal or writ of possession, and if it shall appear that by the issuance of the warrant or writ the tenant will suffer hardship because of the unavailability of other dwelling accommodations the judge may stay the issuance of the warrant or writ and cause the same to issue at such time as he shall deem proper under the circumstances, but in no case shall such judge stay the issuance of any such warrant or writ for possession for a longer period than 6 months after the date of entry of the judgment of possession; provided, however, that in no case shall the issuance of the warrant or writ be stayed or the stay thereof be longer continued, as the case may be, if the tenant should (a) fail to pay to the landlord all arrears in rent and the amount that would have been payable as rent if the tenancy had continued, together with the accrued costs of the action; or (b) during the stay, fail to continue to pay to the landlord the amount of rent that would be due if the tenancy had continued; or (c) during the stay, become so disorderly as to destroy the peace and quiet of the other tenants living in the same building or in the neighborhood; or (d) during the stay, willfully destroy, damage or injure the premises.  

    L.1957,c.110,s.1.  

2A:42-10.7.  Rent payments not to create new tenancy
    In no event shall any payment made by the tenant to the landlord for continued occupancy of any premises or unit, as provided in section 1 of this act, be deemed to create a new tenancy.

     L.1957, c. 110, p. 215, s. 2.

2A:42-10.8.  Applicability
    This act shall apply to all actions and proceedings by a landlord against a  tenant to recover possession of premises used for dwelling purposes for which  warrants or writs of removal shall not have been satisfied, but this act shall  not be operative as to any premises under rent control.

     L.1957, c. 110, p. 215, s. 3.

2A:42-10.9.  Effective date
    This act shall take effect immediately.

     L.1957, c. 110, p. 215, s. 4.  Amended by L.1958, c. 90, p. 534, s. 2; L.1959, c. 27, p. 118, s. 2, eff. May 11, 1959.

2A:42-10.10.  Reprisal as unlawful grounds for civil action for re-entry; action for damages or other appropriate relief by tenant
    No landlord of premises or units to which this act is applicable shall serve  a notice to quit upon any tenant or institute any action against a tenant to  recover possession of premises, whether by summary dispossess proceedings,  civil action for the possession of land, or otherwise:

    a.  As a reprisal for the tenant's efforts to secure or enforce any rights under the lease or contract, or under the laws of the State of New Jersey or its governmental subdivisions, or of the United States;  or

    b.  As a reprisal for the tenant's good faith complaint to a governmental authority of the landlord's alleged violation of any health or safety law, regulation, code or ordinance, or State law or regulation which has as its objective the regulation of premises used for dwelling purposes; or

    c.  As a reprisal for the tenant's being an organizer of, a member of, or involved in any activities of, any lawful organization;  or

    d.  On account of the tenant's failure or refusal to comply with the terms of the tenancy as altered by the landlord, if the landlord shall have altered substantially the terms of the tenancy as a reprisal for any actions of the tenant set forth in subsection a, b, and c of section 1 of this act. Substantial alteration shall include the refusal to renew a lease or to continue a tenancy of the tenant without cause.

    Under subsection b of this section the tenant shall originally bring his good faith complaint to the attention of the landlord or his agent and give the  landlord a reasonable time to correct the violation before complaining to a  governmental authority.

    A landlord shall be subject to a civil action by the tenant for damages and  other appropriate relief, including injunctive and other equitable remedies, as  may be determined by a court of competent jurisdiction in every case in which  the landlord has violated the provisions of this section.

     L.1970, c. 210, s. 1, eff. Sept. 30, 1970.

2A:42-10.11.  Grounds for judgment for tenant in unlawful action for possession by landlord
    In any action brought by a landlord against a tenant to recover possession of premises or units to which this act is applicable, whether by summary dispossess proceedings, civil action for the possession of land, or otherwise, judgment shall be entered for the tenant if the tenant shall establish that the  notice to quit, if any, or the action to recover possession was intended for  any of the reasons set forth in subsections a, b, c, or d of section 1 of this  act.

     L.1970, c. 210, s. 2, eff. Sept. 30, 1970.

2A:42-10.12.  Rebuttable presumption;  notice to quit or alteration of tenancy as reprisal
    In any action or proceeding instituted by or against a tenant, the receipt by the tenant of a notice to quit or any substantial alteration of the terms of  the tenancy without cause after:

    a.  The tenant attempts to secure or enforce any rights under the lease or contract, or under the laws of the State of New Jersey, or its governmental subdivisions, or of the United States;  or

    b.  The tenant, having brought a good faith complaint to the attention of the landlord and having given him a reasonable time to correct the alleged violation, complains to a governmental authority with a report of the landlord's alleged violation of any health or safety law, regulation, code or ordinance;  or

    c.  The tenant organizes, becomes a member of, or becomes involved in any activities of, any lawful organization;  or

    d.  Judgment under section 2 of this act is entered for the tenant in a previous action for recovery of premises between the parties;  shall create a rebuttable presumption that such notice or alteration is a reprisal against the  tenant for making such attempt, report, complaint, or for being an organizer  of, a member of, or involved in any activities of, any lawful organization.  No  reprisal shall be presumed under this section based upon the failure of a  landlord to renew a lease or tenancy when so requested by a tenant if such  request is made sooner than 90 days before the expiration date of the lease or  tenancy, or the renewal date set forth in the lease agreement, whichever later  occurs.

     L.1970, c. 210, s. 3, eff. Sept. 30, 1970.

2A:42-10.13.  Application of act to rental premises for dwelling purposes
    This act shall apply to all rental premises or units used for dwelling purposes except owner-occupied premises with not more than two rental units. Mobile home spaces and mobile homes shall constitute rental premises under this act.

     L.1970, c. 210, s. 4, eff. Sept. 30, 1970.  Amended by L.1975, c. 124, s. 1, eff. June 5, 1975.

2A:42-10.14.  Severability
    If any provision of this act or the application thereof to any person or circumstances or the exercise of any power or authority thereunder is held invalid or contrary to law, such holding shall not affect other provisions or applications of the act which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or applications or affect other exercises of power or authority under said provisions not contrary to law, and to this end the provisions of this act are declared to be severable.

     L.1970, c. 210, s. 6, eff. Sept. 30, 1970.

2A:42-10.15.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as  "The Fair Eviction Notice Act."

     L.1974, c. 47, s. 1.

2A:42-10.16  Warrant for possession; execution.

	2.	In any proceeding for the summary dispossession of a tenant, warrant for possession issued by a court of appropriate jurisdiction:  

	a.	Shall include a notice to the tenant of any right to apply to the court for a stay of execution of the warrant, together with a notice advising that the tenant may be eligible for temporary housing assistance or other social services and that the tenant should contact the appropriate county welfare agency, at the address and telephone number given in the notice, to determine eligibility;  

	b.	Shall be executed not earlier than the third day following the day of personal service upon the tenant by the appropriate court officer. In calculating the number of days hereby required, Saturday, Sunday and court holidays shall be excluded;  

	c.	Shall be executed during the hours of 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., unless the court, for good cause shown, otherwise provides in its judgment for possession; 

	d.	Shall state the earliest date and time that the warrant may be executed, and also shall state that the warrant shall only be executed by an officer of the court; and

	e.	Shall include a notice that it is illegal as a disorderly person's offense for a landlord to padlock or otherwise block entry to a rental premises while a tenant is still in possession of the premises unless such action is done in accordance with a distraint action involving a non-residential premises as permitted by law; shall state that removal of a tenant's belongings from a premises by a landlord after the eviction of a tenant may be done only in accordance with the provisions of P.L.1999, c.340 (C.2A:18-72 et al.); shall contain a concise summary of the provisions of this section and section 3 of P.L.2005, c.219 (C.2C:33-11.1) with special emphasis placed on the duties and obligations of law enforcement officers under those sections of law; and shall advise the occupant of the right to file a court proceeding pursuant to N.J.S.2A:39-1 et seq.

	Whenever a written notice, in accordance with the provisions of subsection a. of this section, is given to the tenant by the court, this shall constitute personal service in accordance with the provisions of subsection b. of this section. 

	At the time a warrant for possession is lawfully executed, the court officer involved shall prepare a statement of "Execution of Warrant for Possession" and shall immediately deliver the statement to the landlord or the landlord's representative by personal service.  The court officer shall deliver a copy of the statement to the tenant by personal service, however, if it cannot be personally served, it may be delivered in the manner provided under N.J.S.2A:18-54.  The statement shall also be affixed to the door to the unit to which the warrant applies.  The statement shall identify the warrant, the date of issuance of the warrant, the court and judge who issued the warrant, the date and time of execution of the warrant, and the name, signature and position of the person executing the warrant.

	The Superior Court, Law Division, Special Civil Part shall retain jurisdiction for a period of 10 days subsequent to the actual execution of the warrant for possession for the purpose of hearing applications by the tenant for lawful relief.  

	L.1974,c.47,s.2; amended 1984, c.180, s.11; 1991, c.91, s.87; 2005,c.319,s.2.

2A:42-10.16a  Three-day period for tenant to submit rent payment.
	 1. a. In an eviction action for nonpayment of rent, pursuant to subsection a. of section 2 of P.L.1974, c.49 (C.2A:18-61.1), the court shall provide a period of three business days after the date on which a warrant for removal is posted to the unit or a lockout is executed due to nonpayment of rent, for the tenant to submit a rent payment.  A late fee shall not be imposed in excess of the amount set forth in the application for a warrant for removal if all rent due and owing is paid within the three business day period established by this subsection.
 
	 b. (1) A landlord shall accept all payments of rent made by a tenant within the three business day period established by subsection a. of this section and upon payment of the rent due and owing, within two business days thereafter, the landlord shall provide the court with written notice that the rent due and owing was paid. A copy of this notice shall be provided to the tenant.
 
	(2)	Upon receipt of the written notice as provided in this subsection, the court shall dismiss with prejudice the action for nonpayment of rent.
 
	(3)	If the tenant makes a timely payment within the three business day period established by subsection a. of this section, and the landlord fails to provide the court with written notice of the rent payment, the tenant may file a motion to dismiss with prejudice the action for nonpayment of rent upon notice to the landlord.
 
	L.2019, c.316, s.1.

2A:42-10.17.  Warrant for removal;  disorderly or destructive residential seasonal tenant
    The provisions of any other law to the contrary notwithstanding, in any action alleging habitual violation of section 2b. of P.L.1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.1b.), or violation of section 2c. of P.L.1974, c. 49 (C. 2A:18-61.1c.), brought by a landlord against a tenant to recover possession of any furnished unit leased or rented for seasonal use in any premises of five or  fewer units, the court having jurisdiction shall issue a warrant for removal  within 2 days from judgment for possession.  Such a warrant for removal may be  stayed only upon consent by the landlord.  For the purposes of this act   "seasonal use"  means use for a term of not more than 125 consecutive days for  residential purposes by a person having a permanent place of residence  elsewhere.   "Seasonal use"  does not mean use as living quarters for seasonal,  temporary or migrant farm workers in connection with any work or place where  work is being performed.  The landlord shall have the burden of proving that  the use of the unit is seasonal.

     L.1979, c. 392, s. 2, eff. Feb. 6, 1980.

2A:42-11.  Action for rent
    A person to whom rent is due upon a lease or other agreement may bring an action for such rent whether the term of the letting be for a definite term or for life or otherwise.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:42-12.  Death of tenant for life;  remedy for recovery of rent
    When a tenant for life shall die before or on the day on which rent was reserved or made payable, upon a lease of real estate which determined on the death of the tenant for life, the executors or administrators of the tenant for  life may in an action recover from the undertenant of the real estate, the  whole, if the tenant for life dies on the day the same was made payable, or if  before that day, then a proportion thereof, according to the time the life  tenant lived in which the rent was growing due, making all just allowances or a  proportional part thereof, respectively.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:42-13.  Action for use and occupation;  parol agreement for rent
    The landlord, his heirs or assigns, may, where the agreement is not in writing, recover a reasonable satisfaction for the real estate, held or occupied by the defendant, in an action for the use and occupation of what was so held or enjoyed.

    No such action shall be defeated by a parol lease or agreement whereon a certain rent was reserved, but no damages may be recovered in excess of the amount of the rent so reserved.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:42-74.  Legislative findings
    The Legislature finds:

    (a) Many citizens of the State of New Jersey are required to reside in multiple dwelling units which fail to meet minimum standards of safety and sanitation and are compelled to pay rents disproportionate to the value of the facilities and services received;

    (b) It is essential to the health, safety and general welfare of the people  of the State that owners of substandard multiple dwelling units be encouraged  to provide safe and sanitary housing accommodations for the public to whom such  accommodations are offered;

    (c) It is necessary, in order to insure the improvement of substandard multiple dwelling units, to authorize the governing bodies of municipalities to  enact and impose rent controls on substandard multiple dwelling units until  such dwelling units satisfy minimum standards of safety and sanitation.

     L.1966, c. 168, s. 1, eff. June 18, 1966.

2A:42-75.  Definitions
    The following terms whenever used or referred to in this act shall have the  following respective meanings for the purposes of this act, unless a different  meaning clearly appears from the context.

    (a)  "Public officer"  shall mean the officer, officers, board or body who is or are authorized by ordinances adopted hereunder to exercise the powers prescribed by such ordinances and by this act.

    (b)  "Owner"  shall mean the holder or holders of the title in fee simple.

     (c)  "Parties in interest"  shall mean all individuals, associations and corporations who have interests of record in a multiple dwelling, and who are in actual possession thereof and any person authorized to receive rents payable  for housing space in a multiple dwelling.

    (d)  "Multiple dwelling"  means and includes any building or structure and land appurtenant thereto containing 3 or more apartments or rented or offered for rent to 3 or more tenants or family units.

    (e)  "Housing space"  means that portion of a multiple dwelling rented or offered for rent for living or dwelling purposes in which cooking equipment is supplied, and includes all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities, and improvements connected with the use or occupancy of such portion of the property.  The term shall not mean or include public housing or dwelling space in any hotel, motel or established guest house, commonly regarded as a hotel, motel or established guest house, as the case may  be, in the community in which it is located.

    (f)  "Bureau of Housing"  means the Bureau of Housing in the State Department of Conservation and Economic Development.

    (g)  "Substandard multiple dwelling"  means any multiple dwelling determined  to be substandard by the public officer.

     L.1966, c. 168, s. 2.

2A:42-76.  Promulgation of state housing code;  scope of standards
    Within 60 days following the effective date of this act the Bureau of Housing shall promulgate a State Housing Code which shall be effective in any municipality adopting an ordinance under this act.  Said code shall set standards consistent with minimum health and safety requirements and covering, but not limited to, matters such as water supply, plumbing, garbage storage, lighting, ventilation, heating, egress, maintenance and use and occupancy.

     L.1966, c. 168, s. 3.

2A:42-77.  Authority to adopt ordinance regulating rents and possession of space in substandard multiple dwellings;  provisions
    Whenever the governing body of a municipality finds that the health and safety of residents of that municipality are impaired or threatened by the existence of substandard multiple dwellings, it may adopt an ordinance setting forth such a finding and providing for the regulation of rents and the possession of rental space in substandard multiple dwellings.  Such ordinance shall include in its provisions that:

    (a) A public officer be designated or appointed to exercise the powers prescribed by the ordinance.

    (b) Whenever it appears by preliminary investigation that a multiple dwelling is substandard the public officer shall cause a complaint to be served  upon the owner of and parties in interest in such multiple dwelling, stating  the reasons why said multiple dwelling is deemed to be substandard and setting  a time and place for hearing before the public officer.  The owners and parties  in interest shall be given the right to file an answer and to appear and give  testimony.  The rules of evidence shall not be controlling in hearings before  the public officer.

    (c) If, after notice and hearing, the public officer determines the multiple  dwelling under consideration is substandard he shall state his findings in  writing and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner or other person  entitled to receive said rents an order requiring that such repairs,  alterations or improvements necessary to bring such property up to minimum  standards be made within a reasonable time.

    (d) Failure to complete such repairs, alterations or improvements within a reasonable time as fixed by the public officer shall be cause to impose rent control on the substandard multiple dwelling.

    (e) In establishing maximum rents which may be charged for housing space in  a multiple dwelling subject to rent control, the permissible rents shall be  sufficient to provide the owner or other person entitled to receive said rents  with a fair net operating income from the multiple dwelling.  The net operating  income shall not be considered less than fair if it is 20% or more of the  annual income in the case of a multiple dwelling containing less than 5  dwelling units or is 15% or more in the case of a multiple dwelling containing  5 or more dwelling units.  In determining the fair net operating income, the  public officer shall consider the following items of expense: heating fuel,  utilities, payroll, janitorial materials, real estate taxes, insurance,  interior painting and decorating, depreciation, and repairs and replacements  and additions to furniture and furnishings which expenses shall be deducted  from the annual income derived from the multiple dwelling.  All items of  expense and the amount of annual income shall be certified by the owner or  other person entitled to receive said rents on forms provided by the public  officer.

    (f) The imposition of rent control on any substandard multiple dwelling shall not operate to impair leases existing at the time of the adoption of an ordinance under this act, but shall take effect at the expiration of the term of any such lease and shall remain in effect thereafter so long as the multiple  dwelling is subject to rent control.

    (g) It shall be unlawful for any person to demand or receive any rent in excess of the maximum rent established for housing space in multiple dwelling subject to rent control or to demand possession of the space or evict a tenant for refusal to pay rent in excess of the established maximum rent.  The owner or other person entitled to receive said rents shall not be prevented, however,  from exercising his rights to obtain possession of housing space from a tenant  as a result of the tenant's violation of law or contract and the owner or other  person entitled to receive said rents shall be provided reasonable grounds to  obtain possession of premises for his own personal use and occupancy and for  purposes of substantially altering, remodeling or demolishing the multiple  dwelling.

    (h) Whenever the public officer finds that a multiple dwelling subject to rent control is no longer substandard, he shall so inform the governing body and rent control on said multiple dwelling shall be removed.

     L.1966, c. 168, s. 4.

2A:42-78.  Registration of owners and management of multiple dwellings
    Any ordinance adopted under this act may provide for the registration of the  owners and management of every multiple dwelling in the municipality. Such  registration shall be with the clerk of the municipality upon forms prescribed  by and furnished by the municipality.  Every such registration form shall  include the name and address of the owner and the name and address of an agent  in charge of the premises residing in the municipality.

     L.1966, c. 168, s. 5.

2A:42-84.1.  Definitions 
    As used in this act: 

   a.   "Completion of construction" means issuance of a certificate of occupancy pursuant to section 15 of the "State Uniform Construction Code Act," P.L. 1975, c. 217 (C. 52:27D-133); 

   b.   "Constructed" means constructed, erected or converted but excludes rehabilitation of premises rented previously for residential purposes without an intervening use for other purposes for a period of at least two years prior to conversion.  Mere vacancy shall not be considered an intervening use for the purposes of this subsection; 

   c.   "Constructed after the effective date of this act" means constructed pursuant to a construction permit issued on or after the effective date of this act; 

   d.   "Constructed for senior citizens" means constructed under a governmental program restricting occupancy of at least 90% of the dwelling units to senior citizens and any members of their immediate households or their occupant surviving spouses, or constructed as a retirement subdivision or retirement community as defined in the "Retirement Community Full Disclosure Act," P.L. 1969, c. 215 (C. 45:22A-1 et seq.); 

   e.   "Multiple dwelling" means any building or structure and land appurtenant thereto containing four or more dwelling units, other than dwelling units constructed for occupation by senior citizens, rented or offered for rent to four or more tenants or family units; 

   f.   "Period of amortization" means the time during which the principal amount of the mortgage loan and interest thereon would be paid entirely through periodic payments, whether or not the term of the mortgage loan is for a shorter period concluding with a balloon payment; and 

   g.   "Senior citizens" means persons 62 years of age or older. 

   L. 1987, c. 153, s. 1. 

2A:42-84.2.  Applicability of municipal rent control ordinances
	2.  a.  In any municipality which has enacted or which hereafter enacts a rent control or rent leveling ordinance, other than under the authority of P.L.1966, c.168 (C.2A:42-74 et seq.), those provisions of the ordinance which limit the periodic or regular increases in base rentals of dwelling units shall not apply to multiple dwellings constructed after the effective date of this act, for a period of time not to exceed the period of amortization of any initial mortgage loan obtained for the multiple dwelling, or for 30 years following completion of construction, whichever is less.

	b.	In the event that there is no initial mortgage financing, the period of exemption from a rent control or rent leveling ordinance shall be 30 years from the completion of construction.

	L.1987,c.153,s.2; amended 1999, c.291, s.1.

2A:42-84.3.  Notice of exemption to tenants 
    The owner of any multiple dwelling exempted from a rent control or rent leveling ordinance pursuant to this act, shall, prior to entering into any lease with a person for tenancy of any premises located in the multiple dwelling, furnish the prospective tenant with a written statement that the multiple dwelling in which the premises is located is exempt from rent control or rent leveling for such time as may remain in the exemption period.  Each lease offered to a prospective tenant for any dwelling unit therein during the period the multiple dwelling is so exempted shall contain a provision notifying the tenant of the exemption. 

   L. 1987, c. 153, s. 3. 

2A:42-84.4.  Filing of owner's claim of exemption 
    The owner of any multiple dwelling claiming an exemption from a rent control or rent leveling ordinance pursuant to this act shall file with the municipal construction official, at least 30 days prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the newly constructed multiple dwelling, a written statement of the owner's claim of exemption from an ordinance under this act, including therein a statement of the date upon which the exemption period so claimed shall commence, such information as may be necessary to effectively locate and identify the multiple dwelling for which the exemption is claimed, and a statement of the number of rental dwelling units in the multiple dwelling for which the exemption is claimed.  The owner shall, at least 30 days prior to the date of the termination of the exemption period afforded pursuant to this act, file with the municipal construction official a notice of the date of termination of the exemption period for the affected multiple dwelling. 

   L. 1987, c. 153, s. 4. 

2A:42-84.5.  Exemptions from rent control, leveling, stabilization; legislative intent
	5.  a.  It is the intent of P.L.1987, c.153 (C.2A:42-84.1 et seq.), that the exemption from rent control or rent leveling ordinances afforded under P.L.1987, c.153 (C.2A:42-84.1 et seq.) shall apply to any form of rent control, rent leveling or rent stabilization, whether adopted now or in the future, and by whatever name or title adopted, which would limit in any manner the periodic or regular increases in base rentals of dwelling units of multiple dwellings constructed after the effective date of P.L.1987, c.153 (C.2A:42-84.1 et seq.).  No municipality, county or other political subdivision of the State, or agency or instrumentality thereof, shall adopt any ordinance, resolution, or rule or regulation, or take any other action, to limit, diminish, alter or impair any exemption afforded pursuant to P.L.1987, c.153 (C.2A:42-84.1 et seq.).

	b.	The Legislature deems it to be necessary for the public welfare to increase the supply of newly constructed rental housing to meet the need for such housing in New Jersey.  In an effort to promote this new construction, the Legislature enacted P.L.1987, c.153 (C.2A:42-84.1 et seq.), the purpose of which was to exempt new construction of rental multiple dwelling units from municipal rent control so that the municipal rent control or rent leveling ordinances would not deter the new construction.  Although this legislation was initially made effective only for a temporary five-year period, it was expanded for a second five-year period by P.L.1992, c.206 until 1997, and then in that year made permanent by P.L.1997, c.56.  At the time P.L.1987, c.153 (C.2A:42-84.1 et seq.) was introduced, the uniform method of financing construction of new apartments was through project-based mortgage loans.  There was little, if any, new construction financed in any other way.  Recently, however, there has been increased utilization of Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) and other public companies which could potentially be an important new source of construction of rental housing in New Jersey.  These entities generally do not utilize project-based mortgages but instead obtain comprehensive financing not secured by individual mortgages as a more efficient and lower cost means of financing new construction.  There has been confusion as to whether new construction undertaken by REITs and other such entities would be exempted from municipal rent control under the terms of section 2 of P.L.1987, c.153 (C.2A:42-84.2) when there is no initial mortgage financing.  To eliminate any confusion and to facilitate the construction of new rental units for which there is no initial mortgage financing, section 1 of P.L.1999, c.291 amends section 2 of P.L.1987, c.153 (C.2A:42-84.2) to add a subsection b. to that section in order to clarify the Legislature's intent of providing an exemption from municipal rent control ordinances, except those adopted under the authority of P.L.1966, c.168 (C.2A:42-74 et seq.), by specifying that the period of time for exemption from rent control in such instances shall be 30 years following completion of construction.

	L.1987,c.153,s.5; amended 1999, c.291, s.2.

2A:42-84.6.  Construction of multiple dwellings encouraged 
    It is the intent of this act to establish an experimental program whereby the construction of multiple dwellings in this State shall be encouraged, and the marketability of those multiple dwellings shall be maintained, to the greatest extent economically possible, through the exemption by law of newly constructed multiple dwellings from rent control, rent leveling and rent stabilization ordinances.  The Legislature, therefore, declares it to be public policy of this State that, within the limitations imposed by this act, the exemptions granted under this act shall not be limited, diminished, altered, or impaired during the period of exemption afforded, in order to maintain in this respect a predictable environment within which the financing, construction and marketing of new multiple dwellings can occur, and to permit the Legislature to evaluate the results of the experimental program after a specified period of time during which the program shall have been given a fair opportunity for success, and during which the coherence of the statutory scheme establishing the program has been preserved. 

   L. 1987, c. 153, s. 6. 

2A:42-85.    Findings 
    The Legislature finds: 

   a.   Many citizens of the State of New Jersey are required to reside in dwelling units which fail to meet minimum standards of safety and sanitation; 

   b.   It is essential to the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the State that owners of substandard dwelling units be encouraged to provide safe and sanitary housing accommodations for the public to whom such accommodations are offered; 

   c.   It is necessary, in order to insure the improvement of substandard dwelling units, to authorize the tenants dwelling therein to deposit their rents with a court appointed administrator until such dwelling units satisfy minimum standards of safety and sanitation; 

   d.   It is necessary to establish an efficient procedure whereby public officers, tenants and utility companies may act to stop and prevent wrongful diversion of utility services and thereby protect both the utility companies and their customers from fraud. 

   L. 1971, c. 224, s. 1, eff. June 21, 1971.  Amended by L. 1985, c. 411, s. 1, eff. Jan. 13, 1986. 

2A:42-86.    Definitions 
    The following terms whenever used or referred to in this act shall have the following respective meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context. 

   a.   "Public officer" shall mean the officer, officers, board or body who is or are authorized by the governing body of a municipality to supervise the physical condition of dwellings within such municipality pursuant to this act.

   b.   "Owner" shall mean the holder or holders of the title in fee simple. 

   c.   "Parties in interest" shall mean all individuals, associations and corporations who have interests of record in a dwelling, and who are in actual possession thereof and any person authorized to receive rents payable for housing space in a dwelling. 

   d.   "Dwelling" means and includes all rental premises or units used for dwelling purposes except owner-occupied premises with not more than two rental units. 

   e.   "Housing space" means that portion of a dwelling rented or offered for rent for living or dwelling purposes in which cooking equipment is supplied, and includes all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities, and improvements connected with the use or occupancy of such portion of the property.  The term shall not mean or include public housing or dwelling space in any hotel, motel or established guest house, commonly regarded as a hotel, motel or established guest house, as the case may be, in the community in which it is located. 

   f.   (Deleted by amendment, P.L. 1985, c. 411.) 

   g.   (Deleted by amendment, P.L. 1985, c. 411.) 

   h.   "Substandard dwelling" means any dwelling determined to be substandard by the public officer. 

   i.   "State Housing Code" means the code adopted by the Department of Community Affairs pursuant to P.L. 1966, c. 168 (C. 2A:42-74 et seq.). 

   j.   "Utility company" means a public utility, as defined in R.S. 48:2-13, or a municipality, county, water district, authority or other public agency, which provides electric, gas or water utility service. 

   L. 1971, c. 224, s. 2, eff. June 21, 1971.  Amended by L. 1985, c. 411, s. 2, eff. Jan. 13, 1986. 

2A:42-87.    Deposit of rents into court 
    A proceeding by a public officer, tenant, or tenants of a dwelling for a judgment directing the deposit of rents into court and their use for the purpose of remedying conditions in substantial violation of the standards of fitness for human habitation established under the State or local housing codes or regulations or a proceeding by a public officer, a tenant whose utility service has been diverted or a utility company for a judgment directing the deposit of rents into court and their use for correcting any wrongful diversion of utility service in a dwelling may be maintained in a court of competent jurisdiction.  The place of trial of the proceeding shall be within the county in which the real property or a portion thereof from which the rents issue is situated.  In cases involving real property located in municipalities in counties of the first class that have established full-time municipal housing courts, the proceedings may be brought in the municipal housing court of the municipality in which the property is located. 

   L. 1971, c. 224, s. 3, eff. June 21, 1971.  Amended by L. 1983, c. 207, s. 3, eff. June 10, 1983; L. 1985, c. 411, s. 3, eff. Jan. 13, 1986; L. 1986, c. 125, s. 4, eff. Oct. 9, 1986. 

2A:42-88.    Grounds for action 
    a.   The public officer or any tenant occupying a dwelling may maintain a proceeding as provided in this act, upon the grounds that there exists in such dwellings or in housing space thereof a lack of heat or of running water or of light or of electricity or of adequate sewage disposal facilities, or any other condition or conditions in substantial violation of the standards of fitness for human habitation established under the State or local housing or health codes or regulations or any other condition dangerous to life, health or safety. 

   b.   A public officer, a tenant whose utility service has been diverted or a utility company providing electric, gas or water utility service to a dwelling may maintain a proceeding as provided in this act upon the grounds (1) that there exists in these dwellings or in housing space thereof a wrongful diversion of electric, gas or water utility service by the owner or owners or other party from a tenant of the dwelling without the consent of the tenant, or the use by the owner or other party in the dwelling without the tenant's consent of electric, gas or water utility service that is being charged to the tenant, and (2) that the owner has been notified by either a public officer, a tenant whose utility service has been diverted or a utility company of the wrongful diversion or unconsented use by certified mail and has failed to take necessary action to correct or eliminate the wrongful diversion or unconsented use within 30 days of receipt of such notice.  If an owner fails or refuses to accept a notice sent by certified mail, the date of receipt shall be deemed to be the third day after mailing, provided the notice was sent to the owner at an address to which the owner's utility bills or municipal tax bills are sent. 

   L. 1971, c. 224, s. 4, eff. June 21, 1971.  Amended by L. 1985, c. 411, s. 4, eff. Jan. 13, 1986. 

2A:42-89.  Institution of action;  service and notice of petition
    a.  A proceeding prescribed by this act shall be commenced by the service of  a petition and notice of a petition.  A notice of petition may be issued only  by a judge or a clerk of the court.

    b.  Notice of the proceeding shall be given to the nonpetitioning tenant occupying the dwelling by affixing a copy of the petition upon a conspicuous part of the subject dwelling.

     L.1971, c. 224, s. 5, eff. June 21, 1971.

2A:42-90.    Contents of petition 
    The petition shall: 

   a.   Set forth material facts showing that there exists in such dwelling or any housing space thereof one or more of the following: (1) a lack of heat or of running water or of light or electricity or of adequate sewage disposal facilities; (2) a wrongful diversion of electric, gas, or water utility service by the owner or other party from the tenant of the dwelling without the consent of the tenant; (3) the use by the owner or other party in the dwelling without the tenant's consent of electric, gas, or water utility service that is being charged to the tenant; (4) any other condition or conditions in substantial violation of the standards of fitness for human habitation established under the State or local housing or health codes or regulations;  or (5) any other condition dangerous to life, health or safety. 

   b.   Set forth that the facts shown in subsection a. of this section have been brought to the attention of the owner or any individual designated by him as the manager of said dwelling and that he has failed to take any action thereon within a reasonable period. 

   c.   Set forth that the petitioner is a tenant of the subject dwelling or is the public officer of the municipality in which the subject dwelling is located, or, in a case involving wrongful diversion or unconsented use of utility services, that the petitioner is a public officer, a tenant whose utility service has been wrongfully diverted or a utility company providing utility services to the dwelling. 

   d.   Set forth a brief description of the nature of the work required to remove or remedy the condition and an estimate as to the cost thereof. 

   e.   Set forth the amount of rent due from each petitioning tenant, if any, monthly. 

   f.   State the relief sought. 

   L. 1971, c. 224, s. 6, eff. June 21, 1971.  Amended by L. 1985, c. 411, s. 5, eff. Jan. 13, 1986. 

2A:42-91.  Defenses to action
    It shall be a sufficient defense to the proceeding, if the owner or any mortgagee or lienor of record establishes that:

    a.  The condition or conditions alleged in the petition did not in fact exist or that such condition or conditions have been removed or remedied; or

    b.  Such condition or conditions have been caused maliciously or by abnormal  or unusual use by a petitioning tenant or tenants or members of the family or  families of such petitioner or petitioners.

    c.  Any tenant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner or  his agent to a portion of the premises for the purpose of correcting such condition or conditions.

     L.1971, c. 224, s. 7, eff. June 21, 1971.

2A:42-92.  Judgment;  service upon nonpetitioning tenants;  deposit of rents  with clerk of court
    The court shall proceed in a summary manner and shall render a judgment either:

    a.  Dismissing the petition for failure to affirmatively establish the allegations thereof or because of the affirmative establishment by the owner or  a mortgagee or lienor of record of a defense or defenses specified in this act;   or

    b.  Directing that (1) the rents due on the date of the entry of such judgment from the petitioning tenant, if any, and the rents due on the dates of  service of the judgment on all other tenants occupying such dwelling, from such  other tenants, shall be deposited with the clerk of the court; (2) any rents  to become due in the future from such petitioner and from all other tenants  occupying such dwelling shall be deposited with such clerk as they fall due;   (3) such deposited rents shall be used, subject to the court's direction, to  the extent necessary to remedy the condition or conditions alleged in the  petition and (4) upon the completion of such work in accordance with such  judgment, any remaining surplus shall be turned over to the owner, together  with a complete accounting of the rents deposited and the costs incurred;  and  granting such other and further relief as to the court may seem just and  proper.  A certified copy of such judgment shall be served personally upon each  nonpetitioning tenant occupying such dwelling.  If personal service on any such  nonpetitioning tenant cannot be made with due diligence, service on such tenant  shall be made by affixing a certified copy of such judgment on the entrance  door of such tenant's apartment and, in addition, within 1 day after such  affixing, by sending a certified copy thereof by registered mail, return  receipt requested, to such tenant.  Any right of the owner or parties in  interest of such dwelling to collect such rent moneys from any petitioning  tenant of such dwelling on or after the date of entry of such judgment, and  from any nonpetitioning tenant of such dwelling on or after the date of service  of such judgment on such nonpetitioning tenant as herein provided, shall be void and unenforceable to the extent that such petitioning or nonpetitioning tenant, as the case may be, has deposited such moneys with the clerk of the court in accordance with the terms of such judgment, regardless of whether such  right of the owner arises from a lease, contract, agreement or understanding  heretofore or hereafter made or entered into or arises as a matter of law from  the relationship of the parties or otherwise.  Any such rent moneys received by  the owner or parties in interest shall be deposited immediately with the clerk  of the court by such owner or parties in interest.  It shall be a valid defense  in any action or proceeding against any such tenant to recover possession of real property for the nonpayment of rent or for use or occupation to prove that  the rent alleged to be unpaid was deposited with the clerk of the court in  accordance with the terms of a judgment entered under this section.

     L.1971, c. 224, s. 8, eff. June 21, 1971.

2A:42-93.  Order permitting performance of work in lieu of judgment; security;  failure to exercise due diligence;  hearing;  judgment; appointment of administrator;  powers
    a.  If, after a trial, the court shall determine that the facts alleged in the petition have been affirmatively established by the petitioner, that no defense thereto specified in this act has been affirmatively established by the  owner or a mortgagee or lienor of record, and that the facts alleged in the  petition warrant the granting of the relief sought, and if the owner or any  mortgagee or lienor of record or parties in interest in the property, shall  apply to the court to be permitted to remove or remedy the conditions specified  in such petition and shall (1) demonstrate the ability promptly to undertake  the work required;  and (2) post security for the performance thereof within  the time, and in the amount and manner deemed necessary by the court, then the  court, in lieu of rendering judgment as provided in this act, may issue an  order permitting such person to perform the work within a time fixed by the  court.

    b.  If, after the issuance of an order pursuant to subdivision a. of this section, but before the time fixed in such order for the completion of the work  prescribed therein, it shall appear to the petitioner that the person permitted  to do the same is not proceeding with due diligence, the petitioners may apply  to the court on notice to those persons who have appeared in the proceeding for  a hearing to determine whether judgment should be rendered immediately as  provided in subdivision c. of this section.

    c.  If, upon a hearing authorized in subdivision b. hereof, the court shall  determine that such owner, mortgagee, lienor or parties in interest is not  proceeding with due diligence, or upon the failure of such owner, mortgagee,  lienor or parties in interest to complete the work in accordance with the  provisions of said order, the court shall render a final judgment appointing an  administrator as authorized in this act.  Such judgment shall direct the  administrator to apply the security posted by such person to the removing or  remedying of the condition or conditions specified in the petition.  In the  event that the amount of such security should be insufficient for such purpose,  such judgment shall direct the deposit of rents with the clerk, as authorized  by this act, to the extent of such deficiency.  In the event that such security  should exceed the amount required to remove or remedy such condition or  conditions, such judgment shall direct the administrator to file with the  court, upon completion of the work prescribed therein, a full accounting of the  amount of such security and the expenditures made pursuant to such judgment,  and to turn over such surplus to the person who posted such security, together  with a copy of such accounting.

    d.  The court is authorized and empowered, in implementing a judgment rendered pursuant to this act, to appoint an administrator who may be a public officer of the municipality wherein the subject dwelling is situated, an incorporated or unincorporated association, or other responsible person or persons, except that no owner, mortgagee or lienor of the subject dwelling shall be appointed an administrator of said dwelling.

    The administrator is authorized and empowered, subject to the court's direction, to receive from the clerk such amounts of rent moneys or security deposited with said clerk as may be necessary to remove or remedy the condition  or conditions specified in the judgment.

     L.1971, c. 224, s. 9, eff. June 21, 1971.

2A:42-94.  Accounts of receipts and expenditures;  presentation or settlement;  notice
    The court shall require the keeping of written accounts itemizing the receipts and expenditures under an order issued pursuant to this act, which shall be open to inspection by the owner, any mortgagee or lienor or parties in  interest in such receipts or expenditures.  Upon motion of the court or the  administrator or of the owner, any mortgagee or lienor of record or of parties  in interest, the court may require a presentation or settlement of the accounts  with respect thereto.  Notice of a motion for presentation or settlement of  such accounts shall be served on the owner, any mortgagee or other lienor of  record who appeared in the proceeding and any parties in interest in such  receipts or expenditures.

     L.1971, c. 224, s. 10, eff. June 21, 1971.

2A:42-95.  Compensation of administrator;  bond
    The court may allow from the rent moneys or security on deposit a reasonable  amount for the services of an administrator appointed under the provisions of  this act.  The administrator so appointed shall furnish a bond, the amount and  form of which shall be approved by the court.  The cost of such bond shall be  paid from the moneys so deposited.

     L.1971, c. 224, s. 11, eff. June 21, 1971.

2A:42-96.  Waiver of provisions of act
    Any provision of a lease or other agreement whereby any provision of this act for the benefit of a tenant, resident or occupant of a dwelling is waived, shall be deemed against public policy and shall be void.

     L.1971, c. 224, s. 12, eff. June 21, 1971.

2A:42-103.   Definitions  
     As used in this act:

  

    "Continuing nuisance" means the keeping of a domesticated animal in a manner which interferes with the health, security and comfort of the other residents of a senior citizen housing project, or the keeping of domesticated animals of a number, size, breed or species inappropriate for the type or size of senior citizen housing project or a dwelling unit within that senior citizen housing project.  

    "Domesticated animal" means a dog, cat, bird, fish or other animal which does not constitute a health or safety hazard.  

    "Landlord" means, in the case of a senior citizen housing project in which dwelling units are rented or offered for rent under either a written or oral lease, the person or persons who own or purport to own the building, structure or complex of buildings or structures in which those rental dwelling units are situated.  In the case of a senior citizen housing project that is organized or operated as a planned real estate development, landlord means the governing board or body of that development.  

    "Planned real estate development" means any real property situated within the State, whether contiguous or not, which consists of, or will consist of, separately owned areas, irrespective of form, be it lots, parcels, units, or interests, and which are offered or disposed of pursuant to a common promotional plan, and providing for common or shared elements or interests in real property.  It shall include, but not be limited to, property subject to the "Condominium Act," P.L.1969, c.257 (C.46:8B-1 et seq.), any form of homeowners' association, any housing cooperative or any community trust or other trust device.  

    "Senior citizen" means a person 62 years of age or over and shall include a surviving spouse if that surviving spouse is 55 years of age or over.  

    "Senior citizen housing project" or "project" means any building or structure, and any land appurtenant thereto, having three or more dwelling units, be they rental or owner-occupied, intended for, and solely occupied by, senior citizens; except that, it shall not include owner-occupied premises having not more than three dwelling units that are rented or offered for rent, or any health care facility as defined in the "Health Care Facilities Planning Act," P.L.1971, c.136 (C.26:2H-1 et seq.).  

    L.1990,c.55,s.1.  

2A:42-104.   Resident of senior citizen housing project permitted to have domesticated animal  
     Any senior citizen residing in a senior citizen housing project shall, upon providing written notice to the landlord, be permitted to own, harbor or care for a domesticated animal while a resident of that project.  

    L.1990,c.55,s.2.  

2A:42-105.   Arbitrary refusal to renew lease; penalty  
     a.   A landlord shall not arbitrarily refuse to renew a lease for a dwelling unit in a senior citizen housing project to any senior citizen who owns, harbors or cares for a domesticated animal in accordance with the provisions of section 2 of this act, except as provided in section 5 of this act.  

    Any landlord who so refuses to renew any such lease shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $500 for each offense, recoverable by the senior citizen resident in a civil action in a summary proceeding under "the penalty enforcement law" (N.J.S.2A:58-1 et seq.).  The municipal court or the Special Civil Part of the Law Division of the Superior Court of the county in which the senior citizen housing project is located shall have jurisdiction to enforce the penalty.  

    b.   A landlord shall not require any senior citizen who resides in a senior citizen housing project to remove, by sale, donation, gift, or otherwise, any domesticated animal which that senior citizen owns, harbors or cares for in accordance with the provisions of section 2 of this act, except as provided in section 5 of this act.  

    L.1990,c.55,s.3.  

2A:42-106.   Landlord immunity  
     a.   A landlord who is in compliance with the provisions of this act shall not be liable to respond in damages in any civil action for injury to persons or property caused by a domesticated animal owned, harbored or cared for by a senior citizen who is in compliance with the provisions of this act. 

    b.   Nothing in this section shall grant the landlord immunity for a willful or wanton act of commission or omission.  

    L.1990,c.55,s.4.  

2A:42-107.   Allowable circumstances for refusal to renew lease  
     Under the following circumstances, a landlord may refuse to renew a senior citizen's lease for a dwelling unit in a senior citizen housing project or may require that a senior citizen remove, by sale, donation, gift, or otherwise, a domesticated animal from a dwelling unit in a senior citizen housing project:  

    a.   When the existence of a domesticated animal or the senior citizen's refusal to comply with the rules and regulations governing domesticated animals constitutes a violation of federal, State or local building, health or use codes;  

    b.   When the senior citizen fails to properly care for the domesticated animal;  

    c.   When the senior citizen fails to properly control the domesticated animal by using a leash, if appropriate, or other necessary safety devices when walking or taking the domesticated animal to or from his dwelling unit or while on the land appurtenant thereto, or fails to take prompt action to remove any animal waste when requested by the landlord; or  

    d.   When the senior citizen fails to confine the domesticated animal's body waste functions to areas that do not interfere with the ingress and egress of any person to or from the senior citizen housing project, or with the use of common areas in and about the senior citizen housing project by the other residents thereof and their invitees.  

    L.1990,c.55,s.5.  

2A:42-108.   Guard dog  
     The presence of a guard dog used by the landlord shall not constitute a waiver of the provisions of this act.  

    L.1990,c.55,s.6.  

2A:42-109  Rights of person with disabilities.

	7.	Nothing in this act shall impair the rights of a person with disabilities to own, harbor or care for a domesticated animal, including guide dogs and service dogs, in accordance with the "Law Against Discrimination," P.L.1945, c.169 (C.10:5-1 et seq.).

	L.1990,c.55,s.7;  amended 2003, c.180, s.1.

2A:42-110.   Removal of continuing nuisance  
     Nothing in this act shall limit the legal rights and remedies of a landlord under the lease or the master deed and bylaws, as the case may be, to remove a domesticated animal that constitutes a continuing nuisance to the welfare or property of either the landlord or the other residents of a senior citizen housing project, nor shall it limit the legal rights and remedies of that landlord or other residents.  

    In any action to remove a domesticated animal or to evict a senior citizen from a senior citizen housing project for violating a lease due to the presence of a domesticated animal that is alleged to be a continuing nuisance, the plaintiff shall have the burden of proving that the domesticated animal is a continuing nuisance.  

    L.1990,c.55,s.8.  

2A:42-111.   Rules, regulations  
     a.   A landlord shall have the right to promulgate reasonable written rules and regulations, in accordance with the provisions of this act, relating to the care and maintenance of domesticated animals by senior citizens, except that a landlord may not require that the domesticated animal be spayed or neutered.  All such rules and regulations shall be transmitted, in writing, to the residents of each dwelling unit in the senior citizen housing project and shall be incorporated within each lease upon its subsequent renewal and the master deed and bylaws, as the case may be.  

    b.   A landlord may require that a senior citizen remove from the senior citizen housing project any offspring of his domesticated animal within eight weeks of their birth; except that, the landlord may require their removal at an earlier date if the offspring of that domesticated animal may be so removed without unreasonable danger to their health.  

    L.1990,c.55,s.9.  

2A:42-112.   Rights of municipality not limited  
     Nothing in this act shall limit the rights of a municipality to prohibit, by ordinance, the owning, harboring or keeping of certain species of animals within the municipality.  

    L.1990,c.55,s.10.  

2A:42-113.   Definitions; disclosure statements to senior citizen housing residents  
    2.  a.  As used in this section:

  

   "Landlord" means, in the case of a senior citizen housing project in which dwelling units are rented or offered for rent, the person or persons who own or purport to own the building, structure or complex of buildings or structures in which those rental dwelling units are situated.  In the case of a senior citizen housing project that is organized or operated as a planned real estate development, landlord means the governing board or body of that development.  

   "Planned real estate development" means any real property situated within the State, whether contiguous or not, which consists of, or will consist of, separately owned areas, irrespective of form, be it lots, parcels, units, or interests, and which are offered or disposed of pursuant to a common promotional plan, and providing for common or shared elements or interests in real property.  It shall include, but not be limited to, property subject to the "Condominium Act," P.L.1969, c.257 (C.46:8B-1 et seq.), any form of homeowners' association, any housing cooperative or any community trust or other trust device.  

   "Senior citizen" means a person 62 years of age or older and shall include a surviving spouse if that surviving spouse is 55 years of age or over.  

   "Senior citizen housing project" means any building or structure, and any land appurtenant thereto, having three or more dwelling units, be they rental or owner occupied, intended for, and solely occupied by, senior citizens; except that, it shall not include owner-occupied premises having not more than three dwelling units that are rented or offered for rent, or any health care facility as defined in the "Health Care Facilities Planning Act," P.L.1971, c.136 (C.26:2H-1 et seq.).  

   b.   Every landlord of a senior citizen housing project, and every landlord of a unit within a senior citizen housing project that is a planned unit development, shall give copies of the statements required by P.L.1974, c.50 (C.46:8-27 et seq.), P.L.1975, c.310 (C.46:8-43 et seq.) and section 1 of this act  to each resident at the time of the signing of the lease and any renewal thereof, if the units in the project are rented or offered for rent. If the project is organized or operated as a planned real estate development, the governing board or body shall provide copies of the public offering statement approved by the Department of Community Affairs in accordance with P.L.1969, c.215 (C.45:22A-1 et seq.) or P.L.1977, c.419 (C.45:22A-21 et seq.) and of the current bylaws of the planned real estate development to all residents to whom copies of those documents were not previously issued either by the developer or by the governing board or body.  

   Upon receipt of the statements or documents, as the case may be, the resident shall sign a form indicating that the landlord delivered the statements or documents as required under the provisions of this section.  The owner shall keep the form on file for one year.  

   The landlord shall post copies of the statements and documents in one or more locations so the statements and documents are prominently displayed and accessible to all the residents of the senior citizen housing project.  

   c.   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as affecting a right guaranteed, or a responsibility imposed, on any person by any other law.

   L.1995,c.144,s.2.  

2A:42-114  Short title.

	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Multifamily Housing Preservation and Receivership Act."

	L.2003,c.295,s.1.

2A:42-115  Findings, declarations relative to multifamily housing.

	2.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	Many citizens of New Jersey are adversely affected by blighted residential property, including both those who live in buildings that fail to meet adequate standards for health, safety and welfare or fail to meet reasonable housing code standards, and those who live in proximity to such buildings;

	b.	Substandard and deteriorating buildings are a public safety threat and nuisance, and their blighting effect diminishes health, public safety and property values in the neighborhoods in which they are located;

	c.	Left to deteriorate over time, these substandard and deteriorating buildings are likely to be abandoned, thereby endangering neighborhood residents and resulting in increased costs to the municipalities in which they are situate;

	d.	The abandonment of substandard buildings furthermore results in the displacement of lower income tenants, thereby increasing the demand for affordable housing, which is already in short supply, and exacerbating homelessness faced by the citizens of New Jersey;

	e.	The number of distressed multifamily buildings in the State which could be maintained as safe, affordable housing could be significantly increased if adequate public resources were made available to alleviate negative conditions in the rental housing stock throughout the State;

	f.	While it is important to provide incentives for landlords to better maintain and improve their properties, it is recognized that there are situations in which it is necessary for other parties to intervene in the operation and maintenance of multifamily buildings, a procedure known as receivership, in order to ensure that they are not abandoned, and that they are maintained as sound, affordable housing, consistent with codes and safety requirements;

	g.	When receivership becomes necessary, receivership activities and the implementation of receivership plans may be supported by grants and loans to be made available out of a newly-created Preservation Loan Revolving Fund, as provided hereunder; and

	h.	In order to ensure that the interests of all parties are adequately protected, it is essential that State law provide clear standards and direction to guide the parties with respect to all aspects of receivership.

	L.2003,c.295,s.2.

2A:42-116  Definitions relative to multifamily housing.

	3.	As used in P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.):

	"Agency" means the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency established under section 4 of P.L.1983, c.530 (C.55:14K-4);

	"Building" means any building or structure and the land appurtenant thereto in which at least half of the net square footage of the building is used for residential purposes; and shall not include any one to four unit residential building in which the owner occupies one of the units as his or her principal residence;

	"Code" means any housing, property maintenance, fire or other public safety code applicable to a residential building, whether enforced by the municipality or by a State agency;

	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Community Affairs;

	"Department" means the Department of Community Affairs;

	"Lienholder" or "mortgage holder" means any entity holding a note, mortgage or other interest secured by the building or any part thereof;

	"Owner" means the holder or holders of title to a residential building;

	"Party in interest" means: (1) any mortgage holder, lien holder or secured creditor of the owner; (2) any tenant living in the building; (3) any entity designated by more than 50 percent of the tenants living in the building as their representative; (4) the public officer; or (5) a non-profit entity providing community services in the municipality in which the building is located;

	"Plaintiff" means a party in interest or a qualified entity that files a complaint pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-117);

	"Public officer" means an officer of the municipality appropriately qualified to carry out the responsibilities set forth in P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.) and designated by resolution of the governing body of the municipality in which the building is located, except that in municipalities organized under the "mayor-council plan" of the "Optional Municipal Charter Law," P.L.1950, c.210 (C.40:69A-1 et seq.), the public officer shall be designated by the mayor;

	"Qualified entity" means any person or entity registered with the department on the basis of having demonstrated knowledge and substantial experience in the operation, maintenance and improvement of residential buildings; 

	"Tenant" means a household that legally occupies a dwelling unit in a residential building.

	L.2003,c.295,s.3.

2A:42-117  Action to appoint receiver.

	4.	A summary action or otherwise to appoint a receiver to take charge and manage a building may be brought by a party in interest or qualified entity in the Superior Court in the county in which the building is situated.  Any receiver so appointed shall be under the direction and control of the court and shall have full power over the property and may, upon appointment and subject to the provisions of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.), commence and maintain proceedings for the conservation, protection or disposal of the building, or any part thereof, as the court may deem proper.  

	A building shall be eligible for receivership if it meets one of the following criteria:

	a.	The building is in violation of any State or municipal code to such an extent as to endanger the health and safety of the tenants as of the date of the filing of the complaint with the court, and the violation or violations have persisted, unabated, for at least 90 days preceding the date of the filing of the complaint with the court; or

	b.	The building is the site of a clear and convincing pattern of recurrent code violations, which may be shown by proofs that the building has been cited for such violations at least four separate times within the 12 months preceding the date of the filing of the complaint with the court, or six separate times in the two years prior to the date of the filing of the complaint with the court and the owner has failed to take action as set forth in section 9 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-122).

	A court, upon determining that the conditions set forth in subsection a. or b. of this section exist, based upon evidence provided by the plaintiff, shall appoint a receiver, with such powers as are herein authorized or which, in the court's determination, are necessary to remove or remedy the condition or conditions that are a serious threat to the life, health or safety of the building's tenants or occupants.

	L.2003,c.295,s.4.

2A:42-118  Contents of complaint.

	5.	A complaint submitted to the court shall include a statement of the grounds for relief and:

	a.	Documentation of the conditions that form the basis for the complaint;

	b.	Evidence that the owner received notice of the conditions that form the basis for the complaint, and failed to take adequate and timely action to remedy those conditions; and

	c.	With respect to any building that contains non-residential facilities, including but not limited to commercial or office floor space, the complaint shall provide explicit justification for the inclusion of the non-residential facilities in the scope of the receivership order; in the absence of such justification, the court shall exclude such facilities from the scope of the receiver's duties and powers.

	The complaint may include a recommendation of the receiver to be appointed.

	L.2003,c.295,s.5.

2A:42-119  Serving of complaint.

	6.	The plaintiff shall serve the complaint and any affidavits or certifications that accompanied the complaint upon the parties in interest, the current owner of the property, and all mortgage holders and lienholders of record determined by a title search and in accordance with the Rules of Court.

	Unless tenants have been provided with written notice to the contrary or the plaintiff has knowledge to the contrary, the business address at which the owner or an agent of the owner may be served shall be that address provided by the owner to the commissioner in registering the property under section 12 of P.L.1967, c.76 (C.55:13A-12). 

	The plaintiff shall mail notification to the public officer and the agency by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of its intent to initiate action under the provisions of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.) on or before the tenth day prior to service of the complaint on the owner and parties in interest.  If no municipal officer has been designated by the municipality for the purposes of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.), the plaintiff shall mail the notice to the municipal clerk.

	L.2003,c.295,s.6.

2A:42-120  Receipt of notice, determination of ownership.

	7.	Upon receipt of notice given by a plaintiff in a receivership proceeding pursuant to section 6 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-119), the agency shall forthwith determine whether the building is owned by a limited partnership established pursuant to an allocation of low income housing tax credits by the agency or any other project over which the agency has regulatory control, and, if the building is owned by such a limited partnership, shall, within 30 days of receiving notice, provide a copy of that notice to the limited partner or partners of the limited partnership by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested.

	A limited partner in a limited partnership established pursuant to an allocation of low income housing tax credits by the agency shall have the same rights and remedies under provisions of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.) as a lienholder.

	L.2003,c.295,s.7.

2A:42-121  Action of court relative to complaint.

	8. a. The court shall act upon any complaint submitted pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-117) in a summary manner;

	b.	At the discretion of the court, any party in interest may intervene in the proceeding and be heard with regard to the complaint, the requested relief or any other matter which may come before the court in connection with the proceedings;

	c.	Any party in interest may present evidence to support or contest the complaint at the hearing.

	L.2003,c.295,s.8.

2A:42-122  Opposition of owner to relief sought in complaint.

	9. a. If the owner opposes the relief sought in the complaint brought under subsection b. of section 4 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-117) and demonstrates by a preponderance of the evidence that repairs were made in timely fashion to each of the violations cited, that the repairs were made to an appropriate standard of workmanship and materials, and that the overall level of maintenance and provision of services to the building is of adequate standard, the court may dismiss the complaint.

	b.	If the complaint is brought by a tenant of the building which is the subject of the complaint and that tenant is in default of any material obligation under New Jersey landlord-tenant law, the court may dismiss the complaint.

	c.	If the court finds that the preponderance of the violations that are the basis of a complaint brought under subsection b. of section 4 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-117) are of a minor nature and do not impair the health, safety or general welfare of the tenants or neighbors of the property, the court may dismiss the complaint.

	d.	Within 10 days of filing the complaint, the plaintiff shall file a notice of lis pendens with the county recording officer of the county within which the building is located.

	L.2003,c.295,s.9.

2A:42-123  Appointment of receiver, other relief.

	10. a. If the court determines, after its summary hearing, that the grounds for relief set forth pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-118) have been established, the court may appoint a receiver and grant such other relief as may be determined to be necessary and appropriate. The court shall select as the receiver the mortgageholder, lienholder or a qualified entity, as defined pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-116).  If the court cannot identify a receiver, the court may appoint any party who, in the judgment of the court, may not have registered with the department pursuant to section 31 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-142), but otherwise fulfills the qualifications of a qualified entity.

	b.	If the court determines, after its summary hearing, that the grounds for relief set forth pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-118) have been established, but the owner presents a plan in writing to the court demonstrating that the conditions leading to the filing of the complaint will be abated within a reasonable period, which plan is found by the court to be reasonable, then the court may enter an order providing that in the event the conditions are not abated by a specific date, including the completion of specific remedial activities by specific dates, or if the conditions recur within a specific period established by the court, then an order granting the relief as requested in the complaint shall be granted.

	The court may require the owner to post a bond in such amount that the court, in consultation with the party bringing the complaint and the public officer, determines to be reasonable, which shall be forfeit if the owner fails to meet the conditions of the order.

	c.	Any sums advanced or incurred by a mortgage holder or lienholder acting as receiver pursuant to this section for the purpose of making improvements to the property, including court costs and reasonable attorneys fees, may be added to the unpaid balance due said mortgage holder or lienholder subject to interest at the same rate set forth in the note or security agreement.

	d.	Nothing in this section shall be deemed to relieve the owner of the building of any obligation the owner or any other person may have for the payment of taxes or other municipal liens and charges, or mortgages or liens to any party, whether those taxes, charges or liens are incurred before or after the appointment of the receiver.

	e.	The appointment of a receiver shall not suspend any obligation the owner may have as of the date of the appointment of the receiver for payment of any operating or maintenance expense associated with the building, whether or not billed at the time of appointment.  Any such expenses incurred after the appointment of the receiver shall be the responsibility of the receiver.

	L.2003,c.295,s.10.

2A:42-124  Denial of rights, remedies afforded lien, mortgage holders.

	11. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary pursuant to P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.), a court may in its discretion deny a lienholder or mortgage holder of any or all rights or remedies afforded lienholders and mortgage holders under P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.), if it finds that the owner of the building owns or controls more than a 50% interest in, or effective control of, the lienholder or mortgage holder, or that the familial or business relationship between the lienholder or mortgage holder and the owner precludes a separate interest on the part of the lienholder or mortgage holder.

	L.2003,c.295,s.11.

2A:42-125  Submission of plan by receiver.

	12. Within 60 days following the order appointing a receiver pursuant to subsection a. of section 10 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-123), the receiver shall submit a plan for the operation and improvement of the building to the court and provide a copy of the plan to the owner, all parties in interest which participated in the hearing and the clerk of the municipality in which the building is situated.  The plan shall include an enumeration of the insurance coverage to be purchased by the receiver, including surety bonds in an amount sufficient to guarantee compliance with the terms and conditions of the receivership and in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the commissioner pursuant to section 31 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-142).

	The court shall approve or disapprove the plan with or without modifications.

	The receiver's plan, to the extent reasonably feasible, shall take into account a recent appraisal of the property and income and expense statements for at least the preceding two years, and shall include:

	a.	an estimate of the cost of the labor, materials and any other costs that are required to bring the property up to applicable codes and standards and abate any nuisances that gave rise to the appointment of the receiver pursuant to section 10 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-123);

	b.	the estimated income and expenses of the building and property after the completion of the repairs and improvements;

	c.	the cost of paying taxes and other municipal charges; and

	d.	the terms, conditions and availability of any financing that is necessary in order to allow for the timely completion of the work outlined in subsection a. of this section.

	The owner shall, to the extent such information is available, expeditiously provide the receiver with such income and expense statements. If the receiver's plan was submitted at the time of the hearing, the receiver may amend the plan subsequent to that hearing, and submit a revised plan to the court pursuant to this section.

	The commissioner may be called upon by the court in any proceeding involving the receivership.

	L.2003,c.295,s.12.

2A:42-126  Bond, surety, insurance posted by receiver, removal of receiver.

	13. Upon appointment, the receiver shall post a bond or other such surety or insurance in accordance with the plan approved by the court pursuant to section 12 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-125).

	The receiver shall take possession of the building and any other property subject to the receivership order immediately after posting the required bond, surety or insurance and, subject to the approval of the court of the bond, surety and insurance, shall immediately be authorized to exercise all powers delegated by P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.), except that the receiver shall not undertake major non-emergent improvements to the property prior to approval of the receiver's plan by the court.

	Any receiver may be removed by the court at any time upon the request of the receiver or upon a showing by a party in interest that the receiver is not carrying out its responsibilities under P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.).  The court may hold a hearing prior to removal of a receiver under this section.

	L.2003,c.295,s.13.

2A:42-127  Filing, continuation of foreclosure unaffected.

	14. a. Neither the filing of a complaint under section 4 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-117) nor the appointment of a receiver under subsection a. of section 10 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-123) shall stay the filing or continuation of any action to foreclose a mortgage or lien on the building or to sell the property for delinquent taxes or unpaid municipal liens.

	b.	In the event that ownership of the building changes as a result of foreclosure while a receiver is in possession, including possession by the municipality pursuant to a tax foreclosure action, the property shall remain subject to the receivership and the receiver shall remain in possession and shall retain all powers delegated under this action unless and until the receivership is terminated under the provisions of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.).

	L.2003,c.295,s.14.

2A:42-128  Powers, duties of receiver.

	15. The receiver shall have all powers and duties necessary or desirable for the efficient operation, management and improvement of the building in order to remedy all conditions constituting grounds for receivership under P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.). Such powers and duties shall include the power to:

	a.	Take possession and control of the building, appurtenant land and any personal property of the owner used with respect to the building, including any bank or operating account specific to the building;

	b.	Collect rents and all outstanding accounts receivable, subject to the rights of lienholders except where affected by court action pursuant to any of the provisions of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.);

	c.	Pursue all claims or causes of action of the owner with respect to the building and other property subject to the receivership;

	d.	Contract for the repair and maintenance of the building on reasonable terms, including the provision of utilities to the building.  If the receiver falls within the definition of a contracting unit pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1971, c.198 (C.40A:11-2), any contract entered into by the receiver shall not be subject to any legal advertising or bidding requirements, but the receiver shall solicit at least three bids or proposals, as appropriate, with respect to any contract in an amount greater than $2,500.  The receiver may enter into contracts or agreements with tenants or persons who are members of the receiver entity, as the case may be, provided that all such contracts or agreements shall be appropriately documented, and included in the receiver's expenses under P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.).  In the event that the receiver contracts for any service with an entity with which the receiver has an identity of interest relationship, it shall first disclose that relationship to the court, the owner and the parties in interest;

	e.	Borrow money and incur debt in accordance with the provisions of section 17 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-130);

	f.	Purchase materials, goods and supplies to operate, maintain, repair and improve the building;

	g.	Enter into new rental contracts and leases for vacant units and renew existing rental contracts on reasonable terms for periods not to exceed one year;

	h.	Affirm, renew or enter into contracts for insurance coverage on the building;

	i.	Engage and, subject to court approval, pay legal, accounting, appraisal and other professionals to aid in carrying out the purposes of the receivership;

	j.	Evict or commence eviction proceedings against tenants for cause when necessary and prudent, notwithstanding the condition of the building; and

	k.	Sell the building in accordance with the provisions of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.).

	L.2003,c.295,s.15.

2A:42-129  Responsibilities of receiver in possession of the building.

	16. While in possession of the building, the receiver shall:

	a.	Maintain, safeguard, and insure the building;

	b.	Apply all revenue generated from the building consistent with the purposes of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.) and the provisions of the plan submitted to and approved by the court. In the case of an officer or agent of a municipality acting as a receiver pursuant to the provisions of section 1of P.L.1942, c.54 (C.54:5-53.1), no revenue shall be applied to any arrears in property taxes or other municipal liens until or unless the municipal officer or agent finds that any material conditions found to exist by the court pursuant to section 10 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-123) have been abated, and that the building has remained free of any such conditions for a period of no less than six months of that certification;

	c.	Implement the plan and, to the extent the receiver determines that any provision of the plan cannot be implemented, submit amendments to the plan to the court, with notice to the parties in interest and the owner;

	d.	Submit such reports as the court may direct and submit a copy of those reports to the parties in interest and the owner.  Such reports may include:

	(1)	a copy of any contract entered into by the receiver regarding repair or improvement of the building, including any documentation required under subsection d. of section 15 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-128);

	(2)	a report of the lease and occupancy status of each unit in the building, and any actions taken with respect to any tenant or lease;

	(3)	an account of the disposition of all revenues received from the building;

	(4)	an account of all expenses and improvements;

	(5)	the status of the plan and any amendments thereto;

	(6)	a description of actions proposed to be taken during the next six months with respect to the building; and

	(7)	itemization of any fees and expenses that the receiver incurred for which it is entitled to payment pursuant to subsection a. of section 18 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-131), which were not paid during the period covered by the report, or which have remained unpaid since the beginning of the receivership.

	L.2003,c.295,s.16.

2A:42-130  Receiver may borrow money, incur indebtedness.

	17. a. The receiver may borrow money and incur indebtedness in order to preserve, insure, manage, operate, repair, improve, or otherwise carry out its responsibilities under the terms of the receivership.

	b.	With the approval of the court, after notice to the owner and all parties in interest, the receiver may secure the payment of any borrowing or indebtedness under subsection a. of this section by a lien or security interest in the building or other assets subject to the receivership. 

	c.	Where the borrowing or indebtedness is for the express purpose of making improvements to the building or other assets subject to the receivership, the court, after notice to the owner and all parties in interest, may authorize the receiver to grant a lien or security interest not in excess of the amount necessary for the improvements with priority over all other liens or mortgages, except for municipal liens.  Prior to granting the receiver's lien priority over other liens or mortgages, the court shall find (1) that the receiver sought to obtain the necessary financing from the senior lienholder, which declined to provide such financing on reasonable terms; (2) that the receiver sought to obtain a voluntary subordination from the senior lienholder, which refused to provide such subordination; and (3) that lien priority is necessary in order to induce another lender to provide financing on reasonable terms. No lien authorized by the court shall take effect unless recorded in the recording office of the county in which the building is located.

	d.	For the purposes of this section, the cost of improvements shall include reasonable non-construction costs such as architectural fees or building permit fees customarily included in the financing of the improvement or rehabilitation of residential property incurred by the receiver in connection with the improvements.

	L.2003,c.295,s.17.

2A:42-131  Receiver entitled to necessary expenses, reasonable fee.

	18. a. The receiver shall be entitled to necessary expenses and to a reasonable fee, to be determined by the court. The expenses incurred by a receiver in removing or remedying a condition pursuant to P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.) shall be met by the rents collected by the receiver or any other moneys made available for those purposes.

	b.	Nothing in P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.) shall be deemed to relieve the owner of the building of any civil or criminal liability or any duty imposed by reason of acts or omissions of the owner.

	c.	The activities of the receiver being appropriate and necessary to carry out a public purpose, the personnel, facilities, and funds of the municipality may be made available to the receiver at the discretion of the municipality for the purpose of carrying out the duties as receiver and the cost of those services shall be deemed a necessary expense of the receiver, which shall reimburse the municipality to the extent that funds are reasonably available for that purpose.

	d.	If the party in interest bringing a receivership action pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-117) is the public officer, the municipality shall be entitled to its costs in filing an application to the court and reasonable attorney fees, to be determined by the court, which may be a lien against the premises and collectible as otherwise provided under law.

	L.2003,c.295,s.18.

2A:42-132  Release of outstanding municipal liens.

	19. Upon request by the receiver and following notice by the receiver to the owner of the property, any municipality may, by order of the county board of taxation, release any outstanding municipal liens on any property subject to a receivership order under P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.).  In responding to such requests, the board shall balance the effect of releasing the lien on the municipality's finances with its effect on the preservation of the building as sound affordable housing. The owner of the property shall be personally liable for payment of the tax or other municipal charge secured by the lien.

	L.2003,c.295,s.19.

2A:42-133  Order for sale of building.

	20. Upon application of the receiver, the court may order the sale of the building if it finds that:

	a.	Notice was given to each current record owner of the building, each mortgagee or lienholder of record, and any other party in interest;

	b.	The receiver has been in control of the building for more than one year at the time of application and the owner has not successfully petitioned for reinstatement under section 24 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-137); and

	c.	The sale would promote the sustained maintenance of the building as sound, affordable housing, consistent with codes and safety requirements.

	L.2003,c.295,s.20.

2A:42-134  Manner in which building sold, alternatives.

	21. In its application to the court, the receiver shall specify the manner in which it proposes the building to be sold, which alternatives shall include, but not be limited to the following:

	a.	Sale on the open market to an entity qualified to own and operate multifamily rental property;

	b.	Sale at a negotiated price to a not-for-profit entity qualified to own and operate multifamily rental property;

	c.	Sale to an entity for the purpose of conversion of the property to condominium or cooperative ownership pursuant to the provisions of "The Planned Real Estate Development Full Disclosure Act," P.L.1977, c.419 (C.45:22A-21 et seq.), provided that that option shall not be approved except with the approval in writing of a majority of the tenants of the building, and provided further that, notwithstanding any provision of "The Planned Real Estate Development Full Disclosure Act," P.L.1977, c.419 (C.45:22A-21 et seq.), no tenant in residence prior to the date the plan of conversion is approved by the court shall be subject to eviction by reason of that conversion; or

	d.	In the case of a one to four family building, sale to a household that will occupy one of the units as an owner occupant, which may be a sitting tenant.

	L.2003,c.295,s.21.

2A:42-135  Dismissal of receiver's application to sell property.

	22. a. Upon application by the receiver to sell the property the owner or any party in interest may seek to have the receiver's application to sell the property dismissed and the owner's rights reinstated upon a showing that the owner meets all of the conditions set forth in section 25 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-138) and such other conditions that the court may establish.  In setting the conditions for reinstatement, the court shall invite recommendations from the receiver.

	b.	In connection with the sale, the court may authorize the receiver to sell the building free and clear of liens, claims and encumbrances in which event, all such liens, claims and encumbrances, including tax and other municipal liens, shall be transferred to the proceeds of sale with the same priority as existed prior to resale in accordance with section 23 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-136).

	L.2003,c.295,s.22.

2A:42-136  Sale of property.

	23. Upon approval by the court, the receiver shall sell the property on such terms and at such price as the court shall approve, and may place the proceeds of sale in escrow with the court, except that unpaid municipal liens shall be paid from the proceeds of the sale.  The court shall order a distribution of the proceeds of sale after paying court costs in the following order of priority:

	a.	The reasonable costs and expenses of sale actually incurred;

	b.	Municipal liens pursuant to R.S.54:5-9; 

	c.	Repayment of principal and interest on any borrowing or indebtedness incurred by the receiver and granted priority lien status pursuant to subsection c. of section 17 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-130);

	d.	Other valid liens and security interests, including governmental liens, in accordance with their priority, including any costs and expenses incurred by the municipality as a receiver, but with respect to non-governmental liens, those duly recorded prior to the filing of the lis pendens notice by the receiver;

	e.	Any fees and expenses of the receiver not otherwise reimbursed during the pendency of the receivership in connection with the sale or the operation, maintenance and improvement of the building and documented by the receiver as set forth in paragraph (7) of subsection d. of section 16 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-129);

	f.	Any costs and expenses incurred by parties in interest in petitioning the court for receivership; and

	g.	Any accounts payable or other unpaid obligations to third parties from the receivership.

	Those proceeds which remain after the distribution set forth in subsections a. through g. of this section shall be remitted to the owner.

	L.2003,c.295,s.23.

2A:42-137  Petition for termination of receivership by owner.

	24. The owner may petition for termination of the receivership and reinstatement of the owner's rights at any time by providing notice to all parties in interest, unless the court shall establish a minimum duration for the receivership in the order appointing the receiver, which minimum duration shall not exceed one year. The owner shall provide timely notice of the petition to the receiver and to all parties in interest.  The court shall schedule a hearing on any such petition.

	Prior to holding a hearing on the owner's petition, the court shall request a report from the receiver with its recommendations for action with respect to the owner's petition.
	L.2003,c.295,s.24.

2A:42-138  Granting of owner's petition.

	25. After reviewing the receiver's recommendations and holding a hearing, the court may grant the owner's petition if it finds that:

	a.	The owner's petition offers credible assurances that those elements of the plan which remain will be achieved by the owner within the time frame consistent with the plan submitted by the receiver and approved by the court;

	b.	The owner has paid or deposits with the court all funds required to meet all obligations of the receivership, including all fees and expenses of the receiver, except as provided in subsection c. of this section;

	c.	The owner agrees to assume all legal obligations, including repayment of indebtedness incurred by the receiver for repairs and improvements to the building resulting from the receivership;

	d.	The owner has paid all municipal property taxes, other municipal liens, and costs incurred by the municipality in connection with bringing the receivership action;

	e.	The owner posts a bond or other security in an amount determined to be reasonable by the court in consultation with the receiver and the public officer, but not in excess of 50% of the fair market value of the property, which shall be forfeit in the event of any future code violation materially affecting the health or safety of tenants or the structural or functional integrity of the building.  Forfeiture shall be in the form of a summary proceeding initiated by the municipal officer, who shall provide evidence that such a code violation has occurred and has not been abated within 48 hours of notice, or such additional period of time as may be allowed by the court for good cause, and shall be in the amount of 100 percent of the cost of abating the violation for the first violation, 150 percent of the cost of abating the violation for the second violation, and 200 percent of the cost of abating the violation for any subsequent violation. The owner may seek approval of the court to be relieved of this requirement after five years, which shall be granted if the court finds that the owner has maintained the property in good repair during that period, that no material violations affecting the health and safety of the tenants have occurred during that period, and that the owner has remedied other violations in a timely and expeditious fashion;

	f.	The court may waive the requirement for a bond or other security for good cause, where it finds that such a waiver will not impair the rights or interests of the tenants of the building;

	g.	The reinstatement of the owner shall be in the interest of the public, taking into account the prior history of the building and other buildings within the municipality currently or previously controlled by the owner;

	h.	The court may establish additional requirements as conditions of reinstatement of the owner's rights as it determines reasonable and necessary to protect the interest of the tenants and the residents of the neighborhood;

	i.	Where the owner has conveyed the property to another entity during the pendency of the receivership, and the petition for reinstatement is brought by the new owner, the new owner shall be subject to all of the provisions of this section, unless the court finds compelling grounds  that the public interest will be better served by a modification of any of these provisions; and

	j.	Where the new owner is a lienholder that obtained the property through foreclosure, or through grant of a deed in lieu of foreclosure, that owner shall not be subject to the provisions of this section, but may seek to terminate the receivership by filing a petition for termination of the receivership pursuant to section 27 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-140).

	L.2003,c.295,s.25.

2A:42-139  Conditions for reinstatement of owner's rights.

	26. a. The court may require as a condition of reinstatement of the owner's rights that the receiver or other qualified entity remain in place as a monitor of the condition and management of the property for such period as the court may determine, and may require such reports at such intervals as it deems necessary and appropriate from the monitor. The court may require the owner to pay a fee to the monitor in such amount as the court may determine.

	b.	In the event of the owner's failure to comply with the conditions established for reinstatement of the owner's rights, or evidence of recurrence of any of the conditions for receivership set forth in section 4 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-117), the receiver, monitor or any party in interest may petition the court for reinstatement of the receivership at any time, which may be granted by the court in a summary manner after notice to the parties and a hearing, if requested by any of the parties. If the court reinstates the receivership, the entire bond or other security shall be forfeit and shall be provided to the receiver for the operation and improvement of the property.

	L.2003,c.295,s.26.

2A:42-140  Termination of receivership.

	27. Upon request of a party in interest or the receiver, the court may order the termination of the receivership if it determines:

	a.	The conditions that were the grounds for the complaint and all other code violations have been abated or corrected, the obligations, expenses and improvements of the receivership, including all fees and expenses of the receiver, have been fully paid or provided for and the purposes of the receivership have been fulfilled;

	b. (1) The mortgage holder or lienholder has requested the receivership be terminated and has provided adequate assurances to the court that any remaining code violations or conditions that constituted grounds for the complaint will be promptly abated, the obligations, expenses and improvements of the receivership, including all fees and expenses of the receiver, have been fully paid or provided for and the purposes of the receivership have been or will promptly be fulfilled;

	(2)	Any sums incurred or advanced by a mortgage holder or lien- holder pursuant to this section, including court costs and reasonable attorney's fees, may be added to the unpaid balance due the mortgage holder or lienholder, with interest calculated at the same rate set forth in the note or security agreement.

	c. (1) A new owner who was formerly a mortgage holder or lienholder and who has obtained the property through foreclosure or through grant of a deed in lieu of foreclosure has requested that the receivership be terminated and has provided adequate assurances to the court that any remaining code violations or conditions that constituted grounds for the complaint will be promptly abated, the obligations, expenses and improvements of the receivership, including all fees and expenses of the receiver, have been fully paid or provided for and the purposes of the receivership have been or will promptly be fulfilled;

	(2)	The former owner of the property shall be personally liable for payment to the new owner of any costs incurred by the new owner to cover the obligations, expenses and improvements of the receiver.

	d.	The building has been sold and the proceeds distributed in accordance with section 23 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-136); or

	e.	The receiver has been unable after diligent effort to present a plan that can appropriately be approved by the court or is unable to implement a plan previously approved by the court or is unable for other reason to fulfill the purposes of the receivership.

	In all cases under this section, the court may impose such conditions on the owner or other entity taking control of the building upon the termination of receivership that the court deems necessary and desirable in the interest of the tenants and the neighborhood in which the building is located, including but not limited to those that may be imposed on the owner under section 25 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-138); except that a new owner who was formerly a mortgage holder or lienholder, or an affiliate thereof, and which has obtained the property through foreclosure or through grant of a deed in lieu of foreclosure and who demonstrates sufficient financial responsibility to the court shall not be required to post a bond.

	L.2003,c.295,s.27.

2A:42-141  Preservation Loan Revolving Fund to make grants, loans to receivers.

	28. a. Beginning in the fiscal year in which P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.) becomes effective, subject to the availability of funds in the Neighborhood Preservation Nonlapsing Revolving Fund established pursuant to section 20 of P.L.1985, c.222 (C.52:27D-320), the department may set aside from that fund a sum of up to $4 million per year to establish a Preservation Loan Revolving Fund for the purpose of making grants or loans, as the case may be, to receivers to implement plans which are consistent with rules and regulations adopted by the commissioner pursuant to section 31 of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-142).  Up to three million dollars in the first year and up to four million dollars in each year thereafter may be set aside for grants and loans to receivers.

	b.	The department shall establish terms for providing loans from the Preservation Loan Revolving Fund, including below market interest rates, deferred payment schedules, and other provisions that will enable these funds to be used effectively for any of the purposes of receivership in situations where a receiver cannot borrow funds on conventional terms without imposing hardship on the tenants or potentially impairing the purposes of the receivership.

	c.	The department may make grants or loans, as the case may be, from the Preservation Loan Revolving Fund in connection with any property that is under receivership pursuant to P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.) in order to further the purposes of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.).

	d.	The sum of $1 million from the first four million dollars to be deposited in the Preservation Loan Revolving Fund shall be used for the purpose of providing operating grants to nonprofit entities to enable such entities to act as receivers pursuant to the provisions of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.) and to further housing preservation through other activities including, but not limited to, acquisition of rental property, management of rental property, provision of technical assistance and training to property owners, and any activities that further the goal of building the capacity of nonprofit entities to act as receivers under the provisions of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.). In making grants under this section, the agency shall seek to assist a small number of entities that shall be geographically distributed among those areas with the greatest need to develop a high level of capacity and to benefit from economies of scale in the conduct of property management and receivership activities.

	L.2003,c.295,s.28.

2A:42-142  Rules, regulations.

	31. a. The commissioner shall, within six months of the enactment of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.), adopt rules and regulations concerning registration of qualified entities.

	Pending the adoption of such rules and regulations by the commissioner, an entity shall be presumed to be qualified upon a finding by the department that approval of that entity would not be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the property or of the community.

	b.	Within six months of the enactment of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.), the commissioner shall adopt rules and regulations setting forth minimum amounts of insurance coverage, by category, to be maintained on buildings under their control by receivers appointed pursuant to the provisions of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.).  In addition, the commissioner shall adopt rules and regulations governing surety bonds which a receiver shall execute and file guaranteeing compliance with the terms and conditions of the receivership and any other provisions of P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-114 et al.).

	The commissioner may provide for a waiver or adjustment of any of these requirements when the commissioner finds that it would prevent an entity that is otherwise fully qualified to act as a receiver from being appointed receiver, so long as that entity can demonstrate a sufficient level of financial responsibility.

	L.2003,c.295,s.31.

2A:42-143  Procedures for collection of emergency contact information for senior citizen occupants; violations, penalties; definitions.
 	1. a.  An administrator shall establish and implement procedures for the collection of emergency contact information for senior citizen occupants, which information shall be used to provide notice in the event of the death of a senior citizen occupant.
 
	b.	The procedures required by subsection a. of this section shall include the provision of notice to, and opportunity for, each current and prospective senior citizen occupant to provide, and update as necessary, emergency contact information to enable the administrator to notify the emergency contact in the event of the death of the senior citizen occupant.
 
	c.	Upon learning of the death of a senior citizen occupant, an administrator shall notify the emergency contact for that senior citizen occupant as soon as is practicable, but no later than 24 hours thereafter.  An administrator who fails to provide notice as required pursuant to this subsection shall be liable to a civil penalty of $500, which may be collected and enforced by the Commissioner of Community Affairs, the Attorney General, or any other person pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).  The municipal court and the Superior Court shall have jurisdiction of proceedings for the enforcement of the penalties provided by this subsection.
 
	d.	The Commissioner of Community Affairs, in consultation with the Commissioners of Health and Human Services, may adopt regulations, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), regulating the collection of emergency contact information and the notification of an emergency contact as required pursuant to this section.
 
	e.	As used in this section:
 
	"Administrator" means the person responsible for the daily administration and operation of a qualified housing facility.
 
	"Qualified housing facility" means any of the following: a rooming or boarding house licensed pursuant to the "Rooming and Boarding House Act of 1979," P.L.1979, c.496 (C.55:13B-1 et al.); a residential health care facility, an assisted living facility, or a nursing home licensed pursuant to the "Health Care Facilities Planning Act," P.L.1971 c.136 (C.26:2H-1 et seq.); a continuing care retirement community operating under a certificate of authority issued pursuant to the "Continuing Care Retirement Community Regulation and Financial Disclosure Act," P.L.1986, c.103 (C.52:27D-330 et seq.); and public housing designated for seniors that is owned by a housing authority created or continued pursuant to the "Local Redevelopment and Housing Law," P.L.1992, c.79 (C.40A:12A-1 et seq.).
 
	"Senior citizen occupant" means a person 62 years of age or older who resides in a qualified housing facility.
 
	L.2017, c.5, s.1.

2A:42-144  Definitions.
 	1.	As used in this act:

	"Emergency period" means the period during which a public health emergency exists as declared by the Governor in Executive Order No. 103 of 2020, as extended, and the 60 days following the conclusion of this period.
 
	"Emergency period nonpayment court record" means any record of a landlord-tenant action filed with a court arising as a result of nonpayment or habitually late payment of rent during the emergency period, including but not limited to:
 
	a.	any information maintained by a court in any form in connection with a landlord-tenant case or proceeding, including but not limited to pleadings, evidentiary exhibits, indices, calendars, and dockets;
 
	b.	any order, judgment, or warrant related to a landlord-tenant action;
 
	c.	any official transcript or recording of a public landlord-tenant proceeding, in any form;
 
	d.	any information in a computerized case management system created or prepared by the court in connection with a landlord-tenant action; and
 
	e.	any record provided to, made, or maintained by a judicial officer. 
 
	L.2021, c.189, s.1.

2A:42-145  Confidentiality, unavailability to public.
 		2.	An emergency period nonpayment court record shall be confidential and unavailable to the public. 
 
	L.2021, c.189, s.2.

2A:42-146  Actions to ensure records kept confidential, unavailable to public.
	3. a. Any New Jersey public entity that maintains a written or automated record or file of emergency period nonpayment court records shall take appropriate actions to ensure that these records are kept confidential and unavailable to the public.
 
	b.	This act shall not prohibit the courts or other New Jersey public entities from retaining or distributing demographic information from emergency period nonpayment court records for the purpose of understanding the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on evictions, or for other public purposes, so long as personally-identifiable information on persons who are the subject of emergency period nonpayment court records remains confidential. 
 
	c.	The Supreme Court of New Jersey may adopt rules, and the Administrative Director of the Courts may issue directives and guidelines, to implement the purposes of this act.
 
	L.2021, c.189, s.3.

2A:42-147  Evaluation of prospective tenant.
 	4. a. When evaluating a prospective tenant, a landlord shall not consider an emergency period nonpayment court record.
 
	b.	A person, tenant screening service, or other entity, shall not knowingly provide court filing information or information contained in an emergency period nonpayment court record to a landlord or other entity involved in the rental of a dwelling unit.
 
	c.	No later than 30 days following the effective date of this act, any person or entity that collects, distributes, and sells court filing information shall update and remove any emergency period nonpayment eviction records that are restricted from public access pursuant to this act.

 	L.2021, c.189, s.4.

2A:42-148  Violations, penalties.
 	5.	Any person who knowingly violates section 4 of this act by revealing to the public an emergency period nonpayment court record, by considering an emergency period nonpayment court record in the evaluation of a prospective tenant, or by failing to remove emergency period nonpayment eviction records restricted from public access, shall, in addition to any other penalty provided by law, be liable for a penalty of not less than $1,000 for the first offense, and not less than $5,000 for the second and each subsequent offense, plus reasonable attorney fees.  This penalty shall be exclusive of, and in addition to, any moneys or property ordered to be paid or restored to any person whose information has been wrongly considered or distributed.  A penalty imposed pursuant to this section shall be enforceable by the Attorney General in a summary proceeding pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).	
 
	L.2021, c.189, s.5.

2A:42A-2  Definitions.
  
	1.	As used in P.L.1968, c.73 (C.2A:42A-2 et seq.): 

	"All-terrain vehicle" means a motor vehicle, designed to travel over any terrain, of a type possessing between three and six non-highway tires, but shall not include golf carts. 
 
	"Dirt bike" means a motor powered vehicle possessing two or more tires, designed to travel over any terrain and capable of traveling off of paved roads, whether or not the vehicle is subject to registration with the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission.
 
	"Snowmobile" means any motor vehicle, designed primarily to travel over ice or snow, of a type which uses sled type runners, skis, an endless belt tread, cleats or any combination of these or other similar means of contact with the surface upon which it is operated, but does not include any farm tractor, highway or other construction equipment, or any military vehicle.  
 
	"Sport and recreational activities" means and includes:  hunting; fishing; trapping; horseback riding; training of dogs; hiking; camping; picnicking; swimming; skating; skiing; sledding; tobogganing; operating or riding snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles or dirt bikes; and any other outdoor sport, game and recreational activity including practice and instruction in any of these activities.
 
	L.1968, c.73, s.1; amended 1991, c.496, s.1; 2015, s.155, s.1.

2A:42A-3.    No duty to keep premises safe  
     2.   Except as provided in section 3 of this act:

  

    a.   An owner, lessee or occupant of premises, whether or not posted as provided in section 23:7-7 of the Revised Statutes, and whether or not improved or maintained in a natural condition, or used as part of a commercial enterprise, owes no duty to keep the premises safe for entry or use by others for sport and recreational activities, or to give warning of any hazardous condition of the land or in connection with the use of any structure or by reason of any activity on such premises to persons entering for such purposes;

    b.   An owner, lessee or occupant of premises who gives permission to another to enter upon such premises for a sport or recreational activity or purpose does not thereby (1) extend any assurance that the premises are safe for such purpose, or (2) constitute the person to whom permission is granted an invitee to whom a duty of care is owed, or (3) assume responsibility for or incur liability for any injury to person or property caused by any act of persons to whom the permission is granted.  

    L.1968,c.73,s.2; amended 1991,c.496,s.2.  

2A:42A-4.  Liability towards persons injured on premises
    This act shall not limit the liability which would otherwise exist:

    a.  For willful or malicious failure to guard, or to warn against, a dangerous condition, use, structure or activity;  or

    b.  For injury suffered in any case where permission to engage in sport or recreational activity on the premises was granted for a consideration other than the consideration, if any, paid to said landowner by the State; or

    c.  For injury caused, by acts of persons to whom permission to engage in sport or recreational activity was granted, to other persons as to whom the person granting permission, or the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises, owes a duty to keep the premises safe or to warn of danger.

     L.1968, c. 73, s. 3, eff. July 1, 1968.

2A:42A-5.  Damages for death or injury to person or property
    Nothing in this act shall create a duty of care or ground of liability for damages for the death or injury to person or property.

     L.1968, c. 73, s. 5, eff. July 1, 1968.

2A:42A-5.1.  Liberal construction  
     3.   The provisions of P.L.1968, c.73 (C.2A:42A-2 et seq.) shall be liberally construed to serve as an inducement to the owners, lessees and occupants of property, that might otherwise be reluctant to do so for fear of liability, to permit persons to come onto their property for sport and recreational activities.  

    L.1991,c.496,s.3.  

2A:42A-6.    Limitation of liability  
     1.   An owner, lessee or occupant of agricultural or horticultural lands as defined in P.L.1983, c.522 (C.2C:18-4 et seq.) who grants permission to operate a motorized vehicle, snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle or dirt bike or to ride horseback thereon pursuant to subsection a. of section 2 of that act does not thereby: a. extend any assurance that the premises, including any natural or man-made conditions, are safe for the purposes set forth in that subsection; b. constitute the person to whom permission is granted an invitee or licensee to whom a duty of care is owed; or c. assume responsibility for, or incur liability for, an injury to person or property caused by the act of a person to whom the permission is granted.  

    L.1985,c.431,s.1; amended 1991,c.496,s.4.  

2A:42A-6.1  Definitions.
 
	5.	For purposes of P.L.1985, c.431 (C.2A:42A-6 et seq.):

	"All-terrain vehicle" means a motor vehicle, designed to travel over any terrain, of a type possessing between three and six non-highway tires, but shall not include golf carts.
 
	"Dirt bike" means a motor powered vehicle possessing two or more tires, designed to travel over any terrain and capable of traveling off of paved roads, whether or not the vehicle is subject to registration with the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission.
 
	 "Snowmobile" means any motor vehicle, designed primarily to travel over ice or snow, of a type which uses sled type runners, skis, an endless belt tread, cleats or any combination of these or other similar means of contact with the surface upon which it is operated, but does not include any farm tractor, highway or other construction equipment, or any military vehicle.  
 
	L.1991, c.496, s.5; amended 2015, c.155, s.2.

2A:42A-6.2.  Liberal construction  
     6.   The provisions of P.L.1985, c.431 (C.2A:42A-6 et seq.) shall be liberally construed to serve as an inducement to the owners, lessees and occupants of property, that might otherwise be reluctant to do so for fear of liability, to permit persons to come onto their property for operating a motorized vehicle, snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle or dirt bike or to ride horseback.  

    L.1991,c.496,s.6.  

2A:42A-7.    Liability for dangerous condition 
    This act shall not limit the liability which would otherwise exist for willful or malicious failure to guard, or to warn against, a dangerous condition, use, structure or activity. 

   L. 1985, c. 431, s. 2, eff. Jan. 13, 1986. 

2A:42A-8.    Limitation of liability of owners, lessees, occupants 
     An owner, lessee or occupant of premises upon which public access has been required as a condition of a regulatory approval of, or by agreement with, the Department of Environmental Protection, regardless of whether public notice is provided, shall be liable only for: 

    a.   willful or malicious failure to guard, or to warn against, a dangerous condition, use, structure or activity; or

   

    b.   injury caused by acts of negligence on the part of the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises to any person where permission to engage in sport or recreational activity on the premises was granted for a consideration other than the consideration, if any, paid to the landowner by the State; or 

    c.   injury caused by acts of gross negligence on the part of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises to any person entering or using the land for a use or purpose unrelated to public access purposes.

   

    L.1989,c.172,s.1. 

2A:42A-8.1  Liability of owners of certain premises which allow public access.

	1. a. An owner, lessee or occupant of premises on which a conservation restriction is held by the State, a local unit, or a charitable conservancy and upon which premises subject to the conservation restriction public access is allowed, or of premises upon which public access is allowed pursuant to a public pathway or trail easement held by the State, a local unit, or a charitable conservancy, and regardless of whether public notice is provided, shall be liable to a person injured on the premises only for:

	(1)	willful or malicious failure to guard, or to warn against, a dangerous condition, use, structure or activity; or

	(2)	injury caused by acts of negligence on the part of the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises to any person where permission to engage in sport or recreational activity on the premises was granted for a consideration other than the consideration, if any, paid to the landowner by the State, local unit, or charitable conservancy; or

	(3)	injury caused by acts of gross negligence on the part of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises to any person entering or using the land for a use or purpose unrelated to public access purposes.

	b.	For the purposes of this section:

	"Charitable conservancy" means the same as that term is defined pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1979, c.378 (C.13:8B-2), or a "qualifying tax exempt nonprofit organization" as defined pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1999, c.152 (C.13:8C-3);

	"Conservation restriction" means the same as that term is defined pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1979, c.378 (C.13:8B-2);

	"Local unit" means the same as that term is defined pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1979, c.378 (C.13:8B-2), or a "local government unit" as defined pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1999, c.152 (C.13:8C-3);

	"Premises" means any land in the State (1) regardless of location or characterization or classification of location including but not limited to land characterized or classified as being located in an urban, suburban, rural, semi-rural, populous, developed, undeveloped, unpopulous, residential, nonresidential, commercial, or industrial area, and (2) regardless of whether or not the land is improved or maintained in a natural condition, or used as part of a commercial enterprise; and

	"Sport or recreational activity" means a "sport and recreational activity" as defined pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1968, c.73 (C.2A:42A-2).

	L.2001,c.265,s.1.

2A:42A-9.  "Agricultural or horticultural land" defined
	1.	As used in this act, "agricultural or horticultural land" means orchards, nurseries or other land devoted to the production for sale of plants, crops, trees, forest products or other related commodities.

	L.1997,c.378,s.1.

2A:42A-10.  Farmers immunity for invitees-pickers
	2.	Notwithstanding the provisions of any law to the contrary, an owner, lessee or occupant of agricultural or horticultural land shall not  have a legal duty to protect a person who is invited onto the land for the purposes of picking or taking agricultural or horticultural products from the natural risks or hazards that are inherent characteristics of agricultural or horticultural land, and shall not be liable if such a person invited onto the land is injured because of any natural risks or hazards that are inherent characteristics of agricultural or horticultural land.

	L.1997,c.378,s.2.

2A:43-1.  Privileged communications
    The privileged character attaching to the publication of judicial or other proceedings shall extend to the publication in any newspaper of official statements issued by police department heads and county prosecutors in investigations in progress or completed by them, and which are accepted in good  faith by the publisher of any newspaper, and the privileged character thereof  shall be a good defense to any action for libel, unless malice in fact be shown  by the plaintiff therein.

     	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1971, c. 2, s. 3, eff. Jan. 15, 1971.

2A:43-2.  Damages recoverable
    The defendant, in an action for libel against the owner, manager, editor, publisher or reporter of any newspaper, magazine, periodical, serial or other publication in this state, may give proof of intention; and plaintiff, unless he shall prove either malice in fact or that defendant, after having been requested by plaintiff in writing to retract the libelous charge in as public a  manner as that in which it was made, failed to do so within a reasonable time,  shall recover only his actual damage proved and specially alleged in the  complaint.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:43-3.  Broadcasters;  liability for statements of candidates for public office
    The owner, licensee or operator of a visual or sound radio broadcasting station or network of stations, hereinafter referred to as a broadcaster, and any agent or employee of any such broadcaster, shall not be liable for any damages for any statement, published or uttered in or as a part of a visual or sound radio broadcast, by any legally qualified candidate for public office, when such broadcast is made under the provisions of Federal law and regulations  governing broadcasts by candidates for public office which deny to a  broadcaster the power of censorship over the material broadcast.

     L.1956, c. 50, p. 101, s. 1, eff. May 22, 1956.

2A:43A-1.    Definitions; notice 
    a.   As used in this section: 

   (1)  "Library material" means any material, regardless of physical form or characteristics, or any part thereof, belonging to, on loan to, or otherwise in the custody of a library facility; 

   (2)  "Library facility" means any public library, any library of an educational, historical, or charitable institution, organization or society, or any museum. 

   b.   Prior to bringing a civil action against any person committing an offense that would constitute theft of library material, the library facility shall notify the person in writing that if he has not reimbursed the library facility for the fair market value of the library material plus any costs, including attorney's fees, and damages within 15 days of the notice, that a civil action may be brought.  Thereafter, if a civil action is brought by the library facility, the library may recover the value of the library material, costs and damages, including attorney's fees. 

   L. 1985, c. 373, s. 5, eff. Nov. 26, 1985. 

2A:44-1.  Definitions
    As used in this article:

     "Aircraft"  means any contrivance invented, used or designed for navigation  or flight in the air except a parachute or other contrivance designed for such  navigation but used primarily as safety equipment.

     "Aircraft mechanic"  means any person licensed to repair or maintain aircraft according to the provisions of the regulations of the United States department of commerce and the laws of the state of New Jersey.

     "Airport operator"  means any person operating an airport according to regulations of the United States department of commerce and of the laws of the state of New Jersey.

     "Hangar operator"  means any person operating a hangar according to regulations of the United States department of commerce and the laws of the state of New Jersey.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-2.  Right of lien;  detention;  priorities;  statement verified by oath
    a. Any person, engaged in the business of operating an airport, a hangar or  place for the storage, maintenance, keeping or repairing of aircraft who, in  connection therewith, permits landings or take-offs or stores, maintains, keeps  or repairs any aircraft or furnishes gasoline, accessories, materials or other  supplies therefor at the request or with the consent of the owner or his  representative, agent or lessee, whether such owner be a conditional vendee or  a mortgagor remaining in possession or otherwise, shall have a lien upon such  aircraft or any part thereof for the sum due as the fees for such landings or  take-offs, or for such storing, maintaining, keeping or repairing of such  aircraft or for furnishing gasoline, accessories, materials or other supplies  therefor, and may, without process of law, detain such aircraft at any time it  is lawfully in his possession until such sum is paid.

    The lien shall be superior to all other liens, except liens for taxes, and the operator of such aircraft shall be deemed the agent of any owner, mortgagee, conditional vendor or other lienor thereof for the creation of such superior lien.

    b.  Any person entitled to a lien pursuant to subsection a. shall, within 90  days after the date upon which work was last performed or material last furnished in performing such work or making such repairs or improvements, or fees were last incurred for landings or take-offs, file in the office of the county recording officer of the county in which the aircraft is based, or where  the work was performed or material supplied, or landing and take-off fees  incurred, a statement verified by oath.  The statement shall include the name  of the person entitled to the lien, the name of the owner of the aircraft, a  description of the aircraft, the amount for which a lien is claimed, and the  date upon which the work was completed, materials supplied or fees incurred.

    	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1981, c. 159, s. 1, eff. June 8, 1981;  L.1983, c. 77, s. 1, eff.  Feb. 24, 1983.

2A:44-3.  Removal of aircraft;  seizure;  costs of seizure
    A person acquiring a lien under section 2A:44-2 of this title shall not lose  the same by reason of allowing the aircraft, or part thereof, to be removed  from his control, and if so removed, he may, after demand of payment of claim  either personally or by registered mail if the owner's address is known, and  without further process of law, seize without force and in a peaceable manner,  the aircraft or part thereof, wherever found in this state.

    A charge of $10 for such seizure shall be paid by the owner of the aircraft  or parts thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-4.     Statement of amount; offer by owner and demand for possession; deposit of amount claimed with court; action for possession; costs
     2A:44-4. The owner or person entitled to the immediate possession of the aircraft, or part thereof, so detained as provided by this article, may on learning of the detention of the same, immediately demand from the person detaining such aircraft or part thereof, or from the person in charge of the place where it is detained, a statement showing the true amount claimed to be due and owing for landing or take-off fees or for the storing, maintaining, keeping or repairing of such aircraft, or for furnishing gasoline, fuel, accessories, materials or other supplies therefor. If upon receiving such statement he considers the amount thereof excessive, he may offer what he considers to be reasonably due and demand possession of the aircraft or part thereof so detained. If possession is refused, he may obtain possession thereof by depositing the amount claimed in the statement with the clerk of any court of competent jurisdiction in the county where the aircraft or part thereof may be situated, together with $12 to cover the cost of court in actions commenced in the Superior Court, Law Division, Special Civil Part and $60 in any other court.  

  	  L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1981,c.159,s.2; 1991,c.91,s.89.  

2A:44-5.  Process out of court;  aircraft delivered to owner
    When the amount claimed to be due and the costs are deposited with the clerk  of the court as provided in section 2A:44-4 of this title, the claimant shall  be entitled to possession of such aircraft or part thereof pursuant to process  out of said court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-6.  Bond in lieu of cash deposit
    In lieu of depositing the amount claimed in cash as provided by section 2A:44-4 of this title, a bond in double the amount claimed and double the amount required to be deposited as costs, may be filed with the clerk of the court.  It shall have sufficient surety, and be approved in the manner in which  similar bonds are now approved in the court from which process is to issue.

    The bond shall be in such form as the court shall prescribe.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-7.  Claim by keeper of hangar;  trial;  judgment
    The person claiming a lien under this article shall assert such claim in the  court within the time and in the manner prescribed by the rules governing the  practice of the court.  The court may hear and determine the matter in a summary manner.  The judgment, if any, may be satisfied out of the deposit made, or an action may be brought on the bond filed.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-8.  Failure to bring action;  damages;  judgment;  return of balance of deposit
    If no claim is made by the person claiming a lien under this article or if judgment shall be rendered for the defendant, the court may order the return of  the money deposited or the discharge of the bond and may also fix and determine  the amount of damages suffered by the owner of the aircraft or parts thereof  for the seizure and detention thereof, and render a judgment for such amount  against the person claiming a lien under this article or the person seizing or  detaining the same.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-9.  Entry of appearance by owner of aircraft
    The filing of a bond or the depositing of cash by the owner of the aircraft  or parts thereof as provided by this article may be considered as an appearance  on his part in the action which the person claiming a lien may institute.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-10.  Sale of aircraft if proceedings not taken by owner
    If no proceedings are taken for the repossession of the aircraft or the parts thereof by the owner, such property so held by any airport operator or any operator of a hangar or place of storage, repair or supplies for aircraft, or held by any aircraft mechanic may, after the expiration of 30 days from the date of the detention, be sold at public auction.

     	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1981, c. 159, s. 3, eff. June 8, 1981.

2A:44-11.  Notice of sale;  advertisement
    Notice of sale under section 2A:44-10 of this title shall be published 2 times for 2 weeks, at least once in each week, in some newspaper circulating in  the municipality, in which the aircraft or part thereof is detained, and not  less than 5 days' notice of such sale shall be given by posting the notice in 5  public places in said municipality.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-12.  Disposition of proceeds of sale
    The proceeds of the sale shall be applied to the payment of the lien and the  expenses of seizure, if any, and of such sale.  The balance, if any remaining,  shall be paid to the owner of such property.  The balance, if not claimed by  the owner within 60 days after the sale, shall be paid over to the municipality, in which the aircraft or part thereof is detained, for the support of the poor.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-13.    Sale of perishable goods; application to court; procedure.
	2A:44-13.	Where the consignee of perishable goods cannot be found by the carrier or shall neglect or refuse to receive the same or to pay the costs and expenses of transportation, or the charges for detention or demurrage, the carrier or its agent may apply in writing to the Superior Court and such court on proof that the goods have been transported and are perishable and that the consignee cannot be found or neglects or refuses to receive the same or to pay the costs and expenses of transportation, detention or demurrage charges, shall order the public sale thereof by a sheriff of the county at a time and place named in the order, of which sale such advertisement shall be made and notice given as the court shall direct.

    L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.90; 2023, c.250, s.6.

2A:44-14.  Sale of unclaimed property;  when authorized.
    When the owner or consignee of property transported by a common carrier to its destination, does not call for the same, or cannot be found, or is unknown,  or neglects or refuses to receive the property or to pay the costs and expenses  of transportation or charges for detention or demurrage and the same has  remained unclaimed in the possession of the carrier for 6 months, or is  perishable, the carrier may sell the same at public auction.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-15.  Notice of sale.
    Public notice of the sale, under section 2A:44-14 of this title, shall be given by advertisement in 1 or more newspapers of the county, at least 6 days before the sale, and by notice set up at least 5 days before the sale in at least 5 of the most public places in the neighborhood where the property was directed to be left and where the sale is to take place, naming the articles to  be sold, the names of the consignor and consignee, if known, the hour of sale,  which shall be after 10 in the morning and before 4 in the afternoon, and the  place of sale, which shall be made in some public place in said county.  If the  residence of the consignee is known, written notice shall be given to him  personally or by leaving the same at his residence or by mailing it to him at  his post-office address.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-16.  Sale of perishable property;  notice.
    Where the unclaimed property is perishable and will depreciate in value by being longer kept, the same may be sold after 2 days, in which case notice shall be published at least once and posted at least 1 full day.

    In cases of urgency, such as shipments of milk or perishable fruit, the sale  may be made at once to the best advantage at public or private sale without  advertisement.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-17.    Proceeds of sale; disposition  
     2A:44-17. The fees and expenses of a sale authorized by this article shall be paid first and next the expenses and charges of the carrier for transportation, detention or demurrage and storage. The residue shall be paid to the clerk of the county who shall pay the same to the owner on the order of the Superior Court. If no person shall, within one year after the sale, claim the proceeds, the same shall be paid into the school fund of the State.  

    	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.91.  

2A:44-18.  Report of person making sale
    The officer or carrier making a sale under this article shall file therewith  a report of the same containing a list of the articles sold, the price  realized, the person to whom sold, the expenses of advertisement and sale, the  expenses and charges paid to the carrier, the name of the consignor and  consignee, the places and dates of consignment and of receipt at destination,  of all of which the carrier shall keep a record.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-19.  Refund to owner of proceeds of sale;  petition
    If the proceeds of a sale of unclaimed property are paid into the school fund and the owner of the money or his legal representative shall, by a written  petition addressed to the director of the division of budget and accounting,  demand the same and present satisfactory proof that he is entitled thereto, the  said director shall, upon the petition and proofs being filed with him, draw  his warrant upon the state treasurer for such sum as the owner may be so  entitled.  The state treasurer shall pay the same as soon as proper  appropriation shall be made therefor.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-19.1.  Customer defined
     "Customer"  means the owner, a representative of the owner, or a person lawfully in possession of any of the goods enumerated in section 2 of this act.

     L.1983, c. 528, s. 1, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

2A:44-19.2.  Lien for charges or services  
     2.   Any person who performs dry cleaning, pressing, glazing, dyeing, washing, laundering, alteration, tailoring or repairs, or uses or furnishes materials or supplies, upon any garment, clothing, wearing apparel (exclusive of furs), draperies, curtains, carpets or rugs, slipcovers or furniture covers, or stores any of the same, at the request of or with the consent of a customer, shall have a lien thereon for the agreed charges for the work, services, storage, materials or supplies, or, in the event there has been no agreed charge, for the reasonable value thereof.  

    L.1983,c.528,s.2; amended 1991,c.480.  

2A:44-19.3.  Nonpayment after 90 days;  public or private sale;  notice to customer
    In the event that payment is not made of the agreed charges or the reasonable value thereof for the work, services, storage, materials or supplies  within 90 days after any of the goods were to be delivered or to be available  to the customer, the goods may be sold at a public or private sale to pay the  agreed or reasonable charges together with the cost of notifying the customer.   The person to whom the charges are payable and owing shall, at least 30 days  prior to the sale, give notice of the time and place of the sale to the  customer.  The notice shall be mailed to the customer at his last known address  by certified mail, return receipt requested.  Where the address of the customer  is unknown, the posting of a notice of the sale in a prominent place in a  public portion of the premises of the person required to give the notice shall  constitute notice.

     L.1983, c. 528, s. 3, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

2A:44-19.4.  Proceeds of sale;  disposition
    Upon the completion of a sale pursuant to the provisions of this act, the proceeds thereof shall be used to pay the reasonable or agreed to charges for work, services, storage, materials or supplies, together with the expenses thereof, including the cost of notifying the customer of the sale, and the balance remaining, if any, shall be forwarded to the customer at the last known  address together with a statement of the distribution of the proceeds of the  sale.

    If the address of the customer is unknown, the balance remaining shall be held by the person performing or furnishing the work, services, storage, materials or supplies for a period of 6 months from the date of the disposition  to be paid to the customer upon demand during this period of time.  Upon the  expiration of the aforesaid period of six months, amounts unclaimed shall be  paid to the treasurer of the municipality in which the premises are located,  for the use of the municipality.

     L.1983, c. 528, s. 4, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

2A:44-19.5.  Inability to sell goods;  other disposition
    If after reasonable effort the goods cannot be sold as provided by this act,  they may be given away or otherwise disposed of as the holder thereof shall  determine.

     L.1983, c. 528, s. 5, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

2A:44-19.6.  Action for debt
    Nothing in this act shall be construed to bar any person from maintaining an  action for debt against a customer, except that the proceeds of any sale, after  deductions of expenses thereof, shall be credited upon the debt so due. If  sale is held prior to entry of judgment, judgment shall be entered only for the  amount of the debt then due and owing after application of the proceeds of the  sale.

     L.1983, c. 528, s. 6, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

2A:44-19.7.  Persons to whom act applicable;  notice;  posting
    The provisions of this act shall apply to all persons performing or furnishing the work, services, storage, materials or supplies on goods who at the time the agreement to furnish or perform the same was made and at all times  thereafter kept posted in a prominent place in a public portion of the premises  the following notice:

     "All articles cleaned, pressed, glazed, dyed, laundered, washed, altered, tailored, stored or repaired and not called for within 90 days thereafter are subject to sale as provided by law."

     L.1983, c. 528, s. 7, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

2A:44-19.8.  Assignment of lien and indebtedness
    The lien and indebtedness on which it is founded may be assigned without impairing the lien and the lien may be enforced by the assignee directly.

     L.1983, c. 528, s. 8, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

2A:44-19.9.  Immunity from liability on conformance with act
    Conformance with the provisions of this act shall extinguish any liability of any person who causes goods to be sold or disposed of pursuant hereto.

     L.1983, c. 528, s. 9, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

2A:44-20.  Definitions
    As used in this article:

     "Owner"  includes a conditional vendee or a mortgagor remaining in possession or otherwise of the motor vehicle.

     "Garage"  means a place or structure used in the business of storing, maintaining, keeping or repairing motor vehicles.

     "Garage keeper"  means a person or corporation engaged in the business of keeping a garage as above defined.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-21  Garage keeper liens; detention of vehicles; notice; priority.
	2A:44-21.  A garage keeper who shall tow, store, maintain, keep, or repair a motor vehicle or furnish gasoline, accessories or other supplies therefor, at the request or with the consent of the owner or the owner's representative, or at the request of a law enforcement officer of this State or any political subdivision of this State, shall have a lien upon the motor vehicle or any part thereof for the sum due for such towing, storing, maintaining, keeping, or repairing of such motor vehicle or for furnishing gasoline or other fuel, accessories or other supplies therefor, and may, without process of law, detain the same at any time it is lawfully in his possession until the sum is paid.  A motor vehicle is considered detained when the owner or person entitled to possession of the motor vehicle is advised by the garage keeper, by a writing sent by certified mail return receipt requested to the address supplied by the owner or person entitled to possession of the motor vehicle, that goods or services have been supplied or performed, and that there is a sum due for those goods or services.
 
	The lien shall not be superior to, nor affect a lien, title or interest of a person held by virtue of a prior conditional sale or a prior chattel mortgage properly recorded or a prior security interest perfected in accordance with chapter 9 of Title 12A of the New Jersey Statutes.
 
	A garage keeper shall only require that reasonable fees, charged in accordance with a duly authorized fee schedule established by a municipality or other political subdivision of this State for non-consensual towing, authorized by a law enforcement officer of this State or by a political subdivision of this State, or for related storage services be paid by the operator, owner, lessor, or lienholder of the vehicle prior to the towing company's release of the vehicle.  In the event the owner or operator of the vehicle defaults on payments to the lessor or lienholder of the vehicle, the lessor or lienholder shall be responsible for these reasonable towing and related storage fees.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1961, c.121, s.4; 1998, c.122, s.1; 2023, c.132, s.2.

2A:44-22.  Removal of vehicle from keeper's control;  seizure
    A garage keeper acquiring a lien under this article shall not lose the same  by reason of allowing the motor vehicle or part thereof to be removed from his  control, and if so removed, he may, after demand of payment of claim either  personally or by registered mail if the owner's address is known, and without  further process of law, seize without force and in a peaceable manner the motor  vehicle or part thereof, wherever found in this state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-23  Statement of amount claimed; offer by owner of reasonable amount and demand for possession; fees.

	2A:44-23. The owner or the person entitled to the immediate possession of the motor vehicle or part thereof so detained, may, on learning of the detention of the same, immediately demand from the garage keeper or the person in charge thereof, a statement of the true amount claimed to be due for the storing, maintaining, keeping or repairing of such motor vehicle, or for furnishing gasoline or other fuel, accessories or other supplies therefor. If upon receiving such statement he considers the amount thereof excessive, he may offer what he considers to be reasonably due and demand possession of the motor vehicle or part thereof so detained. If possession is refused, he may immediately bring an action for possession thereof in the Superior Court, Law Division, Special Civil Part or in any other court.  The owner or person entitled to immediate possession thereof shall pay the appropriate court fees and costs prior to the hearing;  except that the owner or the person may seek relief from the payment of court fees and costs as provided in the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey.  The application for the waiver of fees shall be determined prior to or in conjunction with the summary hearing for possession of the motor vehicle.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991, c.91, s.92; 1998, c.122, s.2.

2A:44-24  Entitlement to possession upon payment to garage keeper.

	2A:44-24.  When the amount determined by the court to be due to the garage keeper is paid in cash or by certified or cashier's check to the garage keeper and the court costs, if any, are deposited with the clerk of the court the owner or person entitled to possession of the motor vehicle or part thereof shall be entitled to possession of the motor vehicle or part thereof, pursuant to process out of said court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1998, c.122, s.3.

2A:44-26   Action brought for possession; assertion of claim by garage keeper; procedure.

	2A:44-26.  In an action brought for possession by the motor vehicle owner or person entitled to possession of the motor vehicle, the garage keeper shall assert his claim for a lien in the court in the manner prescribed by the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey.  The court may hear and determine the matter in a summary manner, and shall determine the amount due to the garage keeper, if any, and the amount of court costs, if any, due to the court clerk.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1998, c.122, s.4.

2A:44-27  Determination of amount of damages.

	2A:44-27.  If judgment is rendered for the motor vehicle owner or person entitled to possession of the motor vehicle, the court may fix and determine the amount of damages  suffered by the motor vehicle owner or person entitled to possession of the motor vehicle for the seizure and detention of the motor vehicle or  part thereof, and render a judgment for such amount against the garage keeper.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1998, c.122, s.5.

2A:44-29  Sale of motor vehicle by garage keeper.

	2A:44-29.  If no proceedings are taken for the repossession of the motor vehicle or part thereof by the motor vehicle owner or person entitled to possession of the motor vehicle, such property so held by the garage keeper shall, after the expiration of not less than 30 days from the date of the detention, be sold at public auction, subject to any prior lien, title or interest held by virtue of a prior conditional sale or a prior chattel mortgage properly recorded.  If an action has been brought under N.J.S.2A:44-26 and the court has ordered payment of money to the garage keeper, the garage keeper shall, upon payment to the garage keeper in cash or by certified or cashier's check of the amount ordered by the court, surrender the motor vehicle or part thereof immediately.  If the amount in the court order has not been paid in accordance with this act within 15 days from the date of the order, the property held by the garage keeper may then be sold at public auction, subject to any prior lien, title or interest held by virtue of a prior conditional sale or a prior chattel mortgage properly recorded.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1998, c.122, s.6.

2A:44-30  Notice of sale.

	2A:44-30.  Notice of the sale, under section 2A:44-29 of this title shall be published  for two weeks at least once in each week, in some newspaper circulating in the municipality in which the garage is situate and not less than five days' notice of  such sale shall be given by posting the notice at the garage keeper's place of business.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1998, c.122, s.7.

2A:44-31  Application of proceeds of sale.

	N.J.S.2A:44-31.  The proceeds of the sale shall be applied to the payment of the lien or the amount specified in the order of court and the expenses of the sale.  The balance, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the motor vehicle, or part thereof.  The balance, if not claimed by the owner within 60 days after sale, shall be paid to the municipality, in which the garage is situated, to provide financial support for social programs for the indigent.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1998, c.122, s.8. 

2A:44-32.  Lien not impaired by taking judgment for money due; enforcement by levy and sale under execution
    A lien held by a person upon chattels in his possession for labor or materials furnished in the repair or construction thereof, shall not be waived,  merged or impaired by the recovery of a judgment for the moneys due for such  labor or material, but the lien may be enforced by levy and sale under  execution upon the judgment.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-33.  Sale by public auction to enforce lien
    If the lien held by a person upon chattels in his possession for labor or materials furnished in the repair or construction thereof, and the amount due thereon, either in whole or part, shall remain unpaid for 3 months after the same became due and payable, the person having the lien may sell the chattels at public auction.

    If the chattels are of a nature as to be easily separated or divided, no more shall be sold than necessary, as near as may be, to make sufficient money to pay the lien and expenses of the sale.  Notice of the sale shall be given by  publishing the notice once in each of the 2 weeks preceding the day of sale in  a newspaper circulating in the county and by posting in 5 public places in the  municipality in which the chattels are located, and by mailing a copy of the  notice to the owner, if his address is known, not less than 5 days before the  day of sale.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-34.  Proceeds of sale;  balance
    The proceeds of the sale shall be applied to the payment of the lien and expenses of the sale.  The balance, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the chattels when they are taken away or settled for in full.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-35.  Definitions
    As used in this article:

     "Hospital" , shall include any hospital owned, operated, or maintained in whole or in part by any person, corporation, charitable association, or other institution, or by any state, county or municipal board or body.

     "Services" , shall include pharmaceuticals, supplies, examinations, tests and therapies.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-36.  Hospital, nursing home and physician entitled to lien for services rendered to injured person as a result of accident
    Every hospital and nursing home in this State, and every licensed physician  or dentist practicing in this State, shall have a lien in the manner set forth  in this article for services rendered, by way of treatment, care or maintenance  after, to any person who shall have sustained personal injuries in an accident  as a result of the negligence or alleged negligence of any other person.

     	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1953, c. 163, p. 1413, s. 1, eff. May 15, 1953;  L.1970, c. 135,  s. 1, eff. July 9, 1970.

2A:44-37.  To what lien attaches
    Upon compliance with the provisions of this article, the lien shall attach to any and all rights of action, suits, claims, demands and upon any judgment, award or determination, and upon the proceeds of any settlement of such rights of action, suits, claims, demands, judgments, awards or determinations which any such injured person may have or shall have, assert or maintain against any such other person for damages on account of such injuries, up to the date of payment of such damages.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-38.  Amount of hospital lien
    The amount of the lien by a hospital for treatment, care and maintenance of  an injured person shall not exceed ward rates in such hospital up to the date  of payment of moneys or compensation to the injured party.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-39.  Amount of physician's or dentist's lien
    The amount of the lien of the physician or dentist for services rendered to  a person as a result of an accident shall be based on the reasonable value thereof, but not to exceed twenty-five per centum (25%) of the amount of any award, report, decision, judgment or settlement to the injured person.

     	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1953, c. 163, p. 1413, s. 2, eff. May 15, 1953.

2A:44-39.1.  Amount of nursing home lien
    The amount of the lien by a nursing home for care and maintenance of an injured person shall be based on the minimum per diem rate charged by the nursing home for ordinary patient care up to the date of payment of moneys or compensation to the injured party.

     L.1970, c. 135, s. 8, eff. July 9, 1970.

2A:44-40.  Accidents or injuries under workmen's compensation law excepted
    No hospital, nursing home, physician or dentist shall be entitled to a lien  under this article where the person was injured as a result of an accident  coming within the scope of any workmen's compensation law.

   	 L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1953, c. 163, p. 1413, s. 3;  L.1970, c. 135, s. 2, eff. July 9,  1970.

2A:44-41.  Notice of lien;  filing;  contents;  fees
    No hospital, nursing home, physician or dentist shall be entitled to a lien  under this article, unless a notice in writing containing the name and address  of the injured person, the date and location of the accident, the date of the  first treatment, care or maintenance, the name and address of the hospital,  nursing home, physician or dentist, and, if ascertainable by reasonable  diligence, the names and addresses of the persons alleged to be liable for  damages sustained by such injured person, shall be filed in the office of the  county clerk of the county in which such injuries shall have occurred, prior to  the payment of any moneys to such injured person or his legal representatives  as damages for such injuries, but in no event later than 90 days after the date  of such first treatment, care or maintenance.

    Every county clerk shall, at the expense of the county, provide a suitable,  well-bound book, to be called the hospital lien docket and a similar book to be  called the physician and dentist lien docket and shall enter therein  respectively any liens claimed under this article.

    As to each claim filed there shall be entered in the proper book the name of  the injured person, the date of the accident, the name of the hospital, nursing  home, physician or dentist making the claim, as the case may be, and the name  of the person alleged to be responsible for the injury.

    The county clerk shall make a proper index for each book in the name of the  injured person.  The county clerk shall for filing each notice of a lien claim,  and for each search in his office, receive the fees fixed by law.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1953, c. 163, p. 1414, s. 4;  L.1963, c. 99, s. 1, eff. June 13,  1963;  L.1970, c. 135, s. 3, eff. July 9, 1970.

2A:44-42.  Notice to person injured and person liable for damages
    Within 10 days after the filing of the notice of lien, the hospital, nursing  home, physician or dentist shall send by registered mail or serve personally, a  copy of such notice with a statement of the date of the filing thereof to or  upon the injured person and the person alleged to be liable for damages  sustained by such injured person, if such name and address can be ascertained  by reasonable diligence.  If the hospital, nursing home, physician or dentist  shall neglect to give such notice where the name and address of the person  injured or the person allegedly causing the injury are known or should be  known, the lien shall be void.

	 L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1953, c. 163, p. 1414, s. 5;  L.1970, c. 135, s. 4, eff. July 9,  1970.

2A:44-43.  Release of claims;  enforcement of lien by action
    After the filing and service of the notice of lien, as provided by this article, no release of any judgment, claim or demand by the injured persons shall be valid or effectual as against such lien and the person making any payment to such injured person or his legal representatives, as compensation for the injuries sustained shall be for a period of 1 year from the date of such payment, remain liable to the hospital, nursing home, physician or dentist  for the amount of the lien and any such hospital, nursing home, physician or  dentist within such period may enforce such lien by action against the person  making any such payment.  In any such action the defendant may contest the  charges by the hospital, nursing home, physician, or dentist, if not in  accordance with this article.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1953, c. 163, p. 1415, s. 6;  L.1970, c. 135, s. 5, eff. July 9,  1970.

2A:44-44.  Statement by physician or dentist of injuries and amount of charges
    Any person legally liable or against whom a claim is asserted, or his representative, for damages for injuries sustained shall, upon written request,  be furnished by any physician or dentist asserting a lien under this article  with a statement of the injuries sustained by the injured person and an  itemized statement of the charges and services rendered to date.  Failure of a  physician or dentist to provide such statement shall constitute a valid defense  in an action brought to enforce a lien under this article.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1953, c. 163, p. 1415, s. 7.

2A:44-45.  Statement of charges;  examination of records
    Any person, legally liable or against whom a claim is asserted for damages for injuries sustained, shall, upon written request, be furnished by any hospital or nursing home asserting a lien under this article with an itemized statement of the charges and services rendered therefor to date and shall be permitted to examine the records of the hospital or nursing home in reference to the treatment, care and maintenance of the injured person therein.  Failure of the hospital or nursing home to provide such statement or permit such examination shall constitute a valid defense in an action brought to enforce a lien under this article.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1970, c. 135, s. 6, eff. July 9, 1970.

2A:44-46.  Discharge of lien;  procedure;  fees
    Any hospital, nursing home, physician or dentist having filed a lien under this article, shall upon payment or release thereof, file or cause to be filed in the office of the county clerk wherein the lien is filed, a duly acknowledged certificate of such payment or release and authorizing the county clerk to discharge the lien.  Thereupon such clerk shall file said certificate in the name of the injured person, and the lien shall be discharged.  For this service the clerk shall be paid the fee fixed by law.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1953, c. 163, p. 1416, s. 8, eff. May 15, 1953;  L.1970, c. 135,  s. 7, eff. July 9, 1970.

2A:44-47.   "Hotel"  and  "guest"  defined
    As used in this article:

    a.   "Hotel"  includes inns and boarding houses.

     b.   "Guest"  includes boarders and lodgers.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-48.  Lien of hotel, apartment hotel, inn and boarding house proprietor
    The proprietor of any hotel, apartment hotel, inn or boarding house shall have a lien on all baggage, and other property belonging to any guest, or brought upon the premises by any guest, tenant, boarder or lodger, for the amount of his bill due to the proprietor thereof for the hire or rent of rooms,  board, lodging, cash advanced or other accommodations furnished in said hotel,  apartment hotel, inn or boarding house, and shall have the right, without  process of law, to retain the same until the said amount of indebtedness is  discharged.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-49.  Sale of retained property;  notice;  disposition of proceeds
    Property retained by the hotel, apartment hotel, inn or boarding house proprietor under this article may be sold at public auction upon a notice published for 3 days in a newspaper circulating in the municipality wherein said hotel, apartment hotel, inn or boarding house is kept.  The proceeds of the sale after the deduction of the expenses thereof shall be applied to the payment of the indebtedness and the balance, if any, shall be paid over to the owner of such property or his representative.  The balance, if not claimed by such owner or his representative within 30 days after such sale, shall be paid to the municipality for the support of the poor.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-51.  Right of lien; retention of property when amount due unpaid; "keeper of a livery stable" defined

	2A:44-51.  Every keeper of a livery stable or boarding and exchange stable, shall have a lien on all animals left with him in livery, for board, sale or exchange and upon all carriages, wagons, sleighs and harness left with him for storage, sale or exchange for the amount due such proprietor for the board and keep of such animal and also for such storage, and shall have the right, without process of law, to retain the same until the amount of such indebtedness is discharged.

	As used in this section, "keeper of a livery stable" shall include, but need not be limited to, a proprietor of a stable, a trainer, a veterinarian, a farrier, or any other person who has a financial relationship with the owner of the horse.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1997, c.2.

2A:44-52.  Sale of retained property;  disposition of proceeds
    Property retained by the proprietor under this article shall be sold at public auction, after the expiration of 30 days from the date of such retention.

    Notice of the sale shall be first published once in each of the 2 weeks preceding the day of the sale in a newspaper circulating in the municipality in  which the stable is situated, and 5 days' notice of the sale shall be given by  posting a copy of the notice in 5 public places in the municipality.

    The proceeds of sale after the deduction of the expenses thereof shall first  be applied to the payment of the indebtedness, and the balance, if any, shall  be paid to the owner of the property, or his representative. The balance, if  not claimed by the owner within 60 days after sale, shall be paid to the  municipality, in which the stable is situated, for the support of the poor.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-53.  Compensation to persons taking up and securing drift lumber or boats
    Any person taking up drift lumber, rails, posts and other valuable lumber, or boats, scows, skiffs, barges or other craft, which may be found adrift in any of the rivers or other waters in, running through or bordering on this state, or lodged on the land in this state of any person, and who shall, in all  things, comply with the requirements of this article, may demand of and recover  from the owner of the same, as full compensation for his expense and labor in  taking up and securing same the following amounts:

    For single logs or other single pieces of drift lumber, rails, posts or other valuable lumber, $.12 each;

    For joined sections of lumber or parts of rafts, $.10 for each log or timber  or supporting piece of lumber, and $.25 for each and every 1,000 linear feet,  but not exceeding a total of $5 for the entire joined section of lumber or part  of raft;

    For a whole raft, or for boats, skiffs, scows, barges or other craft, $5 for  each.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-54.  Drift lumber or boats taken up to be secured and kept; advertisement thereof;  sale and disposition of proceeds
    Each person taking up any of the lumber or craft under this article shall secure and keep the same for 6 days in some convenient place, within 20 yards of the margin of the river or other waters in which the same may be found.

    If, within the 6 days, the same shall not be claimed by the owner thereof, and shall be of the value of $5 or over, the person taking up the same shall make advertisement thereof in a newspaper circulating in the neighborhood, at least once a week for a period of 6 weeks.  The advertisement shall contain a true description of the lumber or boat taken up and a notice where the same is located.

    If the owner of such lumber or craft shall not claim the same on or before the date of the last advertisement, the person who has taken up and secured the  same may sell the property at a public or private sale, at a fair and reasonable price.  The proceeds of such sale, after deducting the compensation allowed by this article, and the expenses of the advertisement and sale, shall be held by the seller for 1 year after the sale, subject to the claim of the owner of the lumber or craft so sold, due proof of ownership thereof being first made.

    If no owner shall appear to claim such proceeds of sale, or, having appeared, shall fail to make due proof of ownership, the said proceeds of the sale shall become the property of the person so selling the same.

    If the value of the lumber or craft shall be under $5 and, if the same shall  not be claimed by the owner thereof within 90 days from the time when they were  taken up and secured, the person taking up and securing the same may  appropriate them to his own use without making any advertisement or sale thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-55.  Affidavit of claimant
    Any person claiming to be the owner of any lumber or craft found adrift and  taken up and secured under this article, or his agent, shall, upon request  verify his claim in writing under oath.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-56.  Rights and title of owners of lumber or boats taken up
    Any person, or his agent, presenting such a written claim and paying the compensation, together with the expenses of the advertisement thereof, pursuant  to this article, shall be entitled to the immediate possession thereof, and, as  against the person taking up any such lumber or craft, such claim shall, in all  courts of this state, be conclusive evidence of title.

    This section shall not be construed to affect in any way the title to any such lumber or craft as between any person claiming ownership thereof and other  claimants thereto.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-57.  Definitions.
    As used in this article:

     "Apparel"  includes the tackle and furniture of a vessel.

      "Owner"  includes a master, agent, consignee or commander of a vessel.

      "Vessel"  includes all ships, steamboats or other craft.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-58.  Application of article
    This article shall apply to all vessels, whether or not enrolled, licensed or registered.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-59.  Debt continuing lien upon vessel;  preferences
    A debt contracted by an owner of a vessel within this State, shall be a continuing lien upon the vessel and her apparel until paid, for:

    a.  Labor performed or materials or articles furnished in this State for the  building, repairing, fitting, furnishing or equipping the vessel in this State  at the time when the same was performed or were furnished;  or

    b.  Supplies, provisions and stores furnished within this State for the use  of the vessel;  or

    c.  Towing, wharfage and drydockage of the vessel and the expenses of keeping the same in storage in port in water or on land, including expenses incurred in taking care of and employing persons to watch the vessel.

    The lien shall be preferred to all other liens on the vessel, except mariner's wages.

     Amended by L.1976, c. 55, s. 1, eff. July 27, 1976.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-60.    Action to enforce lien  
     2A:44-60. Any person having a lien under this article may enforce the same by an action in the Superior Court.  

    	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.93.  

2A:44-61.  Process of attachment;  bond;  sale of vessel;  creditors
    In any such action the lien claimant shall be entitled to process of attachment and the court may require or dispense with the giving of a bond. The court may allow other lien claimants and unsecured creditors to become parties to the action.  The court may therein determine in a summary manner any  issue arising in the action.  The court may order a sale of the vessel at such  time and upon such terms as it shall prescribe and fix the amounts of the  expenses incurred in any such sale and direct the disposition of the proceeds  of the sale.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-62.  Lien not enforceable against vessel seized under process of United States courts
    No proceeding had under this article to enforce a lien shall be had against  a vessel seized by virtue of process issuing from a United States court having  admiralty jurisdiction while the vessel is actually held under such seizure,  nor against a vessel sold by order of such court except for debts contracted  after the sale.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair the  validity of a lien created by this article, the payment of which shall be  ordered, adjudged or decreed by a court of the United States.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-63.  Lien on vessel causing damage to another;  enforcement
    When a vessel shall have been run down or run afoul of by any other vessel and is damaged to the extent of $20 or more through the negligence or willful misconduct of the navigator of such other vessel, the owner of the damaged vessel shall have a lien upon the other vessel and her apparel to the amount of  the damage sustained.

    Any such lien shall be enforceable in the same manner as in the case of other liens under this article.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-125.  Short title
    This article may be cited as the  "municipal mechanics' lien law" .

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-126.  Definitions
    As used in this article:

     "Contractor"  means a person, his assigns or legal representatives, with whom a contract with a public agency is made.

     "Public agency"  means any county, city, town, township, public commission,  public board or other municipality in this state authorized by law to make  contracts for the making of any public improvement in any city, town, township  or other municipality.

     "Subcontractor"  means a person having a contract under a contractor for the performance of the same work, or any specified part thereof, and also a person having such a contract with a subcontractor, for the performance of the same work or any specified part thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-127.  Action to recover debt not barred
    Nothing in this article contained shall affect or impair the right of a creditor for labor performed or materials furnished to maintain an action to recover such debt against the person liable therefor.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-128.	Debts for labor and materials; funds liable; asserting lien; forfeiture of lien
	2A:44-128.  a.  Any person who, as laborer, mechanic, materialman, merchant or trader, or subcontractor, in pursuance of or conformity with the terms of any contract for any public improvement made between any person and a public agency as defined in N.J.S.2A:44-126 and authorized by law to make contracts for the making of public improvements, performs any labor or furnishes any materials, including the furnishing of oil, gasoline or lubricants and vehicle use, toward the performance or completion of any such contract, shall, on complying with the provisions of subsection b. of N.J.S.2A:44-128, N.J.S.2A:44-132 and N.J.S.2A:44-133, have a lien for the value of the labor or materials, or both, upon the moneys due or to grow due under the contract and in the control of the public agency, to the full value of the claim or demand.  The lien may be filed and, to the extent of the amount due or to grow due under the contract, shall become an absolute lien to the full value of the labor performed or materials furnished in favor of every person and his representatives and assigns employed by or furnishing materials to the contractor or subcontractor.
	No public agency shall be required to pay a greater amount than the contract price of the labor performed and materials furnished or the value thereof when no specific contract is made with respect to the same by the contractor or subcontractor, respectively.

	b.  Any person who may seek to assert a lien under subsection a. of this section shall, within 20 days of the first performance of work or performance of work or delivery of labor or materials to a subcontractor, file with the municipal clerk, the chief financial officer of the county or the chairman of the commission, board or authority, whichever is appropriate, written notice that he or she has furnished labor or materials to the subcontractor.  The notice shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the person providing the labor or materials, the name and geographical location of the public improvement for which the labor or materials have been supplied, the name of the subcontractor to which the labor or materials have been supplied, a description of the labor or materials supplied, and the date that the labor or materials were first supplied to the subcontractor.   The officer of the public agency shall maintain a separate file for all written notices which shall be available to the public for inspection and copying during regular business hours. Failure to provide this written notice as required within 20 days of the first performance of work or delivery of labor or materials to the subcontractor shall be a  bar to secure a lien for the labor or materials provided, unless there is money owing from the contractor to the subcontractor to whom the labor or materials were provided, in which case the lien shall be limited in value to a sum not greater than the money owing from the contractor to the subcontractor.

	The public entity with which the notice required by this section is filed may charge an inquiry fee for information contained in the notice to any person, including the contractor.  The inquiry fee shall be reasonable and shall be set to reflect the cost to the public entity of retrieving the information.

	Notwithstanding the provisions of this section to the contrary, if a notice is filed after the 20-day period, the person so filing may assert a lien under subsection a. of this section for any labor or materials provided on or after that filing date.

	No additional notice shall be required for work or materials provided under the same public improvement contract subsequent to the initial notice, notwithstanding that the work and materials may be provided under a separate contract or purchase order.

	Written notice shall be substantially in the following form:


NOTICE OF THE DELIVERY OF LABOR OR MATERIALS

	In accordance with the terms and provisions of the "Municipal Mechanics' Lien Law," N.J.S.2A:44-125 et seq., notice is hereby given that:

	1.  (Name of person supplying labor or materials) of (address of person supplying labor or materials) has on (date) provided to (name of subcontractor) the following:  (description of labor or materials).  My telephone number is (telephone number of person supplying labor or materials).

	2.  The (description of labor or materials) were provided for the (name of public improvement) in (name of municipality), New Jersey.



						Signed:..........................................

						For:...............................................

						Individual, firm or corporation...........



	c.  Funds received by a contractor and paid to a subcontractor or supplier for work performed or labor or materials supplied pursuant to a contract for any public improvement shall be applied only to amounts due and owing for work performed or labor or materials supplied for such public improvement.  Any subcontractor or supplier who knowingly applies such payment received from the contractor on the public improvement to amounts due and owing for work performed or labor or materials supplied on a construction project other than the public improvement and then claims a lien on the public improvement for non-payment shall forfeit all lien rights under this title.  A subcontractor or supplier forfeiting his lien rights pursuant to this section shall be liable for all damages incurred by any contractor as a result of the misapplication of such funds, including attorney's fees, and shall be liable for all court costs and reasonable legal expenses, including attorneys' fees, incurred by the contractor in defending or causing the discharge of the lien claim.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1996, c.81, s.1.

2A:44-129.  Commencement and extent of lien;  exception
    A lien created by this article shall, from the time of the filing thereof, attach, to the extent of the liability of the contractor or subcontractor as the case may be, for the claim preferred upon any funds due or to grow due to the contractor from the public agency under the contract against which the lien  claim is filed unless released as provided by section 2A:44-130 of this title.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-130.  Release of funds from lien;  bond
    The funds to which a lien has attached as provided by section 2A:44-129 of this title may be released and paid to the contractor by the financial officer of the public agency upon the filing with such officer of a bond in double the sum of all claims filed under the provisions of this article against the contract or the funds due or to grow due thereunder, and conditioned for the payment of such sum as may be adjudged to be due under such claims.  The bond shall be approved, as to the form by the chief law officer of the public agency, and, as to the sufficiency thereof, by the financial officer with whom it is filed.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-131.  Priority of lien over assignments
    The lien given by and filed pursuant to this article shall have priority over an assignment, by a contractor or subcontractor to a third person of moneys due or to grow due to such contractor or subcontractor for labor performed or materials furnished for a public improvement referred to in this article even though such assignment was made prior to filing of notice by the lien claimant, but not if such money had been paid to the assignee at the time of the filing of notice.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-132.  Filing notice of lien claim
    A lien claimant may, at any time before the whole work to be performed by the contractor for the public agency is either completed or accepted by resolution of the public agency, or within 60 days thereafter, file with the chairman or other head officer or with the secretary or clerk of the public agency, a notice of lien claim verified by oath of the claimant or his agent.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-133.  Contents of notice;  variance of names not to affect validity of  lien
    The notice of claim under section 2A:44-132 of this title shall state:

    a.  The name and residence or place of business of the claimant;

     b.  The amount claimed and from whom due and if not due when it will be due;

     c.  The amount, as near as may be, of the demand after deducting all just credits and offsets;

     d.  The name of the person by whom employed or to whom the materials were furnished and whether he is the contractor with the public agency or a subcontractor;

    e.  The general nature of the public work to which the contract relates;

     f.  The name of the contractor and the name of the public agency with which  the contract was made;  and

     g.  That the labor was performed for, or materials furnished to, the contractor or subcontractor, specifying which, and that they were actually performed or used in the execution or completion of the contract with the public agency.

    No variance as to the name of the contractor or subcontractor or name of the  public agency shall affect the validity of the claim or lien.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-134.  Lien docket;  entries;  validity of claim not affected by failure to make entry
    The officer of the public agency with whom a notice of lien claim is filed pursuant to section 2A:44-132 of this title shall give notice of the filing thereof to the financial officer of the public agency who shall, in a lien book  kept by him, enter:

    a.  The name and residence or place of business of the claimant;

     b.  The name of the contractor and of the subcontractor, if any, referred to  in the lien;

     c.  The amount and date of the filing;  and

     d.  A brief designation of the contract upon which the claim is made.

     Failure of the officer of the public agency to notify the financial officer  or of the financial officer to make entry in the lien book, shall not affect  the validity of the claim.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-135.  Notice by public agency to contractor or person in interest
    A public agency may, upon a notice of lien claim being filed with it pursuant to section 2A:44-132 of this title, serve notice upon the contractor and upon any person who may appear, by the records of the public agency, to have an interest in the fund in the possession of the public agency, that the claim is filed and requiring the contractor or person in interest to show cause  before the governing board of the public agency, within 5 days from the service  of notice, why the claim should not be paid.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-136.  Payment of claim by public agency if statement not filed; credit for amount paid;  priority of claim of laborer
    If the contractor or person in interest shall fail to file with the financial officer of the public agency, within the time prescribed by notice under section 2A:44-135 of this title, a statement duly verified, that the lien  claim is unfounded and untrue, specifying in what respects the same is unfounded and untrue, the public agency may pay, without the order of any court, the claim out of the funds in its possession upon which the claimant has  a lien.  When payment is so made the public agency shall not be obliged to pay  the same to the contractor but shall be entitled to credit upon the contract  for the amount so paid.  Nothing in this article contained shall impair the  right of the priority of the claim or lien of a laborer as between the right of  the laborer and a claimant or other person entitled to a lien.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-137.  Actions in superior court
    Any claimant who has filed a notice under sections 2A:44-132 and 2A:44-133 of this title may enforce his claim against the fund therein designated by an action of an equitable nature in the superior court.  An action of the same nature to determine or terminate said liens may be brought in said court by the  contractor, subcontractor or public agency.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-138.  Commencement of action;  lien of other claimants preserved
    No lien created under this article shall be binding on the funds of the public agency, unless an action to enforce the lien claim be brought within 60 days from the time when the whole work to be performed by the contractor is either completed or accepted by resolution of the public agency, but if any action be brought by any claimant the lien of any other claimant may be preserved and enforced by filing an answer setting up his claim in such action within the time allowed by the practice of, or within such time as may be allowed him by, the court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-139.  Parties to action;  county or municipality when public agency not corporation
    The claimant first bringing an action for the enforcement of his claim in the superior court as provided by this article, shall make parties to the action all who have filed claims, the contractor, the subcontractor referred to  in the claims, and the public agency with whom the contract was made.  If the  public agency is not a corporation, then the county or municipality under which  it is constituted shall be made a party defendant.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-140.  Determination of validity of liens and amount due; judgment; ratable distribution;  priority of laborer's lien;  claim of subcontractor chargeable with amount paid to claimants
    The superior court shall determine the validity and priorities of the liens  of the plaintiffs and defendants and of all other liens which may be filed  within the time prescribed by this article and the amount due from the public  agency to the contractor under the contract and from the contractor or subcontractor to the respective claimants and shall enter judgment directing the public agency, out of moneys due from it to the contractor, to pay to the several claimants the sums found due to them respectively, with interest and costs upon claims adjudged to be just and valid under this article.  If the amount due from the public agency to the contractor is not sufficient to make the payments in full, distribution shall be made ratably without regard to the priority in filing claims, and in either case the claims of the subcontractors shall be chargeable with the amounts paid to the claimants under them for labor  performed and materials furnished in the execution of the subcontract; provided, however, a laborer shall have a lien prior to other liens upon filing notice under this article at any time before payments are due and made.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-141.  Payment by public agency into court
    The public agency may at any time during the pendency of the action pay into  the superior court the amount which it admits to be due the principal contractor upon the contract.  The contractor or claimants shall not be precluded thereby from seeking judgment for a further sum.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-142.  How discharged
    A lien created under this article may be discharged by:

    a.  Filing with the financial officer of the public agency a duly acknowledged or proved certificate of the claimant or his successor in interest, or his duly authorized attorney or agent or his attorney of record, stating that the lien is discharged;

    b.  The lapse of 60 days since the completion of the work to be performed or  the acceptance of the same by resolution of the public agency without the commencement of an action to enforce the lien claim or the filing of answer, within the time allowed by the practice of, or within such time as may be allowed him by, the superior court, asserting such lien in an action brought by  another claimant;

    c.  Satisfaction of a judgment rendered in an action to enforce the lien or  claim;  or

    d.  The final judgment of the superior court in an action to enforce the lien to which the claimant was a party.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-143.	Additional bond for payment of claims for labor, material, etc.; waiver, surety's obligation
	2A:44-143.  a.  (1)  When public buildings or other public works or improvements are about to be constructed, erected, altered or repaired under contract, at the expense of the State or any contracting unit, as defined in section 2 of P.L.1971, c.198 (C.40A:11-2), or school district, the board, officer or agent contracting on behalf of the State, contracting unit or school district, shall require delivery of the payment and performance bond issued in accordance with N.J.S.2A:44-147 and otherwise, as provided for by law, with an obligation for the performance of the contract and for the payment by the contractor for all labor performed or materials, provisions, provender or other supplies, teams, fuels, oils, implements or machinery used or consumed in, upon, for or about the construction, erection, alteration or repair of such buildings, works or improvements provided by subcontractors or material suppliers in contract with the contractor, or subcontractors or material suppliers in contract with a subcontractor to the contractor, which class of persons shall be the beneficiaries of the payment and performance bond.  The board, officer or agent shall also require that all payment and performance bonds be issued by a surety which meets the following standards:
	(a)  The surety shall have the minimum surplus and capital stock or net cash assets required by R.S.17:17-6 or R.S.17:17-7, whichever is appropriate, at the time the invitation to bid is issued; and

	(b)  With respect to all payment and performance bonds in the amount of $850,000 or more, (i) if the amount of the bond is at least $850,000 but not more than $3.5 million, the surety shall hold a current certificate of authority, issued by the United States Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to 31 U.S.C.  9305, that is valid in the State of New Jersey as listed annually in the United States Treasury Circular 570, except that if the surety has been operational for a period in excess of five years, the surety shall be deemed to meet the requirements of this subsubparagraph if it is rated in one of the three highest categories by an independent, nationally recognized United States rating company that determines the financial stability of insurance companies, which rating company or companies shall be determined pursuant to standards promulgated by the Commissioner of Insurance by regulation adopted pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), and (ii) if the amount of the bond is more than $3.5 million, then the surety shall hold a current certificate of authority, issued by the United States Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 9305, that is valid in the State of New Jersey as listed annually in the United States Treasury Circular 570 and, if the surety has been operational for a period in excess of five years, shall be rated in one of the three highest categories by an independent, nationally recognized United States rating company that determines the financial stability of insurance companies, which rating company or companies shall be determined pursuant to standards promulgated by the Commissioner of Insurance by regulation adopted pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968,  c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).  A surety subject to the provisions of subsubparagraph (ii) of this subparagraph which does not hold a certificate of authority issued by the United States Secretary of the Treasury shall be exempt from the requirement to hold such a certificate if the surety meets an equivalent set of standards developed by the Commissioner of Insurance through regulation which at least equal, and may exceed, the general criteria required for issuance of a certificate of authority by the United States Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 9305.  A surety company seeking such an exemption shall, not later than the 180th day following the effective date of P.L.1995, c.384, certify to the appropriate contracting unit that it meets that equivalent set of standards set forth by the commissioner as promulgated.

	(2)  When such contract is to be performed at the expense of the State and is entered into by the Director of the Division of Building and Construction or State departments designated by the Director of the Division of Building and Construction, the director or the State departments may:  (a) establish for that contract the amount of the bond at any percentage, not exceeding 100%, of the amount bid, based upon the director's or department's assessment of the risk presented to the State by the type of contract, and other relevant factors, and (b) waive the bond requirement of this section entirely if the contract is for a sum not exceeding $200,000.

	(3)  When such a contract is to be performed at the expense of a contracting unit or school district, the board, officer or agent contracting on behalf of the contracting unit or school district may:  (a) establish for that contract the amount of the bond at any percentage, not exceeding 100%, of the amount bid, based upon the board's, officer's or agent's assessment of the risk presented to the contracting unit or school district by the type of contract and other relevant factors, and (b) waive the bond requirement of this section entirely if the contract is for a sum not exceeding $100,000.

	b.  A surety's obligation shall not extend to any claim for damages based upon alleged negligence that resulted in personal injury, wrongful death, or damage to real or personal property, and no bond shall in any way be construed as a liability insurance policy.  Nothing herein shall relieve the surety's obligation to guarantee the contractor's performance of all conditions of the contract, including the maintenance of liability insurance if and as required by the contract.  Only the obligee named on the bond, and any subcontractor performing labor or any subcontractor or materialman providing materials for the construction, erection, alteration or repair of the public building, work or improvement for which the bond is required pursuant to this section, shall have any claim against the surety under the bond.

	c.  A board, officer or agent contracting on behalf of the State, contracting unit or school district shall not accept more than one payment and performance bond to cover a single construction contract.  The board, officer or agent may accept a single bond executed by more than one surety to cover a single construction contract only if the combined underwriting limitations of all the named sureties, as set forth in the most current annual revision of United States Treasury Circular 570, or as determined by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to R.S.17:18-9, meet or exceed the amount of the contract to be performed.

	d.  A board, officer or agent contracting on behalf of the State, contracting unit or school district shall not accept a payment or performance bond unless there is attached thereto a Surety Disclosure Statement and Certification to which each surety executing the bond shall have subscribed.  This statement and certification shall be complete in all respects and duly acknowledged according to law, and shall have substantially the following form:



SURETY DISCLOSURE STATEMENT AND CERTIFICATION



	.............................., surety(ies) on the attached bond, hereby certifies(y) the following:

	(1)  The surety meets the applicable capital and surplus requirements of R.S.17:17-6 or R.S.17:17-7 as of the surety's most current annual filing with the New Jersey Department of Insurance.

	(2)  The capital (where applicable) and surplus, as determined in accordance with the applicable laws of this State, of the surety(ies) participating in the issuance of the attached bond is (are) in the following amount(s) as of the calendar year ended December 31, ......... (most recent calendar year for which capital and surplus amounts are available), which amounts have been certified as indicated by certified public accountants (indicating separately for each surety that surety's capital and surplus amounts, together with the name and address of the firm of certified public accounts that shall have certified those amounts):



	.............................................

	.............................................

	.............................................

	(3) (a) With respect to each surety participating in the issuance of the attached bond that has received from the United States Secretary of the Treasury a certificate of authority pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 9305, the underwriting limitation established therein and the date as of which that limitation was effective is as follows (indicating for each such surety that surety's underwriting limitation and the effective date thereof):

	............................................

	............................................

	............................................

	(b)  With respect to each surety participating in the issuance of the attached bond that has not received such a certificate of authority from the United States Secretary of the Treasury, the underwriting limitation of that surety as established pursuant to R.S.17:18-9 as of (date on which such limitation was so established) is as follows (indicating for each such surety that surety's underwriting limitation and the date on which that limitation was established):



	...........................................

	...........................................

	...........................................

	(4)  The amount of the bond to which this statement and certification is attached is $ ...... .

	(5)  If, by virtue of one or more contracts of reinsurance, the amount of the bond indicated under item (4) above exceeds the total underwriting limitation of all sureties on the bond as set forth in items (3)(a) or (3)(b) above, or both, then for each such contract of reinsurance:

	(a)  The name and address of each such reinsurer under that contract and the amount of that reinsurer's participation in the contract is as follows:..............................

	..........................................

	..........................................

	............................................; and



	(b)  Each surety that is party to any such contract of reinsurance certifies that each reinsurer listed under item (5)(a) satisfies the credit for reinsurance requirement established under P.L.1993, c.243 (C.17:51B-1 et seq.) and any applicable regulations in effect as of the date on which the bond to which this statement and certification is attached shall have been filed with the appropriate public agency.

CERTIFICATE

(to be completed by an authorized certifying agent

for each surety on the bond)



	I ........................ (name of agent), as ....................................... (title of agent) for .............................. (name of surety), a corporation/mutual insurance company/other (indicating type of business organization) (circle one) domiciled in ......................... (state of domicile), DO HEREBY CERTIFY that, to the best of my knowledge, the foregoing statements made by me are true, and ACKNOWLEDGE that, if any of those statements are false, this bond is VOIDABLE.

................................................

(Signature of certifying agent)



.........................................................

(Printed name of certifying agent)



.......................................................

(Title of certifying agent)


	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1979, c.408; 1989, c.316; 1991, c.454; 1995, c.38, s.2; 1995, c.384, s.1; 1996, c.81, s.2.

2A:44-144.	Sureties on and amount of bond; condition for payment of claims; bond deposited, held for use of interested parties
	2A:44-144.  The bond required by this article shall be executed by the contractor with such sureties in accordance with  N.J.S.2A:44-147 as shall be approved by the board, officer or agent acting on behalf of the State, contracting unit or school district, in an amount equal to 100 per cent of the contract price.  The payment bond shall be conditioned for the payment by the contractor of all indebtedness which may accrue to any person, firm or corporation designated as a "beneficiary" pursuant to N.J.S.2A:44-143, in an amount not exceeding the sum specified in the bond, on account of any labor performed or materials, provisions, provender or other supplies, or teams, fuels, oils, implements or machinery used or consumed in, upon, for or about the construction, erection, alteration or repair of the public building or public work or improvement.
	The payment bond shall be deposited with and be held by the board, officer or agent acting on behalf of the State, contracting unit or school district, for the use of any beneficiary thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1995, c.384, s.2; 1996, c.81, s.3.

2A:44-145.	Statements of claimants filed with sureties on bond; time for action on bond
	2A:44-145.  Any person who may be a beneficiary of the payment bond, as defined in this article, and who does not have a direct contract with the contractor furnishing the bond shall, prior to commencing any work, provide written notice to the contractor by certified mail or otherwise, provided that he shall have proof of delivery of same, that said person is a beneficiary of the bond.  If a beneficiary fails to provide the required written notice, the beneficiary shall  only have rights to the benefits available hereunder from the date the notice is provided.
	Any beneficiary, as defined in N.J.S.2A:44-143, to whom any money shall be due on account of having performed any labor or furnished any materials, provisions, provender or other supplies, or teams, fuels, oils, implements or machinery in, upon, for or about the construction, erection, alteration or repair of any public building or other public work or improvement, shall, at any time before the expiration of one year from the last date upon which such beneficiary shall have performed actual work or delivered materials to the project, in the case of a material supplier, furnish the sureties on the bond required by this article a statement of the amount due to him.

	No action shall be brought against any of the sureties on the bond required by this article until the expiration of 90 days after provision to the sureties and the contractor of the statement of the amount due to him, but in no event later than one year from the last date upon which such beneficiary shall have performed actual work or delivered materials to the project.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1996, c.81, s.4.

2A:44-146.	Action on bond; limitation
	2A:44-146.  If the indebtedness due to any person as shown by the statement required to be filed by N.J.S.2A:44-145 shall not be paid in full at the expiration of 90  days from the date of notice of the amount due to the person, such person shall, within one year from the last date that work was performed or materials were supplied by that person, bring an action in his own name upon the bond required by this article.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1996, c.81, s.5.

2A:44-147.	Bond form; conditions
	2A:44-147.  The bond required by this article shall be in substantially the following form:

	"Know all men by these presents, that we, the undersigned as principal and  as sureties, are hereby held and firmly bound unto in the penal sum of  dollars, for the payment of which well and truly to be made, we hereby jointly and severally bind ourselves, our heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns.

	"Signed this ....... day of .................... , 19..... .

	"The condition of the above obligation is such that whereas, the above named principal did on the .............. day of .................................., 19 ........, enter into a contract with  , which said contract is made a part of this the bond the same as though set forth herein;

	"Now, if the said ............................. shall well and faithfully do and perform the things agreed by ................................... to be done and performed according to the terms of said contract, and shall pay all lawful claims of beneficiaries as defined by N.J.S.2A:44-143 for labor performed or materials, provisions, provender or other supplies or teams, fuels, oils, implements or machinery furnished, used or consumed in the carrying forward, performing or completing of said contract, we agreeing and assenting that this undertaking shall be for the benefit of any beneficiary as defined in N.J.S.2A:44-143 having a just claim, as well as for the obligee herein; then this obligation shall be void; otherwise the same shall remain in full force and effect; it being expressly understood and agreed that the liability of the surety for any and all claims hereunder shall in no event exceed the penal amount of this obligation as herein stated.

	"The said surety hereby stipulates and agrees that no modifications, omissions or additions in or to the terms of the said contract or in or to the plans or specifications therefor shall in anywise affect the obligation of said surety on its bond."

	Recovery of any claimant under the bond shall be subject to the conditions and provisions of this article to the same extent as if such conditions and provisions were fully incorporated in the form set forth above.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1996, c.81, s.6.

2A:44-148.  Money paid to contractor trust fund for payment of claims
    All money paid by the state of New Jersey or by any agency, commission or department thereof, or by any county, municipality or school district in the state, to any person pursuant to the provisions of any contract for any public improvement made between any such person and the state or any agency, commission or department thereof, or any county, municipality or school district in the state, shall constitute a trust fund in the hands of such person as such contractor, until all claims for labor, materials and other charges incurred in connection with the performance of such contract shall have been fully paid.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-149.  Definitions
    As used in this article:

     "Cemetery"  includes a burial ground.

      "Monument"  includes a gravestone, inclosure or other structure.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-150.  Right of lien
    A person furnishing or placing a monument in a cemetery shall have a lien thereon for the agreed price thereof or the part remaining unpaid, with interest from the time the amount was due, upon filing a notice of lien with the superintendent or person in charge of the cemetery.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-151.  Notice of lien;  contents;  filing
    Notice of lien may be filed at any time after the completion of the work, but shall be filed within 1 year after the agreed price for furnishing or placing the monument becomes due.  The notice shall state that the lienor has a  lien on the monument for all or the unpaid part of the purchase price thereof,  with interest, specifying the amount agreed to be paid, the amount unpaid with  a description of the monument and the location of the plot upon which it stands  and the names of the persons with whom the agreement for the purchase and  erection of the structure, or for the performance of the labor, was made.  The  notice shall be signed and verified by the lienor.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-152.  Service of notice of lien
    The lienor shall, within 10 days after filing the notice of lien, serve a copy thereof personally, or by mail, upon the person with whom the agreement for the purchase and erection of the monument or for the performance of labor thereon was made, and upon the owner of the lot upon which the monument is erected, if his name and residence can be ascertained.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-153.  Enforcement of lien by action and sale
    A lienor may, after service of the notice, as provided by section 2A:44-152  of this title, bring an action to recover the amount of the debt and to enforce  his lien therefor against the person with whom the agreement was made for the  purchase and erection of the monument or for the performance of labor thereon.   The lienor may, if he recovers judgment, remove the monument from the cemetery  and sell the same at public auction to satisfy the amount of such judgment.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-154.  Sale under judgment
    The sale authorized by section 2A:44-152 of this title, may be conducted by  the lienor or by an officer of the court according to the judgment entered in  the action, and the court shall prescribe the terms and conditions, the time  and place, and the notice to be given of the sale.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-155.  Proceeds of sale;  disposition
    The lienor or officer shall, out of the proceeds of the sale, pay the expenses thereof, and the expenses of the removal of the monument from the cemetery, not exceeding $10 if a gravestone only is removed and $50 if any other monument is removed, and shall retain out of such proceeds the amount due  upon the judgment recovered in the action to enforce the lien.  The residue, if  any, shall be forthwith paid to the judgment debtor.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-156.  Removal of monument after notice of lien filed;  exception
    The superintendent or other person in charge of a cemetery shall not permit  the removal, alteration or inscription of a monument against which a lien  exists after the notice of the lien has been filed and served as prescribed by  this article, except pursuant to the terms of a judgment recovered in an action  brought to enforce the lien.  No officer or person connected with a cemetery  shall hinder or obstruct the removal, in a proper manner, of the monument  pursuant to the terms of such judgment.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-157.   Definitions 
    Definitions.  As used in this article: 

   "Processor" means a person engaged in the business of spinning, throwing, manufacturing, bleaching, mercerizing, dyeing, weighting, printing, finishing, dressing, scraping or otherwise treating or processing of linen, cotton, wool, silk, artificial silk, yarns, synthetic fibers or goods, skins, pelts, furs or hides, or goods of which linen, cotton, wool, silk, artificial silk, yarns, synthetic fibers, skins, pelts, furs or hides form a component part. 

   "Debtor" means a person indebted to a "processor" for labor performed or materials furnished in and about the business mentioned in the preceding paragraph of this section. 

   "Owner" means a person having title to the property herein described, either at law or in equity, or having a lien or encumbrance thereon or an interest in the same, other than the lien of the processor herein created. 

   "Person" includes a natural person or his legal representative, partnership, corporation, company, trust, business entity or association, and any agent, employee, salesman, partner, officer, director, member, stockholder, associate, trustee or cestui que trust thereof. 

   "Property" includes linen, cotton, wool, silk, artificial silk, yarns, synthetic fibers or goods, skins, pelts, furs or hides, or goods of which linen, cotton, wool, silk, artificial silk, yarns, synthetic fibers, skins, pelts, furs or hides form a component part. 

  	 L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L. 1985, c. 492, s. 1, eff. Jan. 21, 1986. 

2A:44-158.   Property subject to lien 
    Property subject to lien.  a. A processor shall be entitled to a lien upon the property of others which comes into the processor's possession, for the entire indebtedness owed to the processor by the person as a result of the processor having performed labor or having furnished materials for that person in and about the spinning, throwing, manufacturing, bleaching, mercerizing, dyeing, weighting, printing, finishing, dressing or scraping, or otherwise treating or processing or shipping, trucking and storing of said property. 

   b.   A processor shall be entitled to a lien upon the property of any person which comes into the processor's possession at a time when that person is indebted to the processor for labor previously performed or materials previously furnished or both in or about the spinning, throwing, manufacturing, bleaching, mercerizing, dyeing, weighting, printing, finishing, dressing or scraping, or otherwise treating or processing or shipping, trucking or storing of other property of the debtor previously released, delivered, relinquished, shipped or surrendered by the processor, for the entire indebtedness owed to the processor by the debtor. 

   	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L. 1985, c. 492, s. 2, eff. Jan. 21, 1986. 

2A:44-159.   Waiver or impairment of lien; assignment 
    Waiver or impairment of lien; assignment.  The lien under section 2A:44-158 of this title shall not be affected in any way by the recovery of a judgment or the taking of a bill or note for the money due for labor or material; or by the processor having released, delivered, relinquished, shipped or surrendered property of the debtor without having been paid in full at the time of the release, delivery, relinquishment, shipment or surrender; or by any extension of credit by the processor to any person at any time.  The lien may be enforced as though the judgment had not been recovered; the bill or note had not been taken; the goods had not been released, delivered, relinquished, shipped or surrendered without full payment; or the processor had not agreed to extend credit.  The lien and the indebtedness under section 2A:44-158 of this title may be assigned without impairing the lien, and the lien may be enforced by the assignee directly, or on his behalf by the assignor, to the extent of the indebtedness so assigned. 

   	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L. 1985, c. 492, s. 3, eff. Jan. 21, 1986. 

2A:44-160.  Sale of property
    A processor having a lien upon the property of others that has come into his  possession and the amount due shall remain due and unpaid either in whole or in  part for 2 months after the same becomes due and payable, may sell the property  at public auction.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-161.  Notice of sale
    Notice of the sale authorized by section 2A:44-160 of this title shall be published for 2 consecutive weeks, at least once in each week, preceding the day of sale in a newspaper published in the county in which the property is located.  Notice of sale shall also be posted in 5 or more public places in the  county, one at least being in the municipality where the property is located,  within 15 days but not less than 5 days, before the sale.  A copy of the notice  shall be mailed to the owner of the property, if known, at least 5 days before  the day of the sale, at his last known post-office address.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-162.  Disposition of proceeds of sale
    The proceeds of the sale after the deduction of the expenses thereof shall be applied to the payment of the lien.  No more of the property shall be sold, if easily separated or divided, than shall be necessary to pay the lien and expenses.

    The balance of the proceeds, if any, shall be paid to those entitled thereto.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-163.  Lien enforceable by other procedure
    The provisions of this article shall not be construed to be in derogation of  the right of the lienor to enforce the lien by any other lawful procedure.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-164.  Paramount claim of lien;  surrender of right;  exception
    The lien created by this article shall be paramount to the title, lien, interest or encumbrance of the owner, when the owner or his representative, if his interest is prior in time to that of the processor, shall have consented or  authorized the acquiring of possession of the property by the processor. Such  consent may be inferred from a course of business or dealings or otherwise.

    The paramount right of the processor shall not be surrendered or waived except by express written agreement between the parties involved.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-165.  Definitions
    As used in this article:

     "Rentor"  includes a person, partnership and corporation who may rent a mill, factory or loft or any portion thereof, to another for manufacturing or other purposes.

     "Rentee"  includes a person, partnership and corporation who may rent space  for manufacturing or other purposes.

     "Owner"  includes a person, partnership or corporation having or acquiring  title to property herein referred to or having or acquiring a legal or  equitable interest in the same.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-166.  Right of lien for unpaid rent;  priority
    A rentor shall be entitled to a lien on machinery and other chattels to the  extent of the rentee's interest therein for the amount of unpaid rent, from the  date the rent is unpaid.

    Such lien hereby created shall have priority and be paramount to any title,  lien, interest, mortgage, judgment or other encumbrance created or acquired  after machinery or other chattels are placed in the premises. Such priority  shall extend only to the amount of unpaid rent for not more than 6 months.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-167.  Sale to meet lien;  notice;  publication
    When a rentor has a lien upon the machinery or other chattels of any rentee  for unpaid rent, and the amount due shall remain due and unpaid, either in  whole or in part, he may expose or cause to be exposed such machinery or other  chattels for sale, and sell the same free and clear of such liens and  encumbrances, to which the lien of the rentor is given priority by section  2A:44-166 of this title, at public auction, upon notice of sale being published  2 times for 2 consecutive weeks, once in each week, preceding the day of sale,  in a newspaper published in the county in which such machinery or other  chattels are located and notice of sale being posted in 5 or more public places  in such county, one of which shall be in the municipality in which such  machinery or other chattels are located, within 15 days but not less than 5  days, before the sale.  A copy of the notice shall be mailed to the owner, if  known, at least 5 days before the day of sale, at his last known post-office  address.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-168.  Disposition of proceeds of sale
    The proceeds of the sale under section 2A:44-167 of this title shall be applied:

    a.  To the payment of the reasonable and necessary expenses of such sale, and next

    b.  To the payment of the unpaid rent for which the rentor has a lien, and next

    c.  To the payment of liens or encumbrances which are subordinate to the lien of the rentor in the order of their priority.

    The balance if any shall be paid to the rentee, or the whole balance if any  may be paid into the superior court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-169.  Definitions
    As used in this article:

    a.  The term  "film laboratory work, labor, services or materials" shall mean the developing of any negative or negatives of a motion picture, printing from negative or negatives thereof, the making or furnishing of any positive print or prints thereof, the making, furnishing, printing, superimposing, or inserting, of titles in any negative or negatives thereof, or in any positive print or prints of a motion picture, the cutting, cleaning, polishing, keeping,  storing, or assembling or otherwise processing, of any negative or negatives or  positive print or prints of a motion picture, the furnishing of any containers  for the handling or shipping of any such negatives or prints, and the doing,  furnishing or performing of any and all other film laboratory work, labor,  services and materials.

    b.  The term  "processor"  includes all persons, partnerships and corporations engaged or that may be engaged in the business, or any part thereof, of making, doing or furnishing film laboratory work, labor, services or materials.

    c.  The term  "motion picture film"  includes all negative and positive prints, together with the distribution and exhibition rights, the story, dialogue and music rights included therein and the copyright thereto.

    d.  The term  "owner"  with respect to any motion picture film includes all  persons, partnerships and corporations having title to motion picture film,  either at law or in equity, and all other persons, partnerships and corporations having or entitled to the possession of the motion picture film, whether he be a conditional vendee or mortgagor remaining in possession, or otherwise.

    e.  The term  "party authorized with respect to any motion picture film" includes any lessee, licensee or grantee of any distribution or exhibition or exploitation rights of any motion picture film, or of any other right, title or  interest in or to such motion picture film, or any agent of the owner, or any  mortgagee or conditional vendee of such motion picture film, or any person,  firm or corporation in possession of any motion picture film, or any person,  partnership or corporation who or which may contract for any motion picture  film, laboratory work, labor, services or materials in connection with such  motion picture, or any agent of any of the foregoing persons, partnerships or  corporations.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-170.  Property subject to lien;  right to detain
    In every case where a processor shall make, do or furnish any film laboratory work, labor, services or materials in connection with any motion picture film or advance or loan money in connection therewith, or in connection  with the production or distribution thereof, to or for the account of, or at  the request of, or with the consent or knowledge of, the owner thereof, or of  any party authorized with respect to such motion picture film, such processor  shall have a lien upon such motion picture film, and upon all other motion  picture films of such owner and of all parties authorized with respect to such  motion picture film, negative or negatives or positive print or prints which  are in the possession of the processor.  Such processor may, without process of  law, detain the negatives and positives of all such motion picture films at any  time in its possession until the payment to such processor of all indebtedness  due or to grow due to such processor on account of such film laboratory work, labor, services or materials, so made, done or furnished by it and on account  of all moneys paid out, loaned or advanced by such processor in connection  therewith or in connection with the production or distribution of such motion  picture film.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-171.  Waiver or impairment of lien
    No lien acquired by any processor shall be waived or impaired by the extension of any credit, or by the taking of any note or other instrument for the payment of the above-mentioned moneys due or to grow due to any such processor, or by the taking of any security for the payment thereof, or by the recovery of any judgment for such moneys.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-172.  Sale of property subject to lien;  notice
    The processor, having a lien upon a motion picture film or films, may cause  the same to be sold at public auction, at any time after the date when any  indebtedness on account of which such processor shall have such lien shall  become due and payable.  Notice of such sale shall be given by publishing such  notice once in each week for each of the two weeks preceding the day of such  sale, in a newspaper circulating in the municipality in which the said property  to be sold is situated, by posting a copy of the notice of sale in 5 public  places in such municipality at least 5 days before the day of such sale, and by  giving at least 10 days' written notice of the sale to the owner or party  authorized with respect to such motion picture film or films to be sold, either  by personal service or by registered mail addressed with the last known address  of such owner or authorized party.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-173.  Disposition of proceeds of sale
    The proceeds of the sale shall be applied first to the payment of the expenses of the sale, not to exceed the legal newspaper advertising fees, plus $10, and then to the payment of the lien.  The balance, if any, shall be paid to the owner of, or party authorized with respect to, the motion picture film or films, or any part thereof so sold.  The balance, if not claimed by the owner or party authorized with respect to such motion picture film or films, within 60 days after sale, shall be paid to the municipality for the support of  the poor.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-174.  Right of lien;  retention
    Every person, firm or corporation who shall perform work of any sort upon any watch, clock or jewelry for a price, at the request or with the consent of the owner thereof, his representative or any other person lawfully in possession thereof, shall have a lien upon such watch, clock or jewelry for the  sum due for such work, and may, without process of law, retain the same at any  time it is lawfully in his possession until the sum due is paid.  Said lien  shall be for the work done and it shall also include the value or agreed price,  if any, of all materials furnished by the lien claimant in connection with the  work.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-175.  Public sale and notice thereof;  disposition of proceeds
    If any money due for work done or materials furnished upon any watch, clock  or jewelry shall remain unpaid for 1 year after the completion of said work or  the furnishing of said materials, the lien claimant, having first given 30 days  notice in writing to the owner specifying the amount due and informing him that  payment of such amount within 30 days will entitle such owner to the return of  the property in the custody of the lien claimant and that in default thereof  the said property will be sold, may, if payment is not made within said period  of 30 days, sell such watch, clock or jewelry at public sale to satisfy the  amount due.  The proceeds of the sale after the deduction of the costs and  expenses thereof shall first be applied to the payment of the indebtedness  secured by the lien, and the balance, if any, shall be paid over to the owner.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-176.  Service or posting of notices
    Any notice prescribed by this article may be served upon the owner of the watch, clock or jewelry upon which the lien is claimed either personally or by registered mail, with return receipt demanded, directed to the last known address of the owner, or if the owner or his address is unknown, the notice may  be posted in 2 public places in the municipality in which the lien claimant  conducts his place of business.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-177.  Action for debt;  proceeds of sale applied on judgment
    Nothing in this article shall be construed so as to prevent the lien claimant from maintaining an action for the debt, notwithstanding the existence  of the lien, either before or after the sale provided for by this article;   provided, however, that the proceeds of any such sale after the deduction of  the expenses thereof shall be credited upon the debt so due. If the sale  should be held prior to the entry of judgment, judgment shall be entered only  for the difference between the debt due and the net proceeds of the sale.  If  the sale be held subsequent to the entry of judgment, said judgment shall be  credited with the net proceeds of such sale.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:44-187.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the  "Self-Service Storage Facility Act."

     L.1983, c. 136, s. 1, eff. April 14, 1983.

2A:44-188  Definitions.
 
 	2.	As used in this act:

	"Electronic mail" means an electronic message or an executable program or computer file that contains an image of a message that is transmitted between two or more computers or electronic terminals. The term includes electronic messages that are transmitted within or between computer networks.
 
	"Last known address" means that postal address or electronic mailing address provided by the occupant in the latest rental agreement, or the postal address or electronic mailing address provided by the occupant in a subsequent written notice of a change of address.
 
	"Occupant" means a person, the person's sublessee, successor, or assignee, entitled to the use of the storage space at a self-service storage facility under a rental agreement, to the exclusion of others.
 
	"Owner" means the proprietor, operator, lessor, or sublessor of a self-service storage facility, the owner's agent, or any other person authorized by the owner to manage the facility, or to receive rent from an occupant under a rental agreement.
 
	"Personal property" means movable property not affixed to land, and includes, but is not limited to, goods, merchandise, and household items.
 
	"Rental agreement" means any written agreement or lease, that establishes or modifies the terms, conditions, rules or any other provisions concerning the use and occupancy of a self-service storage facility.
 
	"Self-service storage facility" means any real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage space to occupants who are to have access for the purpose of storing and removing personal property. No occupant shall use a self-service storage facility for residential purposes. A self-service storage facility is not a warehouse as used in chapter 7 of Title 12A of the New Jersey Statutes.
 
	"Verified mail" means any method of mailing that is offered by the United States Postal Service or private delivery service that provides evidence of mailing.
 
	L.1983, c.136, s.2; amended 2013, c.128, s.1.

2A:44-189.  Lien on personal property;  priority
    Except as specified in this subsection, the owner of a self-service storage  facility or the owner's heirs, successors or assigns shall have a lien upon all  personal property located at a self-service storage facility for rent, labor,  or other reasonable charges due as specified in the rental agreement in  relation to the personal property, and for expenses necessary for its  preservation, or expenses reasonably incurred in its sale under this act.  The  lien provided for in this section is superior to any other lien or security  interest except those prior liens established pursuant to N.J.S. 2A:37-20,  sections 3 and 12 of P.L.1966, c. 30 (C. 54:32B-3, C. 54:32B-12) and R.S.  54:35-19 and those as to which the occupant has notified the owner in writing.   The lien attaches as of the date the personal property is brought to the  self-service storage facility.

     L.1983, c. 136, s. 3, eff. April 14, 1983.

2A:44-189.1  Charging of late fee.
 	1.	In addition to any other remedy available under the "Self-Service Storage Facility Act," P.L.1983, c.136 (C.2A:44-187 et seq.), a reasonable late fee may be charged and collected by an owner for each month that the occupant's rental payment for a storage space is in default.
 
	For purposes of this section, a late fee of up to $20.00 or 18 percent of the monthly rent, whichever is greater, is reasonable and shall not constitute a penalty.
 
	L.2017, c.368, s.1.

2A:44-190.  Issuance of warehouse receipt, bill of lading, or other document  of title;  application of act
    If an owner issues a warehouse receipt, a bill of lading, or other document  of title for the personal property stored at the self-service storage facility,  the owner and the occupant shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 7 of  Title 12A of the New Jersey Statutes and the provisions of this act shall not  apply.

     L.1983, c. 136, s. 4, eff. April 14, 1983.

2A:44-191  Satisfaction of lien.
 
	5.	An owner's lien for a claim which is more than 30 days overdue may be satisfied as follows:
 
	a.	The occupant shall be notified;
 
	b.	The notice shall be delivered in person or sent by verified mail or electronic mail to the last known address of the occupant;
 
	c.	The notice shall include:
 
	(1)	An itemized statement of the owner's claim showing the sum due at the time of the notice and the date when the sum became due;
 
	(2)	A brief and general description of the personal property subject to the lien. The description shall be reasonably adequate to permit the person notified to identify it, except that any container including, but not limited to a trunk, valise, or box that is locked, fastened, sealed, or tied in a manner which deters immediate access to its contents may be described without listing its contents;
 
	(3)	A notice of denial of access to the personal property, if this denial is permitted under the terms of the rental agreement, which provides the name, street address, and telephone number of the owner, or the owner's designated agent, whom the occupant may contact to respond to this notice;
 
	(4)	A demand for payment within a specified time not less than 14 days after delivery of the notice; and
 
	(5)	A conspicuous statement that unless the claim is paid within the time stated in the notice, the personal property will be advertised for sale.  The notice shall specify time and place of the sale;
 
	d.	Any notice made pursuant to this section shall be presumed delivered when it is deposited with the United States Postal Service or private delivery service, and properly addressed with postage prepaid or sent by electronic mail to the occupant's last known address; if the owner sends notice to the occupant's last known e-mail address and does not receive an electronic receipt that establishes delivery of the notice to the occupant's e-mail address, the notice shall be presumed delivered when it is sent to the occupant by verified mail to the occupant's last known address;
 
	e.	After the expiration of the time given in the notice, an advertisement of the sale shall be published once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation where the self-service storage facility is located. The advertisement shall include:
 
	(1)	A brief and general description of the personal property reasonably adequate to permit its identification as provided for in subsection c. (2) of this section;
 
	(2)	The address of the self-service storage facility and the number, if any, of the space where the personal property is located and the name of the occupant; and
 
	(3)	The time, place, and manner of the sale. The sale shall take place not sooner than 15 days after the final publication.  If there is no newspaper of general circulation where the self-service storage facility is located, the advertisement shall be posted at least 10 days before the date of sale in not less than six conspicuous places in the neighborhood where the self-service storage facility is located;
 
	f.	A sale of the personal property shall conform to the terms of the notification;
 
	g.	A sale of the personal property shall be public and shall be held at the self-service storage facility, or at the nearest suitable place to where the personal property is held or stored;
 
	h.	Notwithstanding any law, rule or regulation to the contrary, if the property upon which the lien is claimed is a motor vehicle or watercraft and rent and other charges related to the property are in default for 60 consecutive days, the owner may have the property towed. If a motor vehicle or watercraft is towed as authorized in this subsection, the owner shall: (1) send, by verified or electronic mail to the occupant's last known address, the name, address, and telephone number of the towing company that will perform the towing and the street address of the storage facility where the towed property can be redeemed; and (2) not be liable for the motor vehicle or watercraft or any damages to the motor vehicle or watercraft once the tower takes possession of the property;
 
	i.	Before a sale of personal property the occupant may pay the amount necessary to satisfy the lien, and the reasonable expenses incurred by the owner to redeem the personal property.  Upon receipt of this payment, the owner shall return the personal property, and the owner shall have no liability to any person with respect to the personal property;
 
	j.	A purchaser in good faith of the personal property sold to satisfy a lien, as provided for in section 3 of this act, takes the property free of any rights of persons against whom the lien is valid, despite noncompliance by the owner with the requirements of this section; 
 
	k.	The owner may satisfy his lien from the proceeds of the sale, but shall deposit the balance, if any, in an interest-bearing account with notice given to the occupant of the amount and place of the deposit and of his right to secure the funds; and
 
	l.	The owner's liability arising from the sale of personal property under this section is limited to the net proceeds received from the sale of that property.  The owner shall not be liable for identity theft or other harm resulting from the misuse of information contained in documents or electronic storage media that are part of the occupant's property sold or otherwise disposed of and of which the owner did not have actual knowledge.
 
	L.1983, c.136, s.5; amended 2013, c.128, s.2.

2A:44-191.1  Public sale.
	2.	An online publicly accessible auction website is a suitable place for holding the public sale authorized pursuant to subsection g. of section 5 of P.L. 1983, c.136 (C.2A:44-191), so long as the notice and other requirements of that section have been satisfied. 
 
	L.2017, c.368, s.2.

2A:44-192.  Existing rental agreements;  validity and enforcement
    All rental agreements entered into before, and not extended or renewed after, the enactment of this act, shall remain valid, and may be enforced or terminated in accordance with their terms or as permitted by any other law of this State.

     L.1983, c. 136, s. 6, eff. April 14, 1983.

2A:44-193  Maximum value of stored property; civil actions.
  
	3. a. If a rental agreement entered into pursuant to the "Self-Service Storage Facility Act," P.L.1983, c.136 (C.2A:44-187 et seq.) contains a provision placing a limit on the value of property that may be stored in the occupant's space, this limit shall be deemed to be the maximum value of the stored property, provided that the provision is printed in bold type or underlined in the rental agreement. 
 
	b.	In addition to the remedies otherwise provided by law, only an occupant listed on the last known rental agreement injured by a violation of the "Self-Service Storage Facility Act," P.L.1983, c.136 (C.2A:44-187 et seq.) may bring a civil action to recover damages.
 
	L.2013, c.128, s.3.

2A:44A-1.    Short title  
    1.   This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Construction Lien Law."  

   L.1993,c.318,s.1.  

2A:44A-2  Definitions relative to construction liens.
 
	2.	As used in this act: 

	"Claimant" means a person having the right to file a lien claim on real property pursuant to this act.
 
	"Community association" means a condominium association, a homeowners' association, a cooperative association, or any other entity created to administer or manage the common elements and facilities of a real property development that, directly or through an authorized agent, enters into a contract for improvement of the real property.
 
	"Contract" means any agreement, or amendment thereto, in writing, signed by the party against whom the lien claim is asserted and evidencing the respective responsibilities of the contracting parties, including, but not limited to, price or other consideration to be paid, and a description of the benefit or improvement to the real property subject to a lien. In the case of a supplier, "contract" shall include a delivery or order slip referring to the site or project to which materials have been delivered or where they were used and signed by the party against whom the lien claim is asserted or that party's authorized agent.  As referenced herein: the phrase "party against whom the lien claim is asserted" means the party in direct privity of contract with the party asserting the lien claim; and the term "signed" means a writing that bears a mark or symbol intended to authenticate it.
 
	"Contract price" means the amount specified in a contract for the provision of work, services, material or equipment.
 
	"Contractor" means any person in direct privity of contract with the owner of real property, or with a community association in accordance with section 3 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-3), for improvements  to the real property.  A construction manager who enters into a single contract with an owner or a community association for the performance of all construction work within the scope of a construction manager's contract, a construction manager who enters into a subcontract, or a construction manager who is designated as an owner's or community association's agent without entering into a subcontract is also a "contractor" for purposes of this act.  A licensed architect, engineer or land surveyor or certified landscape architect who is not a salaried employee of the contractor, or the owner or community association, performing professional services related to the improvement of property in direct contract with the property owner shall be considered a "contractor" for the purposes of this act.
 
	"County clerk" means the clerk of the county in which real property to be improved is situated.
 
	"Day" means a calendar day unless otherwise designated.
 
	"Dwelling" means a one-, two- or three-family residence that is freestanding or shares a party wall without common ownership interest in that party wall.  A dwelling may be part of a real property development.
 
	"Equipment" means any machinery or other apparatus, including rental equipment delivered to the site to be improved or used on the site to be improved, whether for incorporation in the improved real property or for use in the construction of the improvement of the real property.  A lien for equipment shall arise only for equipment used on site for the improvement of real property, including equipment installed in the improved real property.  In the case of rental equipment, the amount of any lien shall be limited to the rental rates as set forth in the rental contract.
 
	"Filing" means the (1) lodging for record and (2) the indexing of the documents authorized to be filed or recorded pursuant to this act in the office of the county clerk in the county where the property subject to the lien is located, or, in the case of real property located in more than one county, in the office of the county clerk of each such county.  A document that is "lodged for record" shall mean a document that is delivered to the county clerk and marked by the clerk with a date and time stamp or other mark indicating the date and time received.
 
	"First tier lien claimant" means a claimant who is a contractor.
 
	"Improvement" means any actual or proposed physical changes to real property  resulting from the provision of work, services, or material by a contractor,  subcontractor, or supplier pursuant to  a contract, whether or not such physical change is undertaken, and includes the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, renovation, demolition or removal of any building or structure, any addition to a building or structure, or any construction or fixture necessary or appurtenant to a building or structure for use in conjunction therewith.  "Improvement" includes, but is not limited to, excavation, digging, drilling, drainage, dredging, filling, irrigation, land clearance, grading or landscaping.  "Improvement" shall not include the mining of minerals or removal of timber, gravel, soil, or sod which is not integral to or necessitated by the improvement to real property.  "Improvement" shall not include public works or improvements to real property contracted for and awarded by a public entity.  Any work or services requiring a license for performance including, but not limited to, architectural, engineering, plumbing or electrical construction, shall not constitute an improvement unless performed by a licensed claimant.
 
	"Interest in real property" means any ownership, possessory security or other enforceable interest, including, but not limited to, fee title, easement rights, covenants or restrictions, leases and mortgages.
 
	"Lien" or "construction lien" means a lien on the owner's interest in the real property arising pursuant to  this act.
 
	"Lien claim" means a claim, by a claimant, for money for the value of work, services, material or equipment furnished in accordance with a contract and based upon the contract price and any amendments thereto, that has been secured by a lien pursuant to this act. The term "value" includes retainage earned against work, services, materials or equipment furnished.  
 
	"Lien fund" means the pool of money from which one or more lien claims may be paid.  The amount of the lien fund shall not exceed the maximum amount for which an owner can be liable.  The amount of the lien that attaches to the owner's interest in the real property cannot exceed the lien fund.
 
	"Material" means any goods delivered to, or used on the site to be improved, for incorporation in the improved real property, or for consumption as normal waste in construction operations; or for use on site in the construction or operation of equipment used in the improvement of the real property but not incorporated therein.  The term "material" does not include fuel provided for use in motor vehicles or equipment delivered to or used on the site to be improved.
 
	"Mortgage" means a loan which is secured by a lien on real property.
 
	"Owner" or "owner of real property" means any person, including a tenant, with an interest in real property who personally or through an authorized agent enters into a contract for improvement of the real property.  "Owner" or "owner of real property" shall not include a "community association" that holds record title to real property or has an interest in real property.
 
	"Person" means an individual, corporation, company, association, society, firm, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, partnership, joint stock company or any other legal entity, unless restricted by the context to one or more of the above.
 
	"Public entity" includes the State, and any county, municipality, district, public authority, public agency, and any other political subdivision or public body in the State.
 
	"Real property development" means all forms of residential and non-residential real property development including, but not limited to, a condominium subject to the "Condominium Act," P.L.1969, c.257 (C.46:8B-1 et seq.), a housing cooperative subject to "The Cooperative Recording Act of New Jersey," P.L.1987, c.381 (C.46:8D-1 et al.), a fee simple townhouse development, a horizontal property regime as defined in section 2 of P.L.1963, c.168 (C.46:8A-2), and a planned unit development as defined in section 3.3 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-6).
 
	"Residential construction," also referred to as "residential housing construction" or "home construction," means construction of or improvement to a dwelling, or any portion thereof, or any residential unit, or any portion thereof.  In the case of a real property development, "residential construction" or "residential housing construction" or "home construction" also includes: (1) all offsite and onsite infrastructure and sitework improvements required by a residential construction contract, master deed, or other document; (2) the common elements of the development, which may also include by definition the offsite and onsite infrastructure and sitework improvements; and (3) those areas or buildings commonly shared.
 
	"Residential construction contract" means a contract for the construction of, or improvement to, a  dwelling, or dwellings or any portion  thereof, or a residential unit, or units, or dwellings, or any portion thereof in a real property development.
 
	"Residential purchase agreement" means a  contract between a buyer and a seller for the purchase of a  dwelling, or dwellings or a  residential unit  or units in a real property development. 
 
	"Residential unit" means a unit in a real property development designed to be transferred or sold for use as a residence, and the design evidenced by a document, such as a master deed or declaration, recorded with the county clerk in the county where the real property is located, or a public offering statement filed with the Department of Community Affairs.  "Residential unit" includes a unit designed to be transferred or sold for use as a residence that is part of a multi-use or mixed use development project.  "Residential unit" shall not include a unit designed for rental purposes or a unit designed to be transferred or sold for non-residential use.
 
	"Second tier lien claimant" means a claimant who is, in relation to a contractor: (1) a subcontractor; or (2) a supplier.
 
	"Services" means professional services performed by a licensed architect, engineer, land surveyor, or certified landscape architect, who is not a salaried employee of the contractor, a subcontractor or the owner and who is in direct privity of contract with the owner for the preparation of plans, documents, studies, or the provision of other services by a licensed architect, engineer or land surveyor prepared in connection with  improvement to real property, whether or not such  improvement is undertaken.
 
	"State" means the State of New Jersey and any office, department, division, bureau, board, commission or agency of the State.
 
	"Subcontractor" means any person providing work or services in connection with the improvement of real property pursuant to a contract with a contractor or pursuant to a contract with a subcontractor in direct privity of contract with a contractor.
 
	"Supplier" means any supplier of material or equipment, including rental equipment, having a direct privity of contract with an owner, community association, contractor or subcontractor in direct privity of contract with a contractor.  The term "supplier" shall not include a person who supplies fuel for use in motor vehicles or equipment delivered to or used on the site to be improved or a seller of personal property who has a security agreement providing a right to perfect either a security interest pursuant to Title 12A of the New Jersey Statutes or a lien against the motor vehicle pursuant to applicable law.
 
	"Third tier lien claimant" means a claimant who is a subcontractor to a second tier lien claimant or a supplier to a second tier lien claimant.
 
	"Work" means any activity, including, but not limited to, labor, performed in connection with the improvement of real property.  The term "work" includes architectural, engineering or surveying services provided by salaried employees of a contractor or subcontractor, as part of the work of the contractor or subcontractor, provided, however, that the right to file a lien claim for those services shall be limited to the contractor or subcontractor.
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.2; amended 1995, c.392, s.1; 2010, c.119, s.1.

2A:44A-3  Lien entitlement for work, services, etc.; terms defined.
 
	3. a.  Any contractor, subcontractor or supplier who provides work, services, material or equipment pursuant to a contract, shall be entitled to a lien for the value of the work or services performed, or materials or equipment furnished in accordance with the contract and based upon the contract price, subject to  sections  6, 9, and 10 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-6, 2A:44A-9 and 2A:44A-10). The lien shall attach to the interest of the owner  or unit owner of the real property development, or be filed against the community association, in accordance with this section. 
 
	b.	For purposes of this section:
 
	(1)	"interest of the owner of the real property development" includes interest in any residential or nonresidential units not yet sold or transferred and the proportionate undivided interests in the common elements attributable to those units; 
 
	(2)	"interest of the unit owner" includes the proportionate undivided interests in the common elements of the real property development;
 
	(3)	"unit owner" means an owner of an interest in a residential or nonresidential unit who is not a developer of the property and acquires the unit after the master deed or master declaration is recorded, or after the public offering statement is filed with the Department of Community Affairs; and 
 
	c.	In the case of a condominium, notwithstanding the provisions of the "Condominium Act," P.L.1969, c.257 (C.46:8B-1 et seq.), or in the case of any other real property development with common elements or common areas or facilities, if the contract is: 
 
	(1) with the owner of the real property development, then the lien shall attach to the interest of the owner of the real property development; 
 
	(2) with the community association, the lien claim shall be filed against the community association but shall not attach to any real property.  
 
	In either case, if the work, services, material or equipment are performed or furnished as part of the common elements or facilities of a real property development, the lien shall not attach to the interest of the unit owner.
 
	d.	If the work, services, material or equipment are performed or furnished solely within or as part of a residential or nonresidential unit, the lien shall attach only to the interest of the unit owner.
 
	e.	If a tenant contracts for improvement of the real property, the lien shall attach to the leasehold estate of the tenant and to the interest in the property of any person who: 
 
	(1)	has expressly authorized the contract for improvement  in writing  signed by the person against whom the lien claim is asserted, which writing provides that the person's interest is subject to a lien for this improvement; 
 
	(2)	has paid, or agreed in writing to pay, the majority of the cost of the improvement; or
 
	(3)	is a party to the lease or sublease that created the leasehold interest of the tenant and the lease or sublease provides that the person's interest is subject to a lien for the improvement.
 
	f.	An amount of a lien on an interest of a person other than a tenant shall be limited to the amount that person agreed in writing to pay, less payments made by or on behalf of that person in good faith prior to the filing of the lien.
 
	g.	If an interest in real property is lawfully conveyed after work, services, material, or equipment are performed or furnished but before a lien attaches, the lien shall attach only to the interest retained by the owner or unit owner or community association, as the case may be, who contracted for the work, services, material or equipment and not to the interest previously conveyed.
 
	h.	Nothing in this act shall be construed to limit the right of any claimant from pursuing any other remedy provided by law.
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.3; amended 2010, c.119, s.2.

2A:44A-4.    Lien for improvements; attachment  
    4.   Liens for the following improvements shall attach to real property only in the manner herein prescribed.  In the case of an improvement:  

   a.   Involving a dock, wharf, pier, bulkhead, return, jetty, piling, groin, boardwalk or pipeline above, on or below lands under waters within the State's jurisdiction, the lien shall be on the improvements together with the contracting owner's interest in the lots of land in front of or upon which the improvements are constructed and any interest of the contracting owner of the land in the land or waters in front of the land;  

   b.   Involving removal of a building or structure or part of a building or structure from its situs and its relocation on other land, the lien shall be on the contracting owner's interest in the improved real property on which the building or structure has been relocated;  

   c.   Involving excavation, drainage, dredging, landfill, irrigation work, construction of banks, making of channels, grading, filling, landscaping or the planting of any shrubs, trees or other nursery products, the lien shall be on the land to which the improvements are made, and shall not be upon the adjoining lands directly or indirectly benefited from the improvements.  

   L.1993,c.318,s.4.  

2A:44A-5.    Liens, certain; prohibited  
    5.   No liens shall attach nor shall a lien claim be filed:

  

   a.   For materials that have been furnished or delivered subject to a security agreement which has been entered into pursuant to Chapter 9 of Title 12A of the New Jersey Statutes (N.J.S.12A:9-101 et seq.);  

   b.   For public works or improvements to real property contracted for and awarded by a public entity; provided, however, that nothing herein shall affect any right or remedy established pursuant to the "municipal mechanic's lien law," N.J.S.2A:44-125 et seq.;  

   c.   For work, services, material or equipment furnished pursuant to a residential construction contract unless there is strict compliance with sections 20 and 21 of this act.  

   L.1993,c.318,s.5.  

2A:44A-6  Filing lien claim.
  
	6. a. A contractor, subcontractor or supplier entitled to file a lien pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-3) shall do so according to the following process:
 
	(1)	The lien claim form as provided by section 8 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-8) shall be signed, acknowledged and verified by oath of the claimant setting forth: 
 
	(a)	the specific work or services performed, or material or equipment provided pursuant to contract; and 
 
	(b)	the claimant's identity and contractual relationship with the owner or community association and other known parties in the construction chain.
 
	(2)	In all cases except those involving a residential construction contract, the lien claim form shall then be lodged for record within 90 days following the date the last work, services, material or equipment was provided for which payment is claimed.  In the case of a residential construction contract, the lien claim form shall be lodged for record, as required by paragraph (8) of subsection b. of section 21 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-21), not later than 10 days after receipt by the claimant of the arbitrator's determination, and within 120 days following the date the last work, services, material or equipment was provided for which payment is claimed.  If requested, at the time of lodging for record, the clerk shall provide a copy of the lien claim form marked with a date and time received.
 
	b.	A lien shall not attach or be enforceable unless the lien claim or other document permitted to be filed is: 
 
	(1)	filed in the manner and form provided by this section and section 8 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-8); and 
 
	(2)	a copy thereof served in accordance with section 7 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-7), except that every document lodged for record that satisfies the requirements of this section, even if not yet filed, shall be enforceable against parties with notice of the document.  A document shall be first filed, however, in order to be enforceable against third parties without notice of the document, including, but not limited to, an owner, bona fide purchaser, mortgagee, grantee of an easement, or a lessee or a grantee of any other interest in real estate.
 
	c.	In the case of a residential construction contract the lien claim shall also comply with section 20 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-20) and section 21 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-21).
 
	d.	For purposes of this act, warranty or other service calls, or other work, materials or equipment provided after completion or termination of a claimant's contract shall not be used to determine the last day that work, services, material or equipment was provided.
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.6; amended 2010, c.119, s.3.

2A:44A-7  Serving of lien claim by claimant.
  
	7. a. Within 10  days following the  lodging for record of a lien claim, the claimant shall  serve  on the owner, or community association in accordance with section 3 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-3), and, if any, the contractor and subcontractor against whom the claim is asserted, a copy of the completed and signed lien claim  substantially in the form prescribed  by section 8 of  P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-8) and marked "received for filing" or a similar stamp with a date and time or other mark indicating the date and time received by the county clerk.  Service shall be by personal service as prescribed by the Rules of Court adopted by the Supreme Court of New Jersey or by: 
 
	(1)	simultaneous registered or certified mail or commercial courier whose regular business is delivery service; and 
 
	(2)	ordinary mail addressed to the last known business or residence address  of the owner  or community association, contractor  or subcontractor.  A lien claim served upon a community association need not be served upon individual "unit owners" as defined in section 3 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-3).
 
	b.	The service of the lien claim provided for in this section shall be a condition precedent to enforcement of the lien; however, the service of the lien claim outside the prescribed time period shall not preclude enforceability unless the party not timely served proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the late service has materially prejudiced its position. Disbursement of funds by the owner, community association, a contractor or a subcontractor who has not been properly served, or the creation or conveyance of an interest in real property by  an owner who has not been properly served, shall constitute prima facie evidence  of material prejudice.
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.7; amended 2010, c.119, s.4.

2A:44A-8  Lien claim form.
  
	8.	The lien claim shall be filed in substantially the following form:

CONSTRUCTION LIEN CLAIM
 
	TO THE CLERK, COUNTY OF __________:
 
	In accordance with the "Construction Lien Law," P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-1 et al.), notice is hereby given that (only complete those sections that apply):
 
1.	 On (date), I, (name of claimant), individually, or as a partner of the claimant known as (name of partnership), or an officer/member of the claimant known as (name of corporation or LLC) (circle one and fill in name as applicable), located at (business address of claimant), claim a construction lien against the real property of (name of owner of property subject to lien), in that certain tract or parcel of land and premises described as Block _____, Lot ____, on the tax map of the (municipality) of _____, County of_______, State of New Jersey, (or if no Block and Lot is assigned, a metes and bounds or other description of the property) in the amount of $(lien claim amount), as calculated below for the value of the work, services, material or equipment provided.  (If the claim is against a community association in accordance with section 3 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-3) set forth the name of the community association and the name and location of the property development.)  The lien is claimed against the interest of the owner, unit owner, or against the community association in accordance with section 3 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-3) or other party (circle one; if "other", describe: ____________________). 
 
2.	In accordance with a written contract for improvement of the above property, dated_______, with the property owner, community association, contractor, or subcontractor (circle one), named or known as (name of appropriate party), and located at (address of owner, unit owner, community association, contractor or subcontractor), this claimant performed the following work or provided the following services, material or equipment:
 
a. ____________________
 
b.____________________
 
c. ___________etc.	
 
3.	The date of the provision of the last work, services, material or equipment for which payment is claimed is _______, 20__.
 
4.	The amount due for work, services, material or equipment delivery provided by claimant in connection with the improvement of the real property, and upon which this lien claim is based, is calculated as follows:
	A.	Initial Contract Price: $ _______________
	B.	Executed Amendments to Contract Price/Change Orders: $__________________
	C.	Total Contract Price (A + B) = $_________________
	D.	If Contract Not Completed, Value Determined in Accordance with the Contract of Work Completed or Services, Material, Equipment Provided: _________
	E.	Total from C or D (whichever is applicable): $ _______________
	F.	Agreed upon Credits: $ ________________
	G.	Amount Paid to Date: $ ________________
	TOTAL LIEN CLAIM AMOUNT  E - [F + G] = $______________ 

NOTICE OF UNPAID BALANCE AND ARBITRATION
 
AWARD

	This claim (check one) does________does not______arise from a Residential Construction Contract.  If it does, complete 5 and 6 below; if not residential, complete 5 below, only if applicable.  If not residential and 5 is not applicable, skip to Claimant's Representation and Verification.
 
	5.	A Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien (if any) was previously filed with the County Clerk of __________ County on_________ , 20__ as No._______, in Book _______and Page _______.
 
	6.	An award of the arbitrator (if residential) was issued on________ in the amount of $_______.
  
	CLAIMANT'S REPRESENTATION AND VERIFICATION
 
	Claimant represents and verifies under oath that:
 
	1.	I have authority to file this claim.
 
	2.	The claimant is entitled to the amount claimed at the date of lodging for record of the claim, pursuant to claimant's contract described above.
 
	3.	The work, services, material or equipment for which this lien claim is filed was provided exclusively in connection with the improvement of the real property which is the subject of this claim.
 
	4.	This claim form has been lodged for record with the County Clerk where the property is located within 90 or, if residential construction, 120 days from the last date upon which the work, services, material or equipment for which payment is claimed was provided.
 
	5.	This claim form has been completed in its entirety to the best of my ability and I understand that if I do not complete this form in its entirety, the form may be deemed invalid by a court of law.
 
	6.	This claim form will be served as required by statute upon the owner or community association, and upon the contractor or subcontractor against whom this claim has been asserted, if any.
 
	7.	The foregoing statements made by me in this claim form are true, to the best of my knowledge. I am aware that if any of the foregoing statements made by me in this claim form are willfully false, this construction lien claim will be void and that I will be liable for damages to the owner or any other person injured as a consequence of the filing of this lien claim.
 
                                     Name of Claimant 
 
				       _________________
 
				       Signed 
 
			       __________________________
 
(Type or Print Name and Title)
 
SUGGESTED NOTARIAL FOR INDIVIDUAL CLAIMANT:
  
STATE OF NEW JERSEY
 
COUNTY OF		 ss:

 On this ____ day of ______ 20___, before me, the subscriber, personally appeared (person signing on behalf of claimant(s)) who, I am satisfied, is/are the person(s) named in and who executed the within instrument, and thereupon acknowledged that claimant(s) signed, sealed and delivered the same as claimant's (s') act and deed, for the purposes therein expressed.

________________________
NOTARY PUBLIC

SUGGESTED NOTARIAL FOR CORPORATE OR LIMITED LIABILITY CLAIMANT:

		STATE OF NEW JERSEY
 
		COUNTY OF		 ss:

	On this ____ day of ______ 20__, before me, the subscriber, personally appeared (person signing on behalf of claimant(s)) who, I am satisfied is the Secretary (or other officer/manager/agent) of the Corporation (partnership or limited liability company) named herein and who by me duly sworn/affirmed, asserted authority to act on behalf of the Corporation (partnership or limited liability company) and who, by virtue of its Bylaws, or Resolution of its Board of Directors (or partnership or operating agreement) executed the within instrument on its behalf, and thereupon acknowledged that claimant signed, sealed and delivered same as claimant's act and deed, for the purposes herein expressed.

_________________________
NOTARY PUBLIC

NOTICE TO OWNER OF REAL PROPERTY
 
NOTICE TO CONTRACTOR OR SUBCONTRACTOR, IF APPLICABLE
  
	The owner's real estate may be subject to sale to satisfy the amount asserted by this claim. However, the owner's real estate cannot be sold until the facts and issues which form the basis of this claim are decided in a legal proceeding before a court of law.  The lien claimant is required by law to commence suit to enforce this claim.
 
	The claimant filing this lien claim shall forfeit all rights to enforce the lien claim and shall be required to discharge the lien claim of record, if the claimant fails to bring an action in the Superior Court, in the county in which the real property is situated, to establish the lien claim:
 
	1.	Within one year of the date of the last provision of work, services, material or equipment, payment for which the lien claim was filed; or
 
	2.	Within 30 days following receipt of written notice, by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, from the owner or community association, contractor, or subcontractor against whom a lien claim is filed, as appropriate, requiring the claimant to commence an action to establish the lien claim.
 
	You will be given proper notice of the proceeding and an opportunity to challenge this claim and set forth your position. If, after the owner (and/or contractor or subcontractor) has had the opportunity to challenge this lien claim, the court of law enters a judgment against any of you and in favor of the claimant filing this lien claim, and thereafter judgment is not paid, the owner's real estate may then be sold to satisfy the judgment.  A judgment against a community association for a claim of work, services, material or equipment pursuant to a contract with that community association cannot be enforced by a sale of real estate.
 
	The owner may choose to avoid subjecting the real estate to sale by the owner (or contractor) by either:
 
	1. paying the claimant and obtaining a discharge of lien claim from the claimant, by which the owner will lose the right to challenge this lien claim in a legal proceeding before a court of law; or
 
	2. causing the lien claim to be discharged by filing a surety bond or making a deposit of funds as provided for in section 31 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-31), by which the owner will retain the right to challenge this lien claim in a legal proceeding before a court of law.
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.8; amended 2010, c.119, s.5.

2A:44A-9  Amount of lien claim.
 
	9. a. The amount of a lien claim shall  not exceed the unpaid portion of the contract price  of the claimant's contract for the work, services, material or equipment provided.
 
	b.	Except as set forth in sections 15 and 21 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-15 and 2A:44A-21), and subject to section 7 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-7) and subsection c. of this section, the lien fund shall not exceed:
 
	(1) in the case of a first tier lien claimant or second tier lien claimant, the earned amount of the contract between the owner and the contractor minus any payments made prior to service of a copy of the lien claim; or
 
	(2) in the case of a third tier lien claimant, the lesser of: (a) the amount in paragraph (1) above; or (b) the earned amount of the contract between the contractor and the subcontractor to the contractor, minus any payments made prior to service of a copy of the lien claim.
 
	c.	A lien fund regardless of tier shall not be reduced by payments by the owner, or community association in accordance with section 3 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-3), that do not discharge the obligations for the work performed or services, material or equipment provided, including, but not limited to:
 
	(1) payments not in accordance with written contract provisions; 
 
	(2) payments yet to be earned upon lodging for record of the lien claim; 
 
	(3) liquidated damages; 
 
	(4) collusive payments; 
 
	(5) use of retainage to make payments to a successor contractor after the lien claim is lodged for record; or
 
	(6) setoffs or backcharges, absent written agreement by the claimant, except for any setoffs upheld by judgment that are first determined by: (a) arbitration or alternate dispute resolution in a proceeding conducted in accordance with section 21 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-21); or (b) any other alternate dispute resolution agreed to by the parties.
 
	d.	Subject to subsection c. above, no lien fund exists, if, at the time of service of a copy of the lien claim, the owner or community association has fully paid the contractor for the work performed or for services, material or equipment provided.
 
	e.	For purposes of a lien fund calculation, the "earned amount of the contract" is the contract price unless the party obligated to perform has not completed the performance in which case the "earned amount of the contract" is the value, as determined in accordance with the contract, of the work performed and services, material or equipment provided. 
 
	f.	If more than one lien claimant will participate in a lien fund, the lien fund shall be established as of the date of the first of the participating lien claims lodged for record unless the earned amount of the contract increases, in which case the lien fund shall be calculated from the date of the increase.
 
	g.	No lien rights shall exist for other than first, second, or third tier lien claimants.
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.9; amended 2010, c.119, s.6.

2A:44A-10  Attachment of lien to interest of owner; amount of liability.
  
	10.  Subject to the limitations of  sections 3 and 6 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-3 and 2A:44A-6), the lien  shall attach to the interest of the owner from and after the time of filing of the lien claim.  Except as provided by section 20 of  P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-20), no lien  shall attach to the  interest acquired by a bona fide purchaser  as evidenced by a recordable document recorded or lodged for record before the date of filing of the lien claim. A  lien claim  shall not, except as provided by sections 20 and 22 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-20 and 2A:44A-22), have a priority over any mortgage, judgment or other lien or interest in real estate first recorded, lodged for record, filed or docketed.  A lien claim filed under  this act shall be subject to the effect of a  Notice of  Settlement filed pursuant to P.L.1979, c.406 (C.46:16A-1 et seq.). 
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.10; amended 2010, c.119, s.7.

2A:44A-11  Amendment of lien claim, form.
 
	11. a. A lien claim may be amended  for any appropriate reason, including but not limited to correcting inaccuracies or errors in the original lien claim form, or revising the amount claimed because of:
 
	(1) additional work performed or services, material, or equipment provided;
 
	(2) the release of a proportionate share of an interest in real property from the lien in accordance with section 18 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-18); or 
 
	(3) the partial payment of the lien claim.  
 
	A lien claim may not be amended to cure a violation of section 15 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-15).  
 
	b. The amended lien claim, which shall be filed with the county clerk, shall comply with all the conditions and requirements for the filing of  an original lien claim, including but not limited to the notice requirements of section 7 of  P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-7) and shall be subject to the limitations of  sections 9 and 10 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-9 and 2A:44A-10).  That portion of the amended lien  in excess of the amount previously claimed shall attach as of the date of filing of the  original lien claim.  That excess amount shall also be used to calculate the lien fund pursuant to subsection f. of section 9 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-9). 
 
	c. The amended lien claim shall be filed in substantially the following form:

		AMENDMENT TO CONSTRUCTION LIEN CLAIM

		TO THE CLERK, COUNTY OF                                :

	1.	On (date), the undersigned claimant, (name of claimant) of (address of claimant), filed a CONSTRUCTION LIEN CLAIM in the amount of ($        ) DOLLARS for the value of the work, services, material or equipment provided in accordance with the contract between claimant and (name) as of (date). 
 
	2.	This construction lien claim was claimed against the interest of (name) as  (circle one):  owner, unit owner, community association or other party; (if "other," describe: _____________)  in that certain tract or parcel of land and premises described as Block      , Lot       , on the tax map of the                (municipality) of            , County of           , State of New Jersey, for the improvement of which property the aforementioned work, services, material or equipment was provided.  (If the claim was against a community association in accordance with section 3 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-3), set forth the name of the community association and the name and location of the property development.)
 
	3.	This amends a lien claim which was previously lodged for record on __            ________, 20 __ and filed with the County Clerk of            County on                , 20__ and recorded on ______,_20__ as No.            in Book No.           , Page           .  A Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien (if any) was previously filed with the County Clerk of            on            , 20__ and recorded on                    , 20__ as No.               in Book No.           , Page           .  
 
	4.	Amendments to the original claim were recorded in the office of the County Clerk on           , 20     as No.            in Book No.           , Page           .  (Complete if applicable)  
 
	5.	Effective the date of the  lodging for record of this AMENDMENT TO CONSTRUCTION LIEN CLAIM, the value of the lien is claimed to be in the total amount of ($      ) DOLLARS, inclusive of all prior lien claims or amendments thereof.  
 
	6. The work, services, material or equipment provided upon which this Amendment is made are:  
 
	a.                                   
 
	b.                                   
 
	c.                                    (etc.)
 
	7.	The date of the provision of the last work, services, material or equipment for which payment is  claimed is (date).  
 
	8.	The reason for this amendment is _____________________
 
 		CLAIMANTS REPRESENTATION AND VERIFICATION
 
 				(Same as for lien claim)

		NOTICE TO OWNER OF REAL PROPERTY

				(Same as for lien claim)

		NOTICE TO SUBCONTRACTOR OR CONTRACTOR

 				(Same as for lien claim)
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.11; amended 2010, c.119, s.8.

2A:44A-12  Authorized withholding, deductions.
 
	12.	Upon receipt of notice of a lien claim, the owner, or community association in accordance with section 3 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-3), shall be authorized to withhold and deduct the amount claimed from the unpaid part of the contract price that is or thereafter may be due and payable to the contractor or subcontractor, or both.  The owner or community association may pay the amount of the lien claim to the claimant unless the contractor or subcontractor against whose account the lien is filed notifies the owner and the lien claimant in writing within 20 days of service of the lien claim upon both the owner or community association and the contractor or subcontractor, that the claimant is not owed the monies claimed and the reasons therefor.  Any such payment made by the owner or community association shall constitute a payment made on account of the contract price of the contract with the contractor or subcontractor, or both, against whose account the lien is filed.
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.12; amended 2010, c.119, s.9.

2A:44A-13  "Construction Lien Book," "Construction Lien Index Book"; fees.
 
 	13. a.  The county clerk shall provide a book designated as the "Construction Lien Book" in which  shall  be entered each Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien, Amended Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien, lien claim and amended lien claim, and  discharge, subordination or release of a lien claim or Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien presented for filing pursuant to  this act. 
 
	b.	The county clerk shall cause marginal notations to be made upon each filed document  as follows: 
 
	(1)	upon each Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien, the date an amendment to that Notice or discharge thereof, and related lien claim or amendment thereto is filed; 
 
	(2)	upon each lien claim, the date  an  amendment thereto is filed; and the date a discharge, subordination or release thereof is filed; and 
 
	(3)	upon the affected lien claim or amended lien claim, the date of the filing of the Notice of Lis Pendens pertaining to the real property subject to the lien claim.  
 
	c.	The failure of the clerk to cause a marginal notation to be made in accordance with subsection b. of this section shall not affect the validity, priority or enforceability of any document filed pursuant to this act. 
 
	d.	The county clerk shall provide and maintain  an index book designated as the "Construction Lien Index Book," setting forth  alphabetically, and arranged by  owners' or community associations' names, and by  claimants' names, each Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien, Amended Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien, lien claim, amended lien claim, discharge, subordination and release of a lien claim or Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien.
 
	e.	Each county clerk shall charge  fees for the filing and marginal notation of the documents authorized to be filed by this act as set forth in N.J.S.22A:2-29.
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.13; amended 2010, c.119, s.10.

2A:44A-14  Claimant's failure to commence action; forfeiture, liability.
 
	14.  a.  A claimant filing a lien claim shall forfeit all rights to enforce the lien, and shall immediately discharge the lien of record in accordance with section 30 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-30), if the claimant fails to  commence an action in the Superior Court, in the county in which the real property is situated, to  enforce the lien claim:  
 
	(1)	Within one year of the date of the last provision of work, services, material or equipment, payment for which the lien claim was filed; or  
 
	(2)	Within 30 days following receipt of written notice, by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, from the owner, community association, contractor, or subcontractor against whose account a lien claim is filed, requiring the claimant to commence an action to  enforce the lien claim.  
 
	b.	Any lien claimant who forfeits a lien pursuant to  this section and fails to discharge that lien of record in accordance with section 30 of  P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-30), shall be liable for all court costs, and reasonable legal expenses, including, but not limited to, attorneys' fees, incurred by the owner, community association, contractor, or subcontractor, or the total costs and legal expenses of all or any combination of them, in defending or causing the discharge of the lien claim.  The court  shall, in addition, enter judgment against the claimant who fails to discharge the lien for damages to any of the parties adversely affected by the lien claim.  
 
	c.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2010, c.119) 
 
	d.	Any disputes arising out of the improvement which is the subject of a lien claim but which are unrelated to any action to enforce a lien claim may be brought in a separate action or in a separate count in the same action.  
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.14; amended 2010, c.119, s.11.

2A:44A-15  Improper lodging of lien claim; forfeiture of rights; liability.
 
	15. a. If a lien claim is without basis, the amount of the lien claim is willfully overstated, or the lien claim is not  lodged for record in substantially the form or in the  manner or at a time not in accordance with  this act, the claimant shall forfeit all claimed lien rights and rights to file subsequent lien claims to the extent of the face amount claimed in the lien claim. The claimant shall also be liable for all court costs, and reasonable legal expenses, including, but not limited to, attorneys' fees, incurred by the owner, community association, contractor or subcontractor, or any combination of owner, community association in accordance with section 3 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-3), contractor and subcontractor, in defending or causing the discharge of the lien claim.  The court shall, in addition, enter judgment against the claimant for damages to any of the parties adversely affected by the lien claim.  
 
	b.	If a defense to a lien claim is without basis, the party maintaining the defense shall be liable for all court costs, and reasonable legal expenses, including, but not limited to, attorneys' fees, incurred by any of the parties adversely affected by the defense to the lien claim.  The court shall, in addition, enter judgment against the party maintaining  this defense for damages to any of the parties adversely affected  thereby.
 
	c.	If a lien claim is forfeited pursuant to this section, or section 14 of  P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-14), nothing herein shall be construed to bar the filing of a subsequent lien claim, provided, however, any subsequent lien claim shall not include a claim for the work, services, equipment or material claimed within the forfeited lien claim.  
 
	d.	For the purpose of this section "without basis" means frivolous, false, unsupported by a contract, or made with malice or bad faith or for any improper purpose.
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.15; amended 2010, c.119, s.12.

2A:44A-17.   Lien claims unabated by death of party in interest  
    17.  No lien claim under this act or right thereto shall abate by reason of the death of any party in interest and the right to the lien claim may be asserted by the personal representative of a deceased contractor, subcontractor, or supplier against the personal representative of a deceased owner, contractor or subcontractor.  

   L.1993,c.318,s.17.  

2A:44A-18  Calculation of proportionate share under residential construction.
 
	18.	This section shall solely apply to work, services, material or equipment furnished under a residential construction contract. If a lien attaches to an interest in real property, the lien claimant shall release a proportionate share of the interest in real property from the lien upon receipt of payment for that proportionate share.  This proportionate share shall be calculated in the following manner:  
 
	a.	If there is a contract between the lien claimant and the owner or other writing signed by the parties which provides for an allocation by lot or tract, or otherwise, that allocation of the proportionate share shall be binding upon the lien claimant.  Absent a contract between the lien claimant and the owner or other writing signed by the parties, any allocation made shall be proportionate to each lot if subdivision approval has been granted or to each tract if no subdivision approval is required or has been granted.
 
	b.	If the work performed by the lien claimant was for a condominium in which a master deed is filed before the lien attaches, or for work performed for a cooperative in which a master declaration is filed before the lien attaches, then the proportionate share shall be allocated in an amount equal to the percentage of common elements attributable to each residential unit, subject to the limitations of subsections b. and c. of section 3 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-3).  
 
	c.	If subsection a. or b. of this section does not apply, then the lien shall not be released as to any portion of the interest in real property.  
 
	d.	If a lien claimant receives payment of  the proportionate share but refuses to discharge its lien claim, then upon application to a court having jurisdiction thereof, the court shall order the discharge of the lien claim to the extent of that proportionate share.  The lien claimant shall be further subject to  section 30 of  P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-30), and any amounts to be paid shall be paid from the amount due the claimant.  
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.18; amended 2010, c.119, s.13.

2A:44A-20  Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien, form.
  
	20. a. All valid liens filed pursuant to this act shall attach to the interest of the owner from the time of filing of the lien claim, subject to  this section and sections 3, 6, and 10 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-3, 2A:44A-6 and 2A:44A-10). 
 
	b.	A lien claim validly filed under this act shall have priority over  a prior  conveyance, lease or mortgage of an  interest in real property to which improvements have been made, only if  a Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien is filed before the recording or lodging for record of a recordable document evidencing that conveyance, lease or mortgage.  The Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien shall be filed in substantially the following form:  

 TO THE CLERK, COUNTY OF __________:
 
		NOTICE OF UNPAID BALANCE AND RIGHT TO FILE LIEN

	In accordance with the "Construction Lien Law," P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-1 et al.), notice is hereby given that:
 
	1.	(Name of claimant), individually or as a partner of the claimant known as (Name of partnership), or an officer/member of the claimant known as (Name of corporation or LLC) (Please circle one and fill in name as applicable) located at (Business address of claimant) has on (date) a potential construction lien against the real property of (name of owner of property subject to lien), in that certain tract or parcel of land and premises described as Block ____, Lot ____, on the tax map of the (municipality) of _____, County of ______, State of New Jersey, in the amount of ($_______ ), as calculated below for the value of the work, services, material or equipment provided.  (If claim is against a community association in accordance with section 3 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-3), set forth the name of the community association and the name and location of the property development.)  The lien is to be claimed against the interest of the owner, unit owner, or other party, or against the community association (circle one; if "other", describe: _________).
 
	2.	The work, services, material or equipment was provided pursuant to the terms of a written contract (or, in the case of a supplier, a delivery or order slip signed by the owner, community association, contractor, or subcontractor having a direct contractual relation with a contractor, or an authorized agent of any of them), dated __________, between (claimant) and owner, unit owner, community association, contractor or subcontractor (circle one), named or known as (name of contracting party) and located at (address of other contracting party), in the total contract amount of ($       ) together with (if applicable) amendments to the total contract amount aggregating ($        ).
 
	3.	In accordance with the above contract, this claimant performed the following work or provided the following services, material or equipment:
 
a. __________________
 
b.__________________
 
c. __________________ etc.
 
	4. 	The date of the provision of the last work, services, material or equipment for which payment is claimed is (date.)
 
	5.	The amount due for work, services, material or equipment provided by claimant in connection with the improvement of the real property, and upon which this lien claim is based is calculated as follows:

A. Initial Contract Price: $ _______________
 
B. Executed Amendments to Contract Price/Change Orders: $__________________
 
C. Total Contract Price (A + B) = $_________________
 
D. If Contract Not Completed, Value Determined in Accordance with Contract of Work Completed or Services, Material or Equipment Provided:_________
 
E. Total from C or D (whichever is applicable): $ ________________
 
F. Agreed upon Credits: $ ________________
 
G. Amount Paid to Date: $ ________________
 
TOTAL LIEN CLAIM AMOUNT E -  [F + G] = $______________ 
 
	6.	The written contract (is) (is not) (cross out inapplicable portion) a residential construction contract as defined in section 2 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-2).
 
	7.	This notification has been lodged for record prior or subsequent to completion of the work, services, material or equipment as described above. The purpose of this notification is to advise the owner or community association and any other person who is attempting to encumber or take transfer of said property described above that a potential construction lien may be lodged for record within the 90-day period, or in the case of a residential construction contract within the 120-day period, following the date of the provision of the last work, services, material or equipment as set forth in paragraph 4 of this notice.

CLAIMANT'S REPRESENTATION AND VERIFICATION

Claimant represents and verifies that:

	1.	I have authority to file this Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien.
 
	2.	The claimant is entitled to the amount claimed herein at the date this Notice is lodged for record, pursuant to claimant's contract described in the Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien.
 
	3.	The work, services, material or equipment for which this Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien is filed was provided exclusively in connection with the improvement of the real property which is the subject of this Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien.
 
	4.	The Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien has been  lodged for record within  90 days, or in the case of a residential construction contract within 60 days, from the last date upon which the work, services, material or equipment for which payment is claimed was provided.
 
	5.	The foregoing statements made by me are true, to the best of my knowledge.

				Name of Claimant____________________________
 
				Signed______________________________________
 
					(Type or Print Name and Title)				
 
SUGGESTED NOTARIAL FOR INDIVIDUAL CLAIMANT:


STATE OF NEW JERSEY
 
COUNTY OF [     ]  ss:
  
	On this ____ day of ______ 20___, before me, the subscriber, personally appeared (person signing on behalf of claimant(s)) who, I am satisfied, is/are the person(s) named in and who executed the within instrument, and thereupon acknowledged that claimant(s) signed, sealed and delivered the same as claimant's (s') act and deed, for the purposes therein expressed.


 
________________________
 
NOTARY PUBLIC


SUGGESTED NOTARIAL FOR CORPORATE OR LIMITED LIABILITY CLAIMANT:

	STATE OF NEW JERSEY
 
COUNTY OF [    ]  ss:

	On this ____ day of ______ 20__, before me, the subscriber, personally appeared (person signing on behalf of claimant(s)) who, I am satisfied is the Secretary (or other officer/manager/agent) of the Corporation (partnership or limited liability company) named herein and who by me duly sworn/affirmed, asserted authority to act on behalf of the Corporation (partnership or limited liability company) and who, by virtue of its Bylaws, or Resolution of its Board of Directors (or partnership or operating agreement) executed the within instrument on its behalf, and thereupon acknowledged that claimant signed, sealed and delivered same as claimant's act and deed, for the purposes herein expressed.

                _________________________
 
	NOTARY PUBLIC
 
	c.	A claimant  electing to file a Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien as described above need not serve a copy  upon any interested party.
 
	d.	After the filing of a Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien, any person claiming title to or an  interest in or a lien upon the real property described in the Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien, shall be deemed to have acquired said title, interest or lien with knowledge of the anticipated filing of a lien claim, and shall be subject to the terms, conditions and provisions of that lien claim within the period provided by section 6 of  P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-6) and as set forth in the Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien.  A Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien filed under  this act shall be subject to the effect of a  Notice of  Settlement filed pursuant to P.L.1979, c. 406 (C.46:16A-1 et seq.).
 
	e.	The Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien shall be effective for 90 days or in the case of a residential construction contract claim for 120 days from the date of the provision of the last work, services, material or equipment delivery for which payment is claimed as set forth in paragraph  4 of the Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien.
 
	f.	The lodging for record or filing of a Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien shall not constitute the lodging for record or filing of a lien claim  nor does it extend the time for the  lodging for record of a lien claim, in accordance with  this act.
 
	g.	Failure to file a Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien shall not affect the claimant's lien rights arising under  this act, to the extent that no  conveyance, lease or mortgage of an interest in real property  occurs prior to the filing of a Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien or lien claim.
 
	h.	A Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien may be amended by the filing of an Amended Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien in accordance with  this section.
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.20; amended 2010, c.119, s.14.

2A:44A-21  Legislative findings, additional requirements for lodging for record of lien on residential construction.
 
	21. a.  The Legislature finds that the ability to sell and purchase residential housing is essential for the preservation and enhancement of the economy of the State of New Jersey and that while there exists a need to provide contractors, subcontractors and suppliers with statutory benefits to enhance the collection of money for goods, services and materials provided for the construction of residential housing in the State of New Jersey, the ability to have a stable marketplace in which families can acquire homes without undue delay and uncertainty and the corresponding need of lending institutions in the State of New Jersey to conduct their business in a stable environment and to lend money for the purchase or finance of home construction or renovations requires that certain statutory provisions as related to the lien benefits accorded to contractors, subcontractors and suppliers be modified.  The Legislature further finds that the construction of residential housing generally involves numerous subcontractors and suppliers to complete one unit of housing and that the multiplicity of lien claims and potential for minor monetary disputes poses a serious impediment to the ability to transfer title to residential real estate expeditiously. The Legislature further finds that the purchase of a home is generally one of the largest expenditures that a family or person will make and that there are a multitude of other State and federal statutes and regulations, including "The New Home Warranty and Builders' Registration Act," P.L.1977, c.467 (C.46:3B-1 et seq.) and "The Planned Real Estate Development Full Disclosure Act," P.L.1977, c.419 (C.45:22A-21 et seq.), which afford protection to consumers in the purchase and finance of their homes, thereby necessitating a different treatment of residential real estate as it relates to the rights of contractors, suppliers and subcontractors to place liens on residential real estate.  The Legislature declares that separate provisions concerning residential construction will provide a system for balancing the competing interests of protecting consumers in the purchase of homes and the contract rights of contractors, suppliers and subcontractors to obtain payment for goods and services provided. 
 
	b.	The filing of a lien for work, services, material or equipment furnished pursuant to a residential construction contract shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
 
	(1)	As a condition precedent to the filing of any lien arising under a residential construction contract, a lien claimant shall first file a Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien by lodging for record the Notice within 60 days following the last date that work, services, material or equipment were provided for which payment is claimed in accordance with  subsection  b. of section 20 of  P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-20), and comply with  the remainder of this section.  
 
	(2)	Upon  its lodging for record, a Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien, shall be  served in accordance with the provisions  for the service of lien claims in section 7 of  P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-7). 
 
	(3)	Unless the parties have otherwise agreed in writing to an alternative dispute resolution mechanism, within 10 days from the date the Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien is lodged for record, the lien claimant shall also serve a demand for arbitration and fulfill all the requirements and procedures of the American Arbitration Association to institute an expedited proceeding before  a single arbitrator designated by the American Arbitration Association.  The demand for arbitration may be served in accordance with the provisions for the service of lien claims in section 7 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-7) along with: (a) a copy of the completed and signed Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien; and (b) proof by affidavit that the Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien has been lodged for record.  
 
	If not yet provided at the time of service of the demand for arbitration, a copy of the Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien marked "filed" by the clerk's office shall be provided by the claimant to the parties and the arbitrator, as a condition precedent to the issuance of an arbitrator's determination.
 
	All arbitrations of Notices of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien pertaining to the same residential construction shall be determined by the same arbitrator, whenever possible.  The claimant, owner, or any other party may also request consolidation in a single arbitration proceeding of the claimant's Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien with any other Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien not yet arbitrated but lodged for record by a potential lien claimant whose name was provided in accordance with section 37 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-37).  The request shall be made in the demand for arbitration or, in the case of a request by a person other than the claimant, by letter to the arbitrator assigned to the arbitration or, if none has been assigned, to the appropriate arbitration administrator, within five days of when the demand for arbitration is served.  The arbitrator shall grant or deny a request for a consolidated arbitration proceeding at the arbitrator's discretion.
 
	(4)	Upon the closing of all hearings in the arbitration, the arbitrator shall make the following determinations: (a) whether the Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien was in compliance with section 20 of  P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-20) and whether service was proper under section 7 of  P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-7); (b) the earned amount of the contract between the owner and the contractor in accordance with section 9 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-9); (c) the validity and amount of any lien claim which may be filed pursuant to the Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien; (d) the validity and amount of any liquidated or unliquidated setoffs or counterclaims to any lien claim which may be filed; and  (e) the allocation of costs of the arbitration among the parties.  When making the above determination, the arbitrator shall also consider all determinations made by that arbitrator in any earlier arbitration proceeding pertaining to the same residential construction.
 
	(5)	If the amount of any setoffs or counterclaims presented in the arbitration  cannot be determined by the arbitrator in a liquidated amount, the arbitrator, as a condition precedent to the filing of the lien claim, shall order the lien claimant to post a bond, letter of credit or funds with an attorney-at-law of New Jersey, or other such person or entity as may be ordered by the arbitrator in such amount as the arbitrator shall determine to be 110% of the approximate fair and reasonable value of such setoffs or counterclaims, but in no event  greater than the amount of the lien claim which may be filed.  This 110% limitation  for any bond, letter of credit or funds shall also apply to any alternative dispute resolution mechanism to which the parties may agree.  When making the above determinations, the arbitrator shall consider all determinations made by that arbitrator in any earlier arbitration proceeding pertaining to the same residential construction.
 
	(6)	The arbitrator shall make such determinations set forth in paragraphs (4) and (5) of this subsection and the arbitration proceeding shall be completed within 30 days of receipt of the lien claimant's demand for arbitration by the American Arbitration Association unless no response is filed, in which case the arbitrator shall make such determinations and the arbitration proceeding shall be deemed completed within 7 days after the time within which to respond has expired. These time  periods for completion of the arbitration shall not be extended unless otherwise agreed to by the parties and approved by the arbitrator.  If an alternative dispute mechanism is alternatively agreed to between the parties, such determination shall be made as promptly as possible making due allowance for all time limits and procedures set forth in this act.  The arbitrator shall resolve a dispute regarding the timeliness of the demand for arbitration.
 
	(7)	Any contractor, subcontractor or supplier whose interests are affected by the filing of a Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien under  this act shall be permitted to join in such arbitration; but the arbitrator shall not determine the rights or obligations of any such parties except to the extent those rights or obligations are affected by the lien claimant's Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien.  
 
	(8)	Upon determination by the arbitrator that there is an amount which, pursuant to a valid lien shall attach to the improvement, the lien claimant shall, within 10 days of the lien claimant's receipt of the determination, lodge for record such lien claim in accordance with  section 8 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-8) and furnish any bond, letter of credit or funds required by the arbitrator's decision.  The failure to  lodge for record such a lien claim, or furnish the bond, letter of credit or funds, within the 10-day period, shall cause any lien claim to be invalid.  
 
	(9)	Except for the arbitrator's determination itself, any such determination shall not be considered final in any legal action or proceeding, and shall not be used for purposes of collateral estoppel, res judicata, or law of the case to the extent applicable.  Any finding of the arbitrator pursuant to  this act shall not be admissible for any purpose in any other action or proceeding.  
 
	(10)  If either the lien claimant or the owner or community association in accordance with section 3 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-3) is aggrieved by the arbitrator's determination, then  the aggrieved party may institute a summary action in the Superior Court, Law Division, for the vacation, modification or correction of the arbitrator's determination.  The arbitrator's determination shall be confirmed unless it is vacated, modified or corrected by the court. The court shall render its decision after giving due regard to the time limits and procedures set forth in this act and shall set time limits for lodging for record the lien claim if it finds, contrary to the arbitrator's determination, that the lien claim is valid or the 10-day requirement for lodging for record required by paragraph (8) of this subsection has expired.  
 
	(11) In the event a Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien is filed and the owner conveys its interest in real property to another person before a lien claim is filed, then prior to or at the time of conveyance, the owner may make a deposit with the county clerk where the improvement is located, in an amount no less than the amount set forth in the Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien.  For any deposit made with the county clerk, the county clerk shall discharge the Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien or any related lien claim against the real property for which the deposit has been made.  After the issuance of the arbitrator's determination set forth in paragraphs (4) and (5) of this subsection, any amount in excess of that determined by the arbitrator to be the amount of a valid lien claim shall be returned forthwith to the owner who has made the deposit.  The balance shall remain where deposited unless the lien claim has been otherwise paid, satisfied by the parties, forfeited by the claimant, invalidated pursuant to paragraph (8) of this subsection or discharged under section 33 of  P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-33).  Notice shall be given by the owner in writing to the lien claimant within five days of making the deposit.  
 
	(12) Solely for those lien claims arising from a residential construction contract, if a Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien is determined to be without basis, the amount of the Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien is significantly overstated, or the Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien is not  lodged for record:  (a) in substantially the form, (b) in the manner, or (c) at a time  in accordance with  this act, then the claimant shall be liable for all damages suffered by the owner or any other party adversely affected by the Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien, including all court costs, reasonable attorneys' fees and legal expenses incurred.  
 
	(13) If the aggregate sum of all lien claims attaching to any real property that is the subject of a residential construction contract exceeds the amount due under a residential purchase agreement, less the amount due under any previously recorded mortgages or liens other than construction liens, then upon entry of judgment of all such lien claims, each lien claim shall be reduced pro rata.  Each lien claimant's share then due shall be equal to the monetary amount of the lien claim multiplied by a fraction in which the denominator is the total monetary amount of all valid claims on the owner's interest in real property against which judgment has been entered, and the numerator is the amount of each particular lien claim for which judgment has been entered.  The amount due under the residential purchase agreement shall be the net proceeds of the amount paid less previously recorded mortgages and liens other than construction liens and any required recording fees.  
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.21; amended 2010, c.119, s.15.

2A:44A-22  Priority of mortgages over liens, conditions.
 
	22. a. Every mortgage recorded before the filing of a lien claim or the filing of a Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien in accordance with section 20 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-20), shall have priority as to the land or other interest in real property described and any improvement wholly or partially erected or thereafter to be erected, constructed or completed thereon, over any lien established by virtue of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-1 et al.) to the extent that:
 
	(1)	the mortgage secures funds that have been advanced or the mortgagee is obligated to advance to or for the benefit of the mortgagor before the filing of the lien claim or Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien in accordance with section 20 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-20); or
 
	(2)	the mortgage secures funds advanced after the filing of a lien claim or the filing of a Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien in accordance with section 20 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-20), and the funds are applied in accordance with paragraphs (1) through (7) of subsection b. of this section.
 
	b.	Every mortgage recorded after the filing of a lien claim or the filing of a Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien in accordance with section 20 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-20), shall have priority as to the land or other interest in real property described and any improvement wholly or partially erected or thereafter to be erected, constructed or completed thereon, over any lien  established by virtue of this act to the extent that the mortgage secures funds which have been applied to:
 
	(1)	The payments of amounts due to any claimants who have filed a lien claim or a Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien; 
 
	(2)	The payment to or the securing of payment by, the party against whose interest the lien claim is filed of all or part of the purchase price of the land covered thereby and any subsequent payment made for the improvements to the land, including but not limited to any advance payment of interest to the holder of the mortgage as required by the mortgagee as a condition of the loan; 
 
	(3)	The payment of any valid lien or encumbrance which is, or can be established as, prior to a lien provided for by this act; 
 
	(4)	The payment of any tax, assessment or other State or municipal lien or charge due or payable at the time of, or within 60 days after, such payment, as required by the mortgagee as a condition of the loan; 
 
	(5)	The payment of any premium, counsel fee, consultant fee, interest or financing charges, or other cost related to the financing, any of which are required by the lender to be paid by the owner, provided that the total of same shall not be in excess of 10 percent of the principal amount of the mortgage securing the loan upon which they are based; 
 
	(6)	The payment to the owner of that portion of the purchase price of the real property on which the improvements are made or to be made which have previously been paid by the owner, exclusive of any interest or any other carrying costs of such real property, provided, however, that at the time of the payment of such funds to the owner, the budget upon which the loan was made indicated that the amount of the loan is not less than the total of:  (a) the purchase price of the real property, (b) the cost of constructing the improvements, and  (c) any cost listed in  paragraphs (3), (4), and (5) of subsection b. of this section; or  
 
	(7)	An escrow in an amount not to exceed 150% of the amount necessary to secure payment of charges described in  paragraphs (1), (3), (4) and  (5) of subsection b. of this section.  
 
	c.	Nothing in P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-1 et al.)  shall be deemed to supersede the mortgage priority provisions of R.S.46:9-8 or diminish the effect of a Notice of Settlement filed pursuant to P.L.1979, c.406 (C.46:16A-1 et seq.).  
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.22; amended 2010, c.119, s.16.

2A:44A-23  Payment of claims, pro rata payment.
 
	23.  a. The amount due a lien claimant shall be paid only after the lien claim has been established by judgment, or, in the case of an execution sale, only to those lien claimants whose lien claims were filed before application was made to the court for distribution of the sale proceeds.  All lien claims established by judgment are valid claims that shall be concurrent and shall be paid  as provided in subsection c. of this section.
 
	b.	The sheriff or other officer conducting an execution sale authorized by section 24 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-24) shall pay the proceeds to the clerk of the Superior Court and the Superior Court shall provide proper disposition of sale proceeds to the persons entitled thereto under P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-1 et al.).
 
	c.	The Superior Court shall order the distribution of a lien fund, after its calculation in accordance with section 9 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-9), in the following manner:
 
	(1)	If there are first tier lien claimants, the lien fund shall be allocated in amounts equal to their valid claims.  If the total of those claims would exceed the maximum liability of the owner or community association as provided by section 9 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-9), the allocations shall be reduced pro rata so as not to exceed that maximum liability;
 
	(2)	From the allocation to each first tier lien claimant, amounts shall be allocated equal to the valid claims of second tier lien claimants whose claims derive from contracts with that first tier lien claimant.  If the total of the claims is less than the allocation to that first tier lien claimant, the first tier lien claimant shall be paid the balance.  If the total of the claims exceeds the allocation to that first tier lien claimant, the second tier claimants' allocations shall be reduced pro rata so as not to exceed that first tier lien claimant allocation;
 
	(3)	From the allocation to each second tier lien claimant, amounts shall be allocated equal to the valid claims of third tier lien claimants whose claims derive from contracts with that second tier lien claimant.  If the total of the claims is less than the allocation to that second tier claimant, the second tier lien claimant shall be paid the balance.  If the total of the claims exceeds the allocation to that second tier lien claimant, the allocation to the third tier lien claimants shall be reduced pro rata so as not to exceed that second tier lien claimant allocation; 
 
	(4)	If there are no first tier lien claimants, the lien fund for second tier lien claimants shall be allocated in amounts equal to that second tier's valid claims.  If the total of the claims of any group of second tier lien claimants exceeds the lien fund for that group of claimants as provided by section 9 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-9), the allocations shall be reduced pro rata so as not to exceed that lien fund; and
 
	(5)	If there are no first or second tier lien claimants, the lien fund for third tier lien claimants shall be allocated in amounts equal to that third tier's valid claims.  If the total of the claims of any group of third tier lien claimants exceeds the lien fund for that group of claimants as provided by section 9 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-9), the allocations shall be reduced pro rata so as not to exceed that lien fund.
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.23; amended 2010, c.119, s.17.

2A:44A-24.1  Lien claims enforced by suit.
 
	18. a. Subject to the requirements of section 14 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-14), and in the case of lien claims arising from residential construction contracts the additional requirements of sections 20 and 21 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-20 and 2A:44A-21), a lien claim arising under P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-1 et al.) shall be enforced by a suit commenced in the Superior Court within one year of the date of the last provision of work, services, material or equipment, payment for which the lien claim was filed. Venue shall be laid in the county in which the real property affected by the lien claim is located.
 
	b.	A lien claimant shall join as party defendants the owner or community association, if applicable, in accordance with section 3 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-3), contractor or subcontractor alleged to have failed to make payments for which the lien claim has been filed and any other person having an interest in the real property that would be adversely affected by the judgment.  The court shall order joinder of necessary parties or determine if it is appropriate for the suit to proceed if party defendants are not joined.
 
	c.	The court shall stay the suit to the extent that the lien claimant's contract or the contract of another party against whose account the lien claim is asserted provides that any disputes pertaining to the validity or amount of a lien claim are subject to arbitration or other dispute resolution mechanism.
 
	d. Upon commencement of the suit, the lien claimant shall cause a Notice of Lis Pendens to be filed in the office of the county clerk or register pursuant to N.J.S.2A:15-6 et seq.
 
	e. A party to a suit to enforce a lien claim shall be entitled to assert any defense available to any other party in contesting the amount for which a claimant seeks to have the lien reduced to judgment.
 
	f.	The judgment to be entered in a suit to enforce a lien claim shall (1) establish the amount due to the lien claimant; and (2) direct the public sale by the sheriff or other such officer as the court may direct of the real property and improvement affected by the lien.  The proceeds of the sale shall be distributed in accordance with section 23 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-23).  If funds are realized at the sale in an amount greater than the lien fund, the surplus funds shall be distributed in accordance with law.
 
	g.	Nothing in this act shall bar recovery of money damages pursuant to a lien claim arising under P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-1 et al.).
 
	h.	A judgment obtained against a community association that is unpaid may be enforced by assessment against unit owners as they would be assessed for any other common expense, after reasonable notice, and in a manner directed by the court.  In ordering assessments, the court shall be guided by the master deed, bylaws or other document governing the association.  A judgment shall not be enforced by the sale of any common elements, common areas or common buildings or structures of a real property development.
 
	i.	Upon resolution of the suit other than by the entry of final judgment in favor of the plaintiff in accordance with subsection f. of this section, a cancellation or discharge of lis pendens should be filed, by the party who filed the enforcement action, in the office of the county clerk or register where the notice of lis pendens is filed. 
 
	L.2010, c.119, s.18.

2A:44A-25  Issuance of writ of execution.
 
	25.  If judgment in an action to enforce a lien claim under this act is  entered in favor of the lien claimant, a writ of execution may issue thereon, in accordance with the judgment.  
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.25; amended 2010, c.119, s.19.

2A:44A-27.   Interest in residential property, priority to all subsequent liens  
    27.  The interests in real property set forth in section 21 of this act shall have priority to all subsequent liens under this act upon the land and upon the improvements thereon, except such as may be removable as between landlord and tenant, which may be sold and removed by virtue of any lien for the erection, construction or completion of the same, free from the prior encumbrances.  

   L.1993,c.318,s.27.  

2A:44A-30  Filing of certificate to discharge lien claim of record.
 
	30.  a.  When a lien claim has been filed and the claim has been paid, satisfied or settled by the parties or forfeited by the claimant, the claimant or  claimant's successor in interest or  attorney shall, within 30 days of payment, satisfaction or settlement, or within 7 days of demand by any interested party, file with the county clerk a certificate, duly acknowledged or proved, directing the county clerk to discharge the lien claim of record, which certificate shall contain: 
 
	(1)	The date of filing the lien claim;
 
	(2)	The book and page number endorsed thereon;
 
	(3)	The name of the owner of the land, or the community association, if applicable, named in the notice;
 
	(4)	The location of the property; and
 
	(5)	The name of the person for whom the work, services, equipment or materials was provided. 
 
	b.	If the claimant shall fail or refuse to file this certificate, as set forth in subsection a. of this section, then  any party in interest  may proceed in a summary manner by filing an order to show cause in accordance with the Rules of Court adopted by the Supreme Court of New Jersey.  A judge of the Superior Court may, upon good cause being shown, and absent receipt of written objections and grounds for same, order the lien claim discharged on the return date of the order to show cause.  The county clerk shall thereupon attach the certificate or order to the original notice of lien claim on file and shall note on the record thereof "discharged by certificate" or "discharged by court order," as the case may be and any lien foreclosure action shall be dismissed with prejudice.  
 
	c.	Any party in interest may proceed to discharge a lien claim on the ground that it is without factual basis by filing an order to show cause in the same manner as set forth in subsection b. of this section.
 
	d.	In those circumstances in which the lien claim has been paid in full, the lien claimant has failed to file a lien claim discharge pursuant to this section, and at least 13 months have elapsed since the date of the lien claim, the owner or community association may, in accordance with section 33 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-33) submit for filing a duly acknowledged discharge certificate substantially in the form provided by subsection a. of this section accompanied by an affidavit setting forth the circumstances of payment as set forth below:
  
OWNER (OR COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION) AFFIDAVIT OF PAYMENT TO DISCHARGE LIEN CLAIM
 
TO THE CLERK, COUNTY OF
 
	The undersigned, being duly sworn upon the undersigned's oath, avers as follows:
 
	1.	I am an owner of real property located at (address of property subject to lien), in that certain tract or parcel of land and premises described as Block ____, Lot ____, on the tax map of the (municipality) of ______, County of ________, State of New Jersey. (In the case of a community association, I am an (officer/manager/agent) of the community association, (name of community association) for property located at (location of property development).)

	2.	On or about (date), I caused to be sent to (name of contractor or subcontractor to whom payment was made), located at (address designated for payment by the filed lien claim form), the final payment in the amount of ($       ) in full satisfaction of a certain lien claim dated (date) which was filed by (name of lien claimant) against the real property designated in paragraph 1, on (date) in the office of the county clerk of the County of (name of county) in Construction Lien Book ___, Page ____.
 
	3.	At least 13 months have elapsed since the date of the lien claim and 90 days before filing this affidavit, I mailed or caused to be mailed by certified mail to the last known address of the lien claimant as set forth in the filed lien claim form written notice of my intention to file a discharge certificate with respect to the lien claim.  To the best of my knowledge and belief, no written communication denying or disputing payment in full of the lien claim has been received from the lien claimant (name).
 
	4.	Wherefore, the undersigned directs the county clerk of the County of (name of county) to cause to be filed the discharge certificate accompanying this affidavit, and further directs the county clerk to cause a notation of the discharge of the lien to be endorsed upon the margin of the record of the original lien claim, stating that the discharge is filed, and setting forth the date, book and page number of the filed discharge.
 
 
Name of Owner/Community Association
 
Signed __________________________
 
(Type or Print Name and Title)
  
NOTARIAL FOR INDIVIDUAL OWNER
  
STATE OF NEW JERSEY
 
COUNTY OF		 ss:
 
On this ____ day of ______ 20___, before me, the subscriber, personally appeared (name of owner/community association) who, I am satisfied, is/are the person(s) named in and who executed the within instrument, and thereupon acknowledged that the owner/community association signed, sealed and delivered the same as the owner's/community association's act and deed, for the purposes therein expressed.
 
___________________ _____
 
NOTARY PUBLIC
 
NOTARIAL FOR CORPORATE OR LIMITED LIABILITY OWNER/COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION:
 
	STATE OF NEW JERSEY
 
COUNTY OF 9 (             )		 ss:

	On this ____ day of ______ 20__, before me, the subscriber, personally appeared (person signing on behalf of owner/community association) who, I am satisfied is the Secretary (or other officer/manager/agent) of the Corporation (partnership or limited liability company) named herein and who by me duly sworn/affirmed, asserted authority to act on behalf of the Corporation (partnership or limited liability company) and who, by virtue of its Bylaws, or Resolution of its Board of Directors (or partnership or operating agreement) executed the within instrument on its behalf, and thereupon acknowledged that the owner/community association signed, sealed and delivered same as owner's/community association's act and deed, for the purposes herein expressed.
 
_________________________
 
	NOTARY PUBLIC
 
	e.	Any lien claimant who fails to discharge a lien claim of record pursuant to this section shall be liable for all court costs, and reasonable legal expenses, including, but not limited to, attorneys' fees, incurred by the owner, community association, the contractor, or subcontractor, or any combination of owner, community association, contractor and subcontractor, as applicable, to discharge or obtain the discharge of the lien, and in addition thereto, the court  shall enter judgment against the claimant for damages to any or all of the parties adversely affected by the failure to discharge the lien.  
 
	f.	Upon discharge of record in all cases, the party who filed the enforcement action shall cause the Notice of Lis Pendens to be cancelled or discharged of record pursuant to N.J.S.2A:15-6 et seq. Any party who filed the enforcement action who fails to cancel or discharge the lis pendens of record pursuant to this section shall be liable for all court costs, and reasonable legal expenses, including but not limited to, attorneys' fees, incurred by the owner, community association, the contractor, or subcontractor, or any other interested party, or any combination thereof, as applicable, to obtain the cancellation or discharge of the lis pendens, and in addition thereto, the court shall enter judgment against the claimant for damages to any or all of the parties adversely affected by the failure to cancel or discharge the lis pendens.
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.30; amended 2010, c.119, s.20.

2A:44A-31  Filing of surety bond, deposit.
  
	31.  a. When a lien claim is filed against any improvement and land under this act, the owner, community association in accordance with section 3 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-3), contractor or subcontractor may execute and file with the proper county clerk a bond in favor of the lien claimant, with a surety company, duly authorized to transact business in this State, as surety thereon in an amount equal to 110% of the amount claimed by the lien claimant. The amount of the bond shall be equal to 110% of the amount claimed by the lien claimant  but in the case of a lien claim arising from a residential construction contract, no greater than the earned amount of the contract between the owner and the contractor as determined by the arbitrator in accordance with paragraph (4) of subsection b. of section 21 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-21).  The bond shall be filed in accordance with the language set forth in subsection d. of this section, along with payment in the amount of $25, conditioned upon the payment of any judgment and costs that may be recovered by the lien claimant under this claim.  Any form of bond proffered that contains language inconsistent with the language set forth in subsection d. of this section shall be the basis for a cause of action to strike such language from the form of bond.
 
	b.	As an alternative, the owner, community association, contractor or subcontractor may deposit with the clerk of the Superior Court of New Jersey, funds constituting an amount equal to 110% of the amount claimed by the lien claimant, but in the case of a lien claim arising from a residential construction contract, no greater than the earned amount of the contract between the owner and the contractor as determined by the arbitrator in accordance with paragraph (4) of subsection b. of section 21 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-21).  The deposit shall be made along with payment in the amount of $25, conditioned upon the payment of any judgment and costs that may be recovered by the lien claimant under this claim.  The deposit may be made without the necessity of commencing any legal action.  The written receipt provided by the court clerk for the deposit made may be filed with the county clerk as evidence of that deposit.
 
	c.	Any surety bond filed with the county clerk under this section shall be discharged, and any deposit with the clerk of the Superior Court shall be returned to the depositor, without court order, upon presentment by the owner, community association, contractor or subcontractor of any of the following: 
 
	(1)	a duly acknowledged certificate as provided in paragraph (2) or (3) of subsection a. of section 33 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-33); 
 
	(2)	an order of discharge as provided in paragraph (4) of subsection a. of section 33 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-33); 
 
	(3)	a judgment of dismissal or other final judgment against the lien claimant; or 
 
	(4)	a true copy of a Stipulation of Dismissal, with prejudice, executed by the lien claimant or its representative in any action to foreclose the lien claim which is subject to the surety bond or deposit. 
 
	d.	The bond shall be filed in substantially the following form:
 
(Name of Bond Company)
 
(Bond No.               )  Bond Amount $__________
 
BOND DISCHARGING CONSTRUCTION LIEN
 
WHEREAS, on the (date), (name of claimant) (hereinafter "Lienor") filed a Construction Lien for the sum of (amount written out)                       ($                ), in the office of the Clerk of the County of (name of county where lien claim was filed), (hereinafter "Clerk"), against the real property of owner, (name of owner), or community association (or name of community association) and the tenancy interest of Lot (#),  Block (#), (address of property or name and location of the property development in the case of a community association) on the Tax Map of Township of (name of municipality), County of (name of county), State of New Jersey as more fully set forth in the notice of lien, a true copy of which is attached hereto, and which lien was filed (date lien claim was filed) in book (#), page (#).
 
	WHEREAS, in accordance with the "Construction Lien Law," P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-1 et al.), the Principal is permitted to file a bond for 110% of the lien amount, which would be a total bond penalty of (amount written out) ($                 ) (hereinafter "Penal Sum").
  
	NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the discharge of said lien by the Clerk, the Principal and (name of bond company) as surety, having an office at (address of bond company) and authorized to do business as a surety, do hereby pursuant to the statute provided, in such case made and jointly and severally undertake and become bound to the Clerk in an amount not exceeding the Penal Sum, ($   ) conditioned for the payment of any and all judgments that may be rendered against said property in favor of the Lienor, its successors or assigns, in any action or proceedings to enforce the alleged lien as described.
 
	Sealed with our seal and dated the    day of (month), (year)

 
Witness:____________________		(Name of principal)
 
							By:(Signature)
 
							Title:(Printed name and title 									of signatory)
 
Witness:____________________		(Name of Bond Company)
 
							By: (Signature)
 
							Title:(Printed name and 
 
							title of signatory)
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.31; amended 2010, c.119, s.21.

2A:44A-32.   Release, discharge from claim  
    32.  When the bond, deposit or any combination thereof, authorized by section 31 of this act, is properly filed or deposited, the improvements and land described in the lien claim shall thereupon be released and discharged from the claim and no execution shall issue against the improvements and land. The words "released by bond" or "released by deposit of funds," as applicable, and a reference to the time and place of filing of the bond or deposit shall be entered by the county clerk upon the record of the lien claim.  

   L.1993,c.318,s.32.  

2A:44A-33  Discharge of record of lien claim.
 
	33. a. A lien claim shall be discharged of record by the county clerk:

	(1)	Upon the execution and filing with the county clerk of a surety bond, or the deposit of funds with the clerk of the Superior Court of New Jersey, in favor of the claimant in an amount equal to 110% of the amount of the lien claim; or 
 
	(2)	Upon receipt of a duly acknowledged certificate, discharging the lien claim from the claimant having filed the lien claim, or the claimant's successor in interest, or attorney; or 
 
	(3)	Pursuant to the filing of an owner's or community association's discharge certificate in accordance with section 30 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-30), provided that 90 days prior to the filing of the affidavit, substantially in the form set forth in section 30 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-30), the lien claimant is notified by certified mail at the lien claimant's last known address of the owner's or community association's intent to file a discharge certificate and no written communication from the lien claimant denying or disputing payment in full of the lien claim is filed with the county clerk and served on the owner or community association; or
 
	(4)	Pursuant to an order of discharge by the court.
 
	b.	When judgment of dismissal or final other judgment against the lien claimant is entered in an action to enforce the lien claim under this act and no appeal is taken within the time allowed for an appeal, or if an appeal is taken within the time allowed for an appeal, or if an appeal is taken and finally determined against the lien claimant, the court before which the judgment was rendered, upon application and written notice to the lien claimant as the court shall direct, shall order the county clerk to enter a discharge of the lien claim. 
 
	c.	If an appeal is taken by the claimant, the claim shall be discharged unless the claimant posts a bond, in an amount to be determined by the court, to protect the owner or community association from the reasonable costs, expenses and damages which may be incurred by virtue of the continuance of the lien claim encumbrance. 
 
	d.	Upon discharge of record of the lien claim, unless the action for enforcement also involves claims, by way of counterclaim, cross claim or interpleader, arising out of or related to the improvements that are the subject of the lien claim in which the owner or community association is an interested party, the court shall also order that the owner or community association no longer be a party to an action to enforce the lien claim, and the surety issuing the bond shall be added as a necessary party.
 
	e.	Discharge of record of a lien claim will automatically discharge of record the Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien filed in connection therewith.
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.33; amended 2010, c.119, s.22.

2A:44A-34.   Book, page number of original record of lien claim necessary for release, discharge  
    34.  A discharge, subordination or release of a lien claim or Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien, a receipt of payment of a lien claim, or any order of the court discharging or releasing a lien claim, shall recite the book and page number of the original record of the lien claim, and a full description of the property discharged or released.  The county clerk may refuse to discharge, release or satisfy a lien claim or file a receipt of payment of a lien claim unless the provisions of this section have been satisfied.  

   L.1993,c.318,s.34.  

2A:44A-35  Discharge, subordination, release of lien claim.
 
	35. A discharge, subordination or release of a lien claim or Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien shall be duly acknowledged or proved, and recorded in a properly indexed book for that purpose.  A notation of the record of the discharge of a lien claim or Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien shall be endorsed upon the margin of the record in the book where the original lien or Notice of Unpaid Balance and Right to File Lien is recorded stating that the discharge is filed, giving the date of filing and setting forth the book and the page number where the discharge, or receipt of payment of the lien or order or owner's or community association's discharge certificate discharging the lien, is recorded. 
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.35; amended 2010, c.119, s.23.

2A:44A-36.   Liability for fraud  
    36.  A person who fraudulently deprives a person entitled to the benefits of this act shall be liable to that person for any damages resulting therefrom.  

   L.1993,c.318,s.36.  

2A:44A-37  Furnishing of list of subcontractors, suppliers.
 
	37. a. If required in a contract or upon written request from an owner or community association to a contractor, a subcontractor, or both, the contractor or subcontractor shall, within 10 days, provide the owner or community association with an accurate and full list of the names and addresses of each subcontractor and supplier who may have a right to file a lien pursuant to this act. 
 
	b.	If required in a contract or upon written request from a contractor to a subcontractor, the subcontractor shall, within 10 days, provide the contractor with an accurate and full list of the names and addresses of each subcontractor or supplier who may have a right to file a lien pursuant to this act. 
 
	c.	Any list provided pursuant to subsection a. or b. of this section shall be verified under oath by the person providing same.
 
	d.	Reliance upon the verified list shall be prima facie evidence establishing the bona fides of payment made in reliance thereon and shall constitute an absolute defense to any claim that the party making such payment should have made additional inquiry to determine the identity of potential claimants. 
 
	e.	Any person to whom a written request has been made pursuant to subsection a. or b. of this section who does not provide a list in compliance with this section shall be liable in damages to: (1) the party requesting the list; or (2) the owner or community association, including, but not limited to, court costs and the reasonable legal expenses, including attorneys' fees, incurred by any or all of them, in defending or causing the discharge of a lien claim asserted by a party whose name is omitted from the list. 
 
	L.1993, c.318, s.37; amended 2010, c.119, s.24.

2A:44A-38.   Waivers of construction lien rights  
    38.  Waivers of construction lien rights are against public policy, unlawful, and void, unless given in consideration for payment for the work, services, materials or equipment provided or to be provided, and such waivers shall be effective only upon and to the extent that such payment is actually received.  

   L.1993,c.318,s.38.  

2A:45-1.  Liens and encumbrances determinable
    Whenever the state of New Jersey has any lien or encumbrance upon real property and an action arising out of a prior lien or encumbrance on the same real property is instituted to foreclose, strictly foreclose, or re-foreclose the said prior lien or encumbrance, or otherwise to affect the lien or encumbrance of the state, or when such action is brought to foreclose the equity of redemption of the real property after a sale for unpaid taxes or other municipal liens, the lien or encumbrance of the state and its priority may be brought in question and definitely settled by the court having jurisdiction of the matter.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:45-2.  Notice;  contents
    In any such action, a notice shall be directed to the State of New Jersey, stating the names of the parties and describing the lien or encumbrance of the State sought to be affected and advising the State within what time it is required to answer, if it desires to be heard, which time shall be the same as prescribed for the filing of answers in a summons issued to defendants served personally in the State.  The notice shall set forth with particularity, in addition to the foregoing, (a) where the encumbrance or lien is for an inheritance tax, if known, the name of the decedent by reason of whose death the encumbrance or lien arises, the date of death of such decedent, the county and state wherein such decedent resided at the date of death, and the names and  addresses of the decedent's personal representatives, or, if none have been  appointed, the names and addresses of the decedent's heirs-at-law, or (b) where  the encumbrance or lien is for corporation taxes, or interest, costs or  penalties imposed upon, or by reason of, a corporation tax, the name of the  corporation against which the same was assessed or imposed.  The plaintiff, his attorney or the clerk of the court may issue the notice.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1973, c. 181, s. 1, eff. June 8, 1973.

2A:45-3.  Notice;  upon whom served
    If the lien or encumbrance of the state is for a tax payable to the state or  for any other right or claim of the state, other than a recognizance entered  into or a criminal judgment rendered in any county of the state, the notice  shall be served upon the attorney general, and, if for such a recognizance or  judgment, upon the county prosecutor of the county wherein the recognizance was  entered into or the judgment rendered. In all cases the notice shall be  accompanied by a copy of the complaint.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:45-4.  Action;  judgment;  operation and effect
    On the return of the notice, duly served, or on appearance for the state, the action may proceed as in other cases, and a judgment therein shall bind the  state and the lien of the state cut off, the same as if the judgment had been  made against an individual.  The claim of the state shall be made out of the  surplus, if any, in the order or priority in which the lien of the state stands.  In an action to foreclose the equity of redemption under a sale for taxes or other municipal liens or in any action of strict foreclosure or reforeclosure there may be entered a judgment barring and extinguishing any lien of the state on the lands described in the complaint, in case (a) no answer shall be made by the state;  or (b) where a disclaimer shall be filed by  the state;  or (c) where it shall be determined that the lien of the tax or  assessment or any part thereof or the lien or encumbrance so foreclosed is prior to the lien or encumbrance of the state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:45-5.  Release of judgment from lien of state on real estate required for  public improvement
    Whenever any real estate required for the purpose of carrying out a public improvement which has been authorized by law is subject to the lien of any judgment held by the state of New Jersey, the governor shall have power, by effective instruments, approved by the attorney general, sealed with the great seal of this state and attested by the secretary of state, to release such real  estate so required from the lien of such judgment, if and when, upon application, the governor shall deem it to be in the public interest, and that there is remaining real estate subject to the lien of such judgment sufficient to secure the amount then due on such judgment.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:46-1.  Definitions
    As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter requires otherwise:

    (a)  "Liquidation proceeding"  includes all assignments for the benefit of creditors, whether voluntary or by operation of law;  administration of insolvent decedents' estates;  liquidations of insolvent banks;  equity receiverships where the subject under receivership is insolvent;  and any other  proceedings for distribution of assets of any insolvent debtor, whether a  person, decedent's estate, partnership, corporation or business association.

    (b)  "Liquidator"  means any person administering assets in any liquidation  proceeding as defined in this chapter.

    (c)  "Insolvent debtor"  means any insolvent person, decedent's estate, partnership, corporation or business association involved in a liquidation proceeding as defined in this chapter.

    (d)  "Secured creditor"  means a creditor who has either legal or equitable  security for his debt upon any property of the insolvent debtor of a nature to  be liquidated and distributed in a liquidation proceeding, or a creditor to  whom is owed a debt for which such security is possessed by some indorser,  surety, or other person secondarily liable.

    (e)  "Creditor's sale"  includes any sale effected by the secured creditor by judicial process or otherwise under the terms of his contract or the applicable law for the purpose of realizing upon his security.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:46-2.  Secured creditor's claim must disclose security
    In a liquidation proceeding every secured creditor's claim against the general assets shall disclose the nature of the security.  When a decedent's estate already in the course of administration is judicially declared as likely  to be insolvent or when in an equity receivership it is determined that the  subject under receivership is insolvent, secured creditors having claims on  file which do not comply with this section shall make disclosure within a time  to be fixed by the court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:46-3.  Effect of concealment
    Any secured creditor who with intent to evade the provisions of this chapter  fails to disclose the existence of the security shall not be entitled to  receive or retain dividends out of the general assets, unless he thereafter  releases or surrenders to the liquidator the security which he has failed to  disclose, or unless he procures such release or surrender if the security is in  the possession of an indorser, surety, or other person secondarily liable for  the insolvent debtor.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:46-4.  Value of security credited upon claims
    Dividends paid to secured creditors shall be computed only upon the balance  due after the value of all security not exempt from the claims of unsecured  creditors and not released or surrendered to the liquidator, is determined and  credited upon the claim secured by it.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:46-5.  Determination of value by secured creditor
    (1) By collection.  When the asset constituting the security is an obligation for the payment of money, the secured creditor may determine its value by collection or by exhausting his remedies thereon and then surrendering  the obligation to the liquidator.

    (2) By creditor's sale.  When the asset constituting the security is something other than an obligation for the payment of money, the secured creditor may determine its value by creditor's sale.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:46-6.  Alternative determinations of value
    Where valuation under the provisions of section 2A:46-5 is impracticable or  would cause undue delay, the court, upon application by either the secured creditor or the liquidator, may order the value of the security determined by any of the following methods:

    (1) By compromise, if the secured creditor and the liquidator agree upon a value.  The liquidator may redeem such assets by payment of the agreed value, if authorized by the court.

    (2) By litigation, through proceedings in the liquidation proceeding. The liquidator may redeem such assets by paying the value so determined, if authorized by the court.

    (3) By liquidator's sale of the assets which, when completed and approved by  the court, shall pass to the purchaser good title, free and clear of all liens  of the secured creditor, such liens to be transferred to the proceeds of the  sale.  The order of sale may be either.

    (a) Conditional, requiring the sale to be made by the liquidator only if the  secured creditor does not complete a determination by collection or creditor's  sale as set forth in said section within a time fixed by the court;  or

    (b) Absolute, requiring the sale to be made by the liquidator within a time  fixed by the court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:46-7.  Exempt security not credited
    When any creditor has legal or equitable security upon assets which are exempt from process for the satisfaction of unsecured debts and are duly claimed as exempt by the insolvent debtor, the value of such security shall not  be credited upon the claim.  Amounts realized by the creditor from such security after liquidation proceedings are begun shall be disregarded in computing dividends, unless the dividend so computed exceeds the sum actually owing upon the claim, in which event only the amount owing shall be paid.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:46-8.  Uniformity of interpretation
    This chapter shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to make uniform the law of those states which enact it.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:46-9.  Short title
    This chapter may be cited as the uniform law governing secured creditors' dividends in liquidation proceedings.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:46-10.  Application of chapter
    This chapter shall not apply to contracts and transactions existing upon April 28, 1941.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:47-1.  Establishment by judgment;  summary action
    The existence of any lost or destroyed deed or other instrument relating to  title or real or personal property may be established by judgment in the superior court in an action brought in a summary manner or otherwise.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:47-2.  Survey of real estate
    In any such action relating to real property, the court may require the plaintiff to cause to be prepared and presented to the court, a survey of the premises involved sufficient to identify and locate the premises.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:47-3.  Record of judgment;  operation and effect
    A certified copy of any judgment establishing the existence of an instrument  relating to real property shall be recorded in the office of the county clerk  or register of deeds, as the case may be, of the county wherein the real  property is situate.  Such record shall, from and after the date thereof, be  notice, and a certified copy of such record shall be received in evidence as  fully as the original deed or instrument would be if produced or proven.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:47A-1.  False complaints of unprofessional conduct;  liability for damages
    Any person who falsely and maliciously and without probable cause makes a complaint, orally or in writing, of unprofessional conduct against a member of any profession requiring a license or other authority to practice such profession, to any court or to any ethics and grievance committee, or to any board or other public body authorized to and having the right to hear such complaint and to act thereon or to recommend action thereon and to take or recommend the taking of disciplinary action against the person complained of, such as disbarment or suspension in the case of an attorney-at-law, or the revocation or suspension of a license of other professional persons, shall be liable for any and all damages suffered and sustained by the member of a profession so complained of, to be recovered in a civil action in the nature of  an action at law for malicious prosecution.  In any such action, exemplary or  punitive damages may be awarded.

     L.1956, c. 122, p. 516, s. 1, eff. July 2, 1956.

2A:47A-2.  False complaints of unprofessional conduct;  limitation of actions
    Every such action shall be deemed to be for an injury to the person caused by the wrongful act of the person causing such injury and shall be commenced within 2 years next after the cause of any such action shall have accrued.

     L.1956, c. 122, p. 516, s. 2.

2A:48-1.  Liability of municipality or county;  amount recoverable; persons  covered by insurance
    When, by reason of a mob or riot, any property, real or personal, is destroyed or injured, the municipality if it has a paid police force, in which the mob congregates or riot occurs, or, if not in such a municipality, the county in which such property is or was situate, shall be liable to the person whose property was so destroyed or injured for the damages sustained thereby, recoverable in an action by or in behalf of such person, in an amount not to exceed $10,000.00 for the aggregate of damage done to all such property, both real and personal, at each separate location within a municipality;  provided, however, that no person, and no subrogee of such person, having insurance coverage in whole or in part for the said destruction or injury, shall have a cause of action against such municipality or county at common law or pursuant to the provisions of this act.  For the purpose of this section, insurance coverage means insurance obtained through any source whatsoever, including insurance purchased through any insurance pool, placement facility, plan of operation, or any other plan established pursuant to Federal or State law.

	 L.1951 (1st SS), c.344;   amended by L.1968, c. 386, s. 1, eff. Jan. 2, 1969.

2A:48-2  Limitation of action against municipality or county.
  
	2A:48-2. No action under this article shall be instituted unless commenced within three months after the loss of or injury to the property.  If any person entitled to such an action is, at the time the action accrues, under the age of 18 or a person who has a mental disability that prevents the person from understanding his legal rights or commencing a legal action, the person may commence the action within three years after reaching majority or having the mental capacity to pursue the person's lawful rights.
 
	amended 2013, c.103, s.7.

2A:48-3.  Negligence of party suing;  notice of threats
    If it appears at the trial that the destruction of or injury to the property  was occasioned or in any manner aided, sanctioned or permitted by the  negligence of the claimant, there shall be no recovery.  Nor shall a recovery  be had unless the claimant used all reasonable diligence to prevent the  destruction or injury and shall have, immediately after being apprized of a threat or attempt to destroy or injure his property by a mob or riot, notified  the mayor or chief executive officer or chief of police of the municipality or  the sheriff of the county, as the case may be, of the facts brought to his  knowledge.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:48-4.     Protection of property; expenses  
     2A:48-4. The mayor or officer or sheriff shall, upon receiving the notice, take all legal means to protect the property attacked or threatened. The expenses incurred by any of such officers in the performance of any duty hereby imposed shall be paid by the county treasurer of the county in which the property is situate, upon the approval thereof by a judge of the Superior Court of such county.  

  	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.105.  

2A:48-5.  Action against persons participating in mob or riot
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent a person whose property has been destroyed or injured by a mob or riot from maintaining an action against each and every person engaged or in any manner participating in the mob or riot.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:48-6.  Compromise by municipality or county with owner
    A municipality by its governing body, or a county, by its board of chosen freeholders, may, when liable to an action under this article, agree in writing  with the owner of the property destroyed or injured upon a sum to be paid to  him, without action, which sum shall be paid as claims of a general nature  against the municipality or county are paid.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:48-7.  Recovery over by municipality or county from persons participating  in mob or riot
    A municipality or county, having paid damages for the destruction of or injury to property under this article, either upon a judgment therefor or as a settlement, may recover the full value of the property destroyed or injured by action against any or all persons engaged or in any manner participating in the  mob or riot and the amount of judgment or settlement shall be prima facie evidence of the value of the property destroyed or injured.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:48-8.  Liability of municipality or county in damages;  amount
    Any person who, by reason of the action of a collection of individuals--five  or more in number--assembled for the unlawful purpose of offering violence to  the person or property of any one supposed to have been guilty of the violation  of a law, or for the purpose of exercising correctional powers or regulative  powers over any person, by violence and without lawful authority, suffers  material damage to his property or injury to his person, shall be entitled to  recover his damages in an action brought for such purpose against the  municipality in which such damage is suffered or injury inflicted, if the  municipality has a paid police force, or, if not in such municipality, then,  against the county in which such damage is suffered or injury inflicted, but  not in excess of $5,000.  Where the provisions of article 1 of this chapter are  also applicable and allow a recovery for the damage to property, the person  entitled to such damages may elect to maintain his action for damages to his  property under either this article or under article 1 of this chapter, but he  may not recover under both articles for the same damages to property.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:48-9.  Liability of municipality or county for death by lynching; amount
    When any person shall suffer death by lynching at the hands of a mob, his surviving spouse, lineal heirs, or adopted children, who was or were dependent upon him, shall be entitled to recover their damages, but not in excess of $5,000, sustained by reason thereof, in an action against the municipality in which the lynching occurred if the municipality has a paid police force; otherwise, against the county.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:49-1.  Action for recovery;  jurisdiction;  bond for costs
    If moneys, funds or other property held or owned by any municipality or school district, or held or owned officially or otherwise for or on behalf thereof, have been or shall be, without right, obtained, received, paid, converted or disposed of, action for the recovery thereof or to recover damages  or other compensation for such wrongful obtaining, receiving, paying, conversion or disposition, or both, may be maintained in any court of competent  jurisdiction thereof, by 10 freeholders of such municipality or district who  have paid taxes on real estate in such municipality or school district, within  1 year, in the name of and for and on behalf of such municipality or school  district.  Before any such action shall be maintained, such freeholders shall  file with the clerk of such municipality or school district, a bond to the  municipality or school district conditioned for the payment of the costs, if  any, assessed against such municipality or school district, in said action,  approved as to form and amount by a judge of the court in which such action is  brought.

2A:49-2.  Limitation of action
    No action under this chapter shall lie unless the cause thereof shall have accrued within 6 years before its commencement.

2A:49-3.  Disposition of recovery
    Out of any recovery had in an action under this chapter, the expenses incurred in the action by the freeholders, including payments made or to be made for legal services in an amount to be approved by the court, shall be first deducted and the balance thereupon be paid into the treasury of the municipality or school district in whose behalf the action is brought.

2A:49A-1.    Short title  
    1.   This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Uniform Foreign-Money Claims Act."  

   L.1993,c.317,s.1.  

2A:49A-2.    Definitions  
    2.   As used in this act:

  

   "Action" means a judicial proceeding or arbitration in which a payment in money may be awarded or enforced with respect to a foreign-money claim.  

   "Bank-offered spot rate" means the spot rate of exchange at which a bank will sell foreign money at a spot rate.  

   "Conversion date" means the banking day next preceding the date on which money, in accordance with this act, is:  

   a.   Paid to a claimant in an action or distribution proceeding;

  

   b.   Paid to the official designated by law to enforce a judgment or award on behalf of a claimant; or  

   c.   Used to recoup, set-off, or counterclaim in different moneys in an action or distribution proceeding.  

   "Distribution proceeding" means a judicial or nonjudicial proceeding for the distribution of a fund in which one or more foreign-money claims is asserted and includes an accounting, an assignment for the benefit of creditors, a foreclosure, the liquidation or rehabilitation of a corporation or other entity, and the distribution of an estate, trust, or other fund.  

   "Foreign money" means money other than money of the United States of America.

  

   "Foreign-money claim" means a claim upon an obligation to pay, or a claim for recovery of a loss, expressed in or measured by a foreign money.  

   "Money" means a medium of exchange for the payment of obligations or a store of value authorized or adopted by a government or by inter-governmental agreement.  

   "Money of the claim" means the money determined as proper pursuant to section 5 of this act.  

   "Person" means an individual, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, joint venture, partnership, association, two or more persons having a joint or common interest, or any other legal or commercial entity.  

   "Rate of exchange" means the rate at which money of one country may be converted into money of another country in a free financial market convenient to or reasonably usable by a person obligated to pay or to state a rate of conversion. If separate rates of exchange apply to different kinds of transactions, the term means the rate applicable to the particular transaction giving rise to the foreign-money claim.  

   "Spot rate" means the rate of exchange at which foreign money is sold by a bank or other dealer in foreign exchange for immediate or next day availability or for settlement by immediate payment in cash or equivalent, by charge to an account, or by an agreed delayed settlement not exceeding two days.  

   "State" means a State of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or a territory or insular possession subject to the jurisdiction of the United States.  

   L.1993,c.317,s.2.  

2A:49A-3.    Applicability of act  
    3.  a.  This act applies only to a foreign-money claim in an action or distribution proceeding.  

   b.   This act applies to foreign-money issues even if other law under the conflict of laws rules of this State applies to other issues in the action or distribution proceeding.  

   L.1993,c.317,s.3.  

2A:49A-4.    Agreements by parties to transaction  
    4.  a.  The effect of this act may be varied by agreement of the parties made before or after commencement of an action or distribution proceeding or the entry of judgment.  

   b.   Parties to a transaction may agree upon the money to be used in a transaction giving rise to a foreign-money claim and may agree to use different moneys for different aspects of the transaction. Stating the price in a foreign money for one aspect of a transaction does not alone require the use of that money for other aspects of the transaction.  

   L.1993,c.317,s.4.  

2A:49A-5.    Proper money  
    5.  a.  The money in which the parties to a transaction have agreed that payment is to be made is the proper money of the claim for payment.  

   b.   If the parties to a transaction have not otherwise agreed, the proper money of the claim, as in each case may be appropriate, is the money:  

   (1)  regularly used between the parties as a matter of usage or course of dealing;  

   (2)  used at the time of a transaction in international trade, by trade usage or common practice, for valuing or settling transactions in the particular commodity or service involved; or  

   (3)  in which the loss was ultimately felt or will be incurred by the party claimant.  

   L.1993,c.317,s.5.  

2A:49A-6.    Determination of amount to be paid  
    6.  a.  If an amount contracted to be paid in a foreign money is measured by a specified amount of a different money, the amount to be paid is determined on the conversion date.  

   b.   If an amount contracted to be paid in a foreign money is to be measured by a different money at the rate of exchange prevailing on a date before default, that rate of exchange applies only to payments made within a reasonable time after default, not exceeding 30 days.  Thereafter, conversion is made at the bank-offered spot rate on the conversion date.  

   c.   A monetary claim is neither usurious nor unconscionable because the agreement on which it is based provides that the amount of the debtor's obligation to be paid in the debtor's money, when received by the creditor, must equal a specified amount of the foreign money of the country of the creditor.  If, because of unexcused delay in payment of a judgment or award, the amount received by the creditor does not equal the amount of the foreign money specified in the agreement, the court or arbitrator shall amend the judgment or award accordingly.  

   L.1993,c.317,s.6.  

2A:49A-7.    Claim assertion; opposition; set-off  
    7.  a.  A person may assert a claim in a specified foreign money.  If a foreign-money claim is not asserted, the claimant makes the claim in United States dollars.  

   b.   An opposing party may allege and prove that a claim, in whole or in part, is in a different money than that asserted by the claimant.  

   c.   A person may assert a defense, set-off, recoupment, or counterclaim in any money without regard to the money of other claims.  

   d.   The determination of the proper money of the claim is a question of law.

  

   L.1993,c.317,s.7.  

2A:49A-8.    Judgment, award on foreign-money claim; payment  
    8.  a.  Except as provided in subsection c. of this section, a judgment or award on a foreign-money claim shall be stated in an amount of the money of the claim.  

   b.   A judgment or award on a foreign-money claim is payable in that foreign money or, at the option of the debtor, in the amount of United States dollars which will purchase that foreign money on the conversion date at a bank-offered spot rate.  

   c.   Assessed costs shall be entered in United States dollars.

  

   d.   Each payment in United States dollars shall be accepted and credited on a judgment or award on a foreign-money claim in the amount of the foreign money that could be purchased by the dollars at a bank-offered spot rate of exchange at or near the close of business on the conversion date for that payment.  

   e.   A judgment or award made in an action or distribution proceeding on both (1) a defense, set-off, recoupment, or counterclaim and (2) the adverse party's claim, shall be netted by converting the money of the smaller into the money of the larger, and by subtracting the smaller from the larger, and specify the rates of exchange used.  

   f.   A judgment substantially complies with subsection a. of this section, if it is in the following form: On this      day of            , 199 , it is ORDERED that judgment be entered in favor of the Plaintiff and against the Defendant in the sum of          (insert amount in the foreign money)    with interest at the rate of (insert rate - see Section 9 of this act) percent a year from the     day of             , 199 , or, at the option of the judgment debtor, the number of United States dollars which will purchase the   (insert name of foreign money)    with interest due, at a bank-offered spot rate at or near the close of business on the banking day next before the day of payment, together with assessed costs of (insert amount)  United States dollars.  

   g.   If a contract claim is of the type covered by subsections a. or b. of section 6 of this act, the judgment or award shall be entered for the amount of money stated to measure the obligation to be paid in the money specified for payment or, at the option of the debtor, the number of United States dollars which will purchase the computed amount of the money of payment on the conversion date at a bank-offered spot rate.  

   h.   A judgment shall be entered and indexed in foreign money in the same manner as other judgments, and has the same effect as a lien. It may be discharged by payment.  

   L.1993,c.317,s.8.  

2A:49A-9.    Governing rate of exchange  
    9.   The rate of exchange prevailing at or near the close of business on the day the distribution proceeding is initiated governs all exchanges of foreign money in a distribution proceeding.  A foreign-money claimant in a distribution proceeding shall assert its claim in the named foreign money and show the amount of United States dollars resulting from a conversion as of the date the proceeding was initiated.  

   L.1993,c.317,s.9.  

2A:49A-10.   Pre-judgment, pre-award interest payable  
    10.  a.  With respect to a foreign-money claim, recovery of pre-judgment or pre-award interest and the rate of interest to be applied in the action or distribution proceeding, except as provided in subsection b. of this section, are matters of the substantive law governing the right to recovery under the conflict of laws rules of this State.  

   b.   The court or arbitrator shall increase or decrease the amount of pre-judgment or pre-award interest otherwise payable in a judgment or award in foreign-money to the extent required by the law of this State governing a failure to make or accept an offer of settlement or offer of judgment, or conduct by a party or its attorney causing undue delay or expense.  

   c.   A judgment or award on a foreign-money claim bears interest at the rate applicable to judgments of this State.  

   L.1993,c.317,s.10.  

2A:49A-11.   Entering, enforcing foreign judgment  
    11.  a.  If an action is brought to enforce a judgment of another jurisdiction expressed in a foreign money and the judgment is recognized in this State as enforceable, the enforcing judgment shall be entered as provided in section 8 of this act, whether or not the foreign judgment confers an option to pay in an equivalent amount of United States dollars.  

   b.   A foreign judgment may be docketed in accordance with any rule or statute of this State providing a procedure for its recognition and enforcement.  

   c.   A satisfaction or partial payment made upon the foreign judgment, on proof thereof, shall be credited against the amount of foreign money specified in the judgment, notwithstanding the entry of judgment in this State.  

   d.   A judgment entered on a foreign-money claim only in United States dollars in another state shall be enforced in this State in United States dollars only.  

   L.1993,c.317,s.11.  

2A:49A-12.   Computations of value of assets, amount of foreign money claimed under legal process.  
    12.  a.  Computations under this section are for the limited purposes of the section and do not affect computation of the United States dollar equivalent of the money of the judgment for the purpose of payment.  

   b.   For the limited purpose of facilitating the enforcement of provisional remedies in an action, the value in United States dollars of assets to be seized or restrained pursuant to a writ of attachment, garnishment, execution, or other legal process, the amount of United States dollars at issue for assessing costs, or the amount of United States dollars involved for a surety bond or other court-required undertaking, shall be ascertained as provided in subsections c. and d. of this section.  

   c.   A party seeking process, costs, bond, or other undertaking under subsection b. of this section shall compute in United States dollars the amount of the foreign money claimed from a bank-offered spot rate prevailing at or near the close of business on the banking day next preceding the filing of a request or application for the issuance of process or for the determination of costs, or an application for a bond or other court-required undertaking.  

   d.   A party seeking the process, costs, bond, or other undertaking under subsection b. of this section shall file with each request or application an affidavit or certificate executed in good faith by its counsel or a bank officer, stating the market quotation used and how it was obtained, and setting forth the calculation. Affected court officials incur no liability, after a filing of the affidavit or certificate, for acting as if the judgment were in the amount of United States dollars stated in the affidavit or certificate.  

   L.1993,c.317,s.12.  

2A:49A-13.   Substitution of new foreign money  
    13.  a.  If, after an obligation is expressed or a loss is incurred in a foreign money, the country issuing or adopting that money substitutes a new money in place of that money, the obligation or the loss is treated as if expressed or incurred in the new money at the rate of conversion the issuing country establishes for the payment of like obligations or losses denominated in the former money.  

   b.   If substitution occurs under subsection a. of this section after a judgment or award is entered on a foreign-money claim, the court or arbitrator shall amend the judgment or award by a like conversion of the former money.  

   L.1993,c.317,s.13.  

2A:49A-14.   Principles of law supplement provisions of act  
    14.  Unless displaced by particular provisions of this act, the principles of law and equity, including the law merchant, and the law relative to capacity to contract, principal and agent, estoppel, fraud, misrepresentation, duress, coercion, mistake, bankruptcy, or other validating or invalidating causes supplement its provisions.  

   L.1993,c.317,s.14.  

2A:49A-15.   Uniform construction of act  
    15.  This act shall be applied and construed to effectuate its general purpose to make uniform the law with respect to the subject of this act among states enacting it.  

   L.1993,c.317,s.15.  

2A:49A-16.1  Short title.
 	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Foreign Country Money-Judgments Recognition Act of 2015."
 
	L.2017, c.365, s.1.

2A:49A-16.2  Definitions relative to foreign country money-judgments.
 	2.	As used in this act:

	"Foreign country" means a government other than:
 
	(1)	the United States;
 
	(2)	a state, district, commonwealth, territory, or insular possession of the United States; or
 
	(3)	any other government with regard to which the decision in this State as to whether to recognize a judgment of that government's courts is initially subject to determination under the Full Faith and Credit Clause of the U.S. Const., Art.IV, Sec.1.
 
	"Foreign-country judgment" means a judgment of a court of a foreign country.
 
	L.2017, c.365, s.2.

2A:49A-16.3  Applicability.
 	3. a. Except as otherwise provided in subsection b. of this section, this act shall apply to a foreign-country judgment to the extent that the judgment:
 
	(1)	grants or denies recovery of a sum of money; and
 
	(2)	under the law of the foreign country where rendered, is final, conclusive, and enforceable.
 
	b.	This act shall not apply to a foreign-country judgment, even if the judgment grants or denies recovery of a sum of money, to the extent that the judgment is: 
 
	(1)	a judgment for taxes;
 
	(2)	a fine or other penalty; or
 
	(3)	a judgment for divorce, support, or maintenance, or other judgment rendered in connection with domestic relations.
 
	c.	A party seeking recognition of a foreign-country judgment shall have the burden of establishing that this act applies to the foreign-country judgment.
 
	L.2017, c.365, s.3.

2A:49A-16.4  Recognition by courts; exceptions.
 	4. a. Except as otherwise provided in subsections b. and c. of this section, a court of this State shall recognize a foreign-country judgment to which this act applies.
 
	b.	A court of this State shall not recognize a foreign-country judgment if:
 
	(1)	the judgment was rendered under a judicial system that does not provide impartial tribunals or procedures compatible with the requirements of due process of law, as determined by the court using standards developed by the American Law Institute and the International Institute for the Unification of Private Law to govern resolution of transnational disputes;
 
	(2)	the foreign court did not have personal jurisdiction over the defendant; or
 
	(3)	the foreign court did not have jurisdiction over the subject matter.
 
	c.	A court of this State may determine, in its discretion, not to recognize a foreign-country judgment if:
 
	(1)	the defendant in the proceeding in the foreign court did not receive notice of the proceeding in sufficient time to enable the defendant to defend;
 
	(2)	the judgment was obtained by fraud that deprived the losing party of an adequate opportunity to present its case;
 
	(3)	the judgment or the cause of action on which the judgment is based is repugnant to the public policy of this State or of the United States;
 
	(4)	the judgment conflicts with another final and conclusive judgment;
 
	(5)	the proceeding in the foreign court was contrary to an agreement between the parties under which the dispute in question was to be determined otherwise than by proceedings in that foreign court;
 
	(6)	in the case of jurisdiction based only on personal service, the foreign court was a seriously inconvenient forum for the trial of the action; 
 
	(7)	the judgment was rendered in circumstances that raise substantial doubt about the integrity of the rendering court with respect to the judgment; or
 
	(8)	the specific proceeding in the foreign court leading to the judgment was not compatible with the requirements of due process of law, as determined by the court using standards developed by the American Law Institute and the International Institute for the Unification of Private Law to govern resolution of transnational disputes.
 
	d.	A party resisting recognition of a foreign-country judgment shall have the burden of establishing that a ground for nonrecognition stated in subsection b. or c. of this section exists, except that where a foreign-country judgment has been rendered in default of appearance of the defendant, the party seeking recognition shall have the burden of establishing that: 
 
	(1)	the rendering court had jurisdiction over the defendant in accordance with the law of the country of origin of judgment; 
 
	(2)	the defendant was served with initiating process in accordance with the law of the country of origin; and 
 
	(3)	the rendering court had jurisdiction over the defendant on a basis provided pursuant to section 5 of this act.
 
	L.2017, c.365, s.4.

2A:49A-16.5  Conditions for non-refusal of recognition.
  	5. a. A foreign-country judgment shall not be refused recognition for lack of personal jurisdiction if:
 
	(1)	the defendant was served with process personally in the foreign country;
 
	(2)	the defendant, before the commencement of the proceeding, had agreed to submit to the jurisdiction of the foreign court with respect to the subject matter involved;
 
	(3)	the defendant was domiciled in the foreign country when the proceeding was instituted or was a corporation or other form of business organization that had its principal place of business in, or was organized under the laws of, the foreign country;
 
	(4)	the defendant had a business office in the foreign country and the proceeding in the foreign court involved a cause of action arising out of business done by the defendant through that office in the foreign country; or
 
	(5)	the defendant operated a motor vehicle or airplane in the foreign country and the proceeding involved a cause of action arising out of that operation.
 
	b.	The list of bases for personal jurisdiction in subsection a. of this section shall not be construed to be exclusive.  The courts of this State may recognize bases for personal jurisdiction other than those listed in subsection a. of this section as sufficient to support a foreign-country judgment, as long as the exercise of personal jurisdiction in the foreign country is compatible with the Due Process Clause of the U.S. Const., Amend.V and Amend.XIV.
 
	c.	An appearance by the defendant in the country of origin, or an unsuccessful objection to the jurisdiction of the rendering court, shall not deprive the defendant of the right to resist recognition under this section, but factual determinations by the rendering court concerning jurisdiction shall be binding on the defendant.
 
	L.2017, c.365, s.5.

2A:49A-16.6  Recognition as original matter, pending matter.
 	6. a. If recognition of a foreign-country judgment is sought as an original matter, the issue of recognition shall be raised by filing an action seeking recognition of the foreign-country judgment.
 
	b.	If recognition of a foreign-country judgment is sought in a pending action, the issue of recognition may be raised by counterclaim, cross-claim, or affirmative defense.
 
	c.	A party against whom a foreign-country judgment is entered may file an action for a declaration that the foreign-country judgment shall not be subject to recognition.  For the purposes of this section, a foreign-country judgment shall not be subject to recognition if a ground for nonrecognition stated in subsection b. or c. of section 4 of this act exists.  The party bringing an action under this section shall have the burden of establishing a ground for nonrecognition under subsection b. or c. of section 4 of this act.

 	L.2017, c.365, s.6.

2A:49A-16.7  Entitlement to recognition.
 	7.	If the court in a proceeding finds that the foreign-country judgment is entitled to recognition under this act then, to the extent that the foreign-country judgment grants or denies recovery of a sum of money, the foreign-country judgment shall be:
 
	a.	conclusive between the parties to the same extent as the judgment of a sister state entitled to full faith and credit in this State would be conclusive; and
 
	b.	enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a judgment rendered in this State.
 
	L.2017, c.365, s.7.

2A:49A-16.8  Appeal.
	8.	If a party establishes that an appeal from a foreign-country judgment is pending or will be taken, the court may stay any proceedings with regard to the foreign-country judgment until the appeal is concluded, the time for appeal expires, or the appellant has had sufficient time to prosecute the appeal and has failed to do so.
 
	L.2017, c.365, s.8.

2A:49A-16.9  Commencement of action.
  	9.	An action to recognize a foreign-country judgment shall not be commenced before the foreign-country judgment becomes effective in the foreign country, or after 15 years from the date that the foreign-country judgment became effective in the foreign country.
 
	L.2017, c.365, s.9.

2A:49A-16.10  Application, construction.
 	10.	In applying and construing this uniform act, consideration shall be given to the need to promote uniformity of the law with respect to its subject matter among states that enact it.
 
	L.2017, c.365, s.10.

2A:49A-16.11  Recognition of judgment outside of scope of act.
	11.	This act shall not prevent the recognition under principles of comity or otherwise of a foreign-country judgment not within the scope of this act.
 
	L.2017, c.365, s.11.

2A:49A-25  Short title
	1.  This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Uniform Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act."

	L.1997,c.204,s.1.

2A:49A-26  "Foreign judgment" defined
	2.  In this act "foreign judgment" means any judgment, decree, or order of a court of the United States or of any other court which is entitled to full faith and credit in this State.

	L.1997,c.204,s.2.

2A:49A-27  Filing of copy of foreign judgment
	3.  A copy of any foreign judgment authenticated in accordance with an act of Congress or the statutes of this State may be filed in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of this State.  The clerk shall treat the foreign judgment in the same manner as a judgment of the Superior Court of this State.  A judgment so filed has the same effect and is subject to the same procedures, defenses and proceedings for reopening, vacating, or staying as a judgment of a Superior Court of this State and may be enforced in the same manner.

	L.1997,c.204,s.3.

2A:49A-28  Filing of affidavit; mailing of notice to judgment debtor
	4.  a.  At the time of the filing of the foreign judgment, the judgment creditor or his lawyer shall make and file with the Clerk of the Superior Court an affidavit setting forth the name and last known post office address of the judgment debtor, and the judgment creditor.  The affidavit shall further set forth whether the time to appeal the foreign judgment has expired and whether the court of origin has granted a stay of execution.  In addition, in the case of a judgment entered by default, the affidavit shall so state and shall set forth the expiration date under the rules of the court of origin for vacating the default.

	b.  Promptly upon the filing of the foreign judgment and the affidavit, the clerk shall mail notice of the filing of the foreign judgment to the judgment debtor at the address given and shall make a note of the mailing in the docket.  The notice shall include the name and post office address of the judgment creditor and the judgment creditor's lawyer, if any, in this State.  In addition, the judgment creditor may mail a notice of the filing of the judgment to the judgment debtor and may file proof of mailing with the clerk.  Lack of mailing notice of filing by the clerk shall not affect the enforcement proceedings if proof of mailing by the judgment creditor has been filed.

	c.  No execution or other process for enforcement of a foreign judgment filed under this act shall issue until 14 days after the date the judgment is filed.

	L.1997,c.204,s.4.

2A:49A-29  Appeal, stay of execution, enforcement
	5.  a.  If the judgment debtor shows the Superior Court that an appeal from the foreign judgment is pending or will be taken, or that a stay of execution has been granted, the court shall stay enforcement of the foreign judgment until the appeal is concluded, the time for appeal expires, or the stay of execution expires or is vacated, upon proof that the judgment debtor has furnished security for the satisfaction of the judgment required by the state in which it was rendered.

	b.  If the judgment debtor shows the Superior Court any ground upon which enforcement of a judgment of the Superior Court would be stayed, the Superior Court shall stay enforcement of the foreign judgment for an appropriate period, upon requiring the same security for satisfaction of the judgment which is required in this State.

	L.1997,c.204,s.5.

2A:49A-30  Fees for filing foreign judgment
	6.  Any person filing a foreign judgment shall pay to the Clerk of the Superior Court the fees required pursuant to N.J.S.22A:2-29 for actions taken with respect to judgments.  Fees for docketing, transcription or other enforcement proceedings shall be as provided for judgments of the Superior Court in accordance with N.J.S.22A:2-29.

	L.1997,c.204,s.6.

2A:49A-31  Right unimpaired
	7.  The right of a judgment creditor to bring an action to enforce his judgment instead of proceeding under this act remains unimpaired.

	L.1997,c.204,s.7.

2A:49A-32  Construction of act relative to consumer loans.
  
	8.	Nothing in this act shall be construed to require the enforcement of any foreign judgment which is based on a consumer loan containing any provision prohibited by the provisions of the "New Jersey Consumer Finance Licensing Act," sections 1 through 49 of P.L.1996, c.157 (C.17:11C-1 et seq.).
 
	L.1997, c.204, s.8; amended 2009, c.53, s.70.

2A:49A-33  Uniformity of interpretation, construction
	9. This act shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to make uniform the law of those states which enact it.

	L.1997,c.204,s.9.

2A:49A-34.  Findings, declarations relative to Euro as medium of payment
	1.	The Legislature finds and declares:

	a.	The member states of the European Union have adopted a uniform currency called the Euro.  These states have provided a three-year period of transition, from January 1, 1999 to December 31, 2001, for this complex new monetary policy to be put into place.  Prior to January 1, 2002, both the individual currencies of the states and the Euro will be in circulation.  The rates of exchange for these  currencies when they are converted to Euro will be set by the new Central European Bank.  Additional member states of the European Union may also convert their national currencies into the Euro.

	b.	During the transition from national currencies to a single European Union currency, and after the Euro is in place, parties to international contracts and financial transactions will require a clear understanding of the terms and value of their transactions to conduct their business with fairness and certainty.

	c.	There exists some uncertainty over the enforceability of certain contracts, securities and instruments that call for payment in a currency replaced by the Euro; this legislation is intended to ensure the continuity of these contracts.

	L.2000,c.23,s.1.

2A:49A-35.  Definitions relative to Euro as medium of payment
	2.	As used in this act:

	"Euro" means the currency of participating member states of the European Union signed February 17, 1992.

	"European Currency Unit" or "ECU" means the currency basket that is from time to time used as the unit of account of the European community as referred to in Article 109g of the Treaty on European Union and as defined in Regulation (EC) No.3320/94. 

	L.2000,c.23,s.2.

2A:49A-36.  Replacement of ECU by Euro in contract, security, or instrument references
	3.  a.  When the Euro first becomes the monetary unit of participating member states of the European Union, references to the ECU in a contract, security or instrument shall be replaced by references to the Euro at the rate of one Euro to one ECU.

	b.	If is it unclear that a contractual reference to the ECU is a reference to the official definition of the ECU, it shall be presumed to be a reference to the ECU, which presumption shall be rebuttable, taking into account the intentions of the parties.

	L.2000,c.23,s.3.

2A:49A-37.  Euro considered equivalent substitute for replaced currency
	4.  a.  If a subject or medium of payment of a contract, security or instrument is a currency that has been substituted or replaced by the Euro, the Euro shall be a commercially reasonable substitute and substantial equivalent that may be either:

	(1)	used in determining the value of that currency; or

	(2)	tendered, in each case at the conversion rate specified in, and otherwise calculated or rounded, as appropriate, in accordance with, the regulations adopted by the Council of the European Union.

	b.	If a subject or medium of payment of a contract, security or instrument is the ECU, the Euro shall be a commercially reasonable substitute and substantial equivalent that may be either:

	(1)	used in determining the value of the ECU; or

	(2)	tendered, in each case at the conversion rate specified in, and otherwise calculated or rounded, as appropriate, in accordance with, the regulations adopted by the Council of the European Union. 

	c.	Performance of any obligations described in subsection a. or b. of this section may be made in the currency or currencies originally designated in the contract, security or instrument, so long as the currency or currencies remain legal tender, or in Euros, but not in any other currency, if that other currency has been substituted or replaced by the Euro or is a currency that is considered a denomination of the Euro and has a fixed conversion rate with respect to the Euro.

	L.2000,c.23,s.4.

2A:49A-38.  Existing contracts, securities, instruments unaffected by introduction of Euro
	5.	None of the following shall have the effect of discharging or excusing performance under any contract, security or instrument, or give a party the right to unilaterally alter or terminate any contract, security or instrument:

	a.	The introduction of the Euro;

	b.	The tendering of Euros in connection with any obligation in compliance with subsection a. or b. of section 4 of this act;

	c.	The determining of the value of any obligation in compliance with subsection a. or b. of section 4 of this act; or

	d.	The calculating or determining of the subject or medium of payment of a contract, security or instrument with reference to interest rate or other basis that has been substituted or replaced due to the introduction of the Euro and is a commercially reasonable substitute and substantial equivalent.

	L.2000,c.23,s.5.

2A:49A-39.  Existing specific agreements unaffected by introduction of Euro
	6.	The provisions of this act shall not alter or impair, and shall be subject to, any agreements between the parties with specific reference to or agreement regarding the introduction of the Euro.

	L.2000,c.23,s.6.

2A:49A-40.  Applicability of act
	7.  a.  Notwithstanding the Uniform Commercial Code, Title 12A of the New Jersey Statutes, or any other law of this State to the contrary, the provisions of this act shall apply to all contracts, securities and instruments, including contracts with respect to commercial transactions, and shall not be deemed to be displaced by any other law of this State.

	b.	In circumstances of currency alteration, other than the introduction of the Euro, the provisions of this act shall not be interpreted as creating any negative inference or negative presumption regarding the validity or enforceability of contracts, securities or instruments denominated in whole or in part in a currency affected by that alteration.

	L.2000,c.23,s.7.

2A:50-1.  No personal deficiency judgment in foreclosure actions or execution thereon for balance due
    No judgment shall be rendered in any action to foreclose a mortgage for any  balance which may be due plaintiff over and above the proceeds of the sale of  the mortgaged property, and no execution shall issue therein for the collection  of any such balance.

2A:50-2.  Order of proceedings;  foreclosure;  action on bond; limitations;   parties
    Except as otherwise provided, all proceedings to collect any debt secured by  a mortgage on real property, shall be as follows:

    First, a foreclosure of the mortgage;  and

     Second, an action on the bond or note for any deficiency, if, at the sale in  the foreclosure proceeding, the mortgaged premises do not bring an amount sufficient to satisfy the debt, interest and costs.

    The action for any deficiency shall be commenced within 3 months from the date of the sale or, if confirmation is or was required, from the date of the confirmation of the sale of the mortgaged premises.  In such action judgment shall be rendered and execution issued only for the balance due on the debt and  interest and costs of the action.

    No action shall be instituted against any person answerable on the bond or note unless he has been made a party in the action to foreclose the mortgage.

     Amended by L.1979, c. 286, s. 1.

2A:50-2.1.  Time for bringing action on note for deficiency
    In the case of a mortgage given to secure a debt evidenced by a note, where  foreclosure proceedings are instituted within the time prescribed by the  Statute of Limitations, action on the note for any deficiency may be commenced  within the 3-month period provided by N.J.S. 2A:50-2, regardless of whether  said action would otherwise be barred for lapse of time.

     L.1979, c. 286, s. 11.

2A:50-2.2.  Agreement to waive rights;  invalidity
    Any express agreement made or entered into by a borrower at the time of or in connection with the making of or renewal of any loan secured by a mortgage, or thereafter, whereby the borrower agrees to waive the rights, or privileges conferred, upon him by chapter 50 of Title 2A of the New Jersey Statutes shall be void and of no effect.

     L.1979, c. 286, s. 12.

2A:50-2.3.  Application of act
    This act shall not apply to proceedings to collect a debt evidenced by a note and secured by a mortgage on real property in the following instances:

    a.  Where the debt secured is for a business or commercial purpose other than a two-family, three-family or four-family residence in which the owner or his immediate family resides;

    b.  Where the mortgaged property is other than a one-family, two-family, three-family or four-family dwelling in which the owner or his immediate family  resides at the time of institution of proceedings to collect the debt;

    c.  Where a banking institution, savings and loan association or building and loan association, operating pursuant to State or Federal law, is the lender  or his assignee and the mortgage is not the primary security for the debt, as  evidenced by (1) the financial condition of one or more persons directly or  indirectly liable on the note, or (2) the giving of collateral in addition to  the mortgage as security for the debt;

    d.  Where a banking institution, savings and loan association, building and  loan association or licensed secondary mortgage lender, operating pursuant to  State or Federal law, is the lender, and the mortgage is given to secure  payment of a loan evidenced by a note, and where the mortgage so given is  subject to the lien or liens of a prior mortgage or mortgages not held by such  institution or association or by any holder in which such institution or association has an interest or with which such institution or association has an affiliation.

     L.1979, c. 286, s. 13.  Amended by L.1981, c. 333, s. 1, eff. Dec. 14, 1981.

2A:50-2.4.  Severability
    If any provision or section of this act shall be held to be unconstitutional, said provision or section shall be exscinded and the remainder of the provisions and sections of the act as amended or supplemented shall be and remain valid with the same effect as if said provision so held to be unconstitutional had never been a part of the act.

     L.1979, c. 286, s. 14.

2A:50-3.  Answer disputing amount of deficiency;  determination of amount
    The obligor in any bond or note specified in section 2A:50-2 of this Title,  with respect to any bond given after March 29, 1933, and with respect to any  note given after the effective date of this amendatory act may file an answer  in the action for deficiency, disputing the amount of the deficiency sued for.   In that event both parties may introduce evidence as to the fair market value  of the mortgaged premises at the time of the sale thereof in the foreclosure  action, and the court, with or without a jury, shall determine the amount of  such deficiency, by deducting from the debt secured the amount determined as  the fair market value of the premises.  If all parties to the action shall so  agree, the court may accept as the fair market value of the mortgaged premises  the value fixed by three appraisers, to be named by agreement of all the  parties to the action, which agreement shall be evidenced by a stipulation to  be filed in the action.

     Amended by L.1979, c. 286, s. 2.

2A:50-4.  Judgment in action on bond as opening foreclosure and sale; right  of redemption;  time for bringing action to redeem
    If, after the foreclosure and sale of mortgaged premises, the person entitled to the debt shall recover a judgment in an action on the bond or note for any balance of debt, such recovery shall open the foreclosure and sale of the premises, and the person against whom the judgment has been recovered may redeem the property by paying the full amount of money for which the judgment in the foreclosure action was granted, with interest to be computed from the date of the judgment in the foreclosure action, and all costs of the action for  deficiency, and all reasonable expenses which the purchaser may have incurred  in the meantime for taxes, assessments, other prior liens, necessary repairs  upon the premises and interest on same, after deducting from the amount thereof  such income as the holder may have derived from the possession of the premises,  either as rent or otherwise.

    An action for redemption of the premises shall be brought within 6 months after the entry of the judgment for the balance of the debt.

     Amended by L.1979, c. 286, s. 3.

2A:50-5.  Answer in action on bond disputing amount of deficiency as termination of right to redeem;  foreclosure and sale not to be opened
    Where an action has been brought for a deficiency as provided by section 2A:50-2 of this Title, and where the party or parties liable for such deficiency shall have answered disputing the amount of the deficiency as provided by section 2A:50-3 of this Title, the effect of such answer shall be to terminate any right to redeem from foreclosure sale as provided by section 2A:50-4 of this Title, and the recovery for the deficiency shall not open the foreclosure and sale of the premises as provided by said section 2A:50-4.

     Amended by L.1979, c. 286, s. 4.

2A:50-6.  Bonds;  notice of proposed judgment by confession or action on
    No judgment shall be entered by confession on any bond or note where a mortgage on real estate has been or may be given for the same debt or in any action on the bond or note, unless, prior to the entry of the judgment, if by confession, or prior to the commencement of the action, if the proceeding be by  action, there shall be filed in the office of the clerk or register of deeds  and mortgages as the case may be, of the county, in which the real estate  described in the mortgage is situate a written notice of the proposed judgment  or action, setting forth the court in which it is proposed to enter the  judgment or begin the action, the names of the parties to the bond or note and  to the judgment or action, the book and page of the record of the mortgage,  together with a description of the real estate described therein.

     Amended by L.1979, c. 286, s. 5.

2A:50-7.  Record of notice of proposed judgment by confession or action on bond;  fees
    The county clerk or register of deeds and mortgages, as the case may be, shall forthwith record the notice required to be given by section 2A:50-6 of this Title, together with the time of the filing thereof, in the book by him kept for the record of notices of lis pendens.

    For the filing and recording of such notice the clerk or register shall receive the fees provided by P.L.1965, c. 123, s. 2 (C. 22A:4-4.1), which fees shall be included with the other costs to be taxed and recovered in the judgment or action for deficiency.

     Amended by L.1979, c. 286, s. 6.

2A:50-8.  Action on bond where lien or mortgage has been extinguished by foreclosure of prior mortgage
    When any debt is evidenced by a bond or a note and is secured by a mortgage  on real property and the lien of the mortgage has been or shall be extinguished  by the foreclosure of a prior mortgage and sale of the mortgaged premises,  action on the bond or note shall be commenced within 1 year of the sale or, if  confirmation was or is required, from the date of confirmation of the sale.   All such actions not commenced within said period shall be thereafter  completely and forever barred for lapse of time. However, the time during  which any application for surplus moneys arising from the foreclosure of such  prior mortgage shall be in litigation shall not be taken or computed as part of  any such period of 1 year.

     Amended by L.1979, c. 286, s. 7.

2A:50-9.  Judgment on bond not to open foreclosure and sale;  right of redemption
    The recovery of a judgment in an action pursuant to section 2A:50-8 shall not open the foreclosure and sale of the mortgaged premises or result in any right of redemption.

     Amended by L.1979, c. 286, s. 8.

2A:50-10.  Record of notice
    No judgment shall be entered by confession or in any action upon any bond or  note pursuant to section 2A:50-8 unless prior to the entry of the judgment, if  by confession, or prior to the commencement of the action on the bond or note,  if the proceeding be by action, there shall be filed and recorded in the office  of the clerk or register of deeds and mortgages as the case may be, of the  county, in which the mortgaged premises are situate, a written notice to the  same effect and in the same manner as is required by sections 2A:50-6 and  2A:50-7 of this Title.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1979, c. 286, s. 9.

2A:50-11.  Penal sum of bond may be expressed in sum of debt;  recovery for  true amount
    Whenever a bond secured by a mortgage shall be given for the same debt, the  penal sum of the bond may be expressed in the sum of the debt instead of in a  sum double the amount of the debt.  In any action upon such bond, recovery may  be had for the true amount due including the debt, interest, charges, advances,  costs, and any other obligation, secured and evidenced by the terms and  conditions of the bond and mortgage, in the same manner and to the same effect  as though the penal sum expressed in the bond was double the amount of the  debt.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-12.  Prior judgments by confession validated
    L.1911, c. 354, p. 740 (R.S. 2:65-8), entitled  "A supplement to an act entitled "supplement to an act entitled  "an act concerning proceedings on bonds and mortgages given for the same indebtedness and the foreclosure and sale of mortgaged premises thereunder"  (which said act was approved March 12, 1880), and which supplement was approved May 28, 1907' " , approved May 2, 1911, saved from repeal.  [This act is a validating act as to prior judgments by confession.]

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-13.  Parties to foreclosure action by trustee or fiduciary
    From and after May 29, 1937, it shall not be necessary to make any cestui que trustent, ward, beneficiary, holder of bonds, certificates, shares or other  interests in a mortgage, parties to any action brought by any trustee or  fiduciary acting on their behalf to foreclose any mortgage or mortgages in which they may be interested, but any order or judgment entered therein shall be as binding and effective as though they had been made parties to such action.

    Nothing in this section shall be deemed as indicating that, prior to the above date, it was necessary to make such cestui que trustent and the like parties.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-14.  Validation of sales where cestuis que trustent not made parties to foreclosure proceedings
    L.1938, c. 62, p. 168, entitled  "An act validating the sale of certain lands, tenements, hereditaments or real estate made under any decree, judgment or order of any court of this state or any execution or other process issued thereon,"  approved April 4, 1938, saved from repeal.  [This section validates sales of real estate where cestuis were not made parties to foreclosure proceedings.]

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-15.  Parties to foreclosure action against trustee or fiduciary
    It shall not be necessary in any action to foreclose any mortgage or mortgages to join as party or parties defendant any cestui que trust or cestuis  que trustent of any interest, right, claim, or title, held in, on or to the  mortgaged premises by a trustee or fiduciary for the benefit of such cestui que  trust or cestuis que trustent, but any order or judgment entered therein shall  be as binding and effective as though they had been made parties to such  action.

    Nothing in this section shall be deemed as indicating that, prior to June 14, 1938, it was necessary to make such cestui que trust and the like parties.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-16.  Action on bond secured by mortgage or by ejectment by mortgagee for possession;  redemption by mortgagor;  satisfaction and discharge of mortgage by court
    Section 1 of an act entitled  "An act concerning mortgages"  (revision), approved March 27, 1874 (Rev.1877, p. 701, s. 1;  R.S. 2:65-9), saved from repeal.  [The provisions of this section are indicated in the above section heading.]

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-17.  Suit to compel payment of amount due mortgagee or to foreclose equity of redemption;  order or decree before hearing of cause
    Section 2 of an act entitled  "An act concerning mortgages"  (revision), approved March 27, 1874 (Rev.1877, p. 702, s. 2;  R.S. 2:65-10), saved from repeal.  [The provisions of this section are indicated in the above section heading.]

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-18.  Exceptions to sections 2A:50-16 and 2A:50-17
    Section 3 of an act entitled  "An act concerning mortgages"  (revision), approved March 27, 1874 (Rev.1877, p. 703, s. 3;  R.S. 2:65-11), saved from repeal.  [The provisions of this section are indicated in the above section heading.]

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-19.  Sale of mortgaged premises by sheriff or other officer
    In all foreclosure actions the sheriff or other officer directed to sell mortgaged premises shall make such sale and report thereof and execute such conveyance as the court shall order and direct.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-20.  Title conveyed by sheriff's deed notwithstanding misnomer of certain defendants
    R.S. 2:65-13 as am.L.1948, c. 378, p. 1557, s. 3, saved from repeal. [This section provides that the sheriff's deed shall be valid despite the fact that any defendant who may have been made a party defendant in a foreclosure action has been misnamed in his representative capacity, provided that such person was  actually named by his own proper name in the proceedings.]

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-21.  Bar of equity of redemption
    If a mortgagee or those holding under him shall be in possession of the real  estate specified in the mortgage, or any part thereof, for 20 years after a  default of payment by the mortgagor, the right or equity of redemption in the  mortgage shall be forever barred.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-22.  Action against person assuming payment of mortgage debt
    No action to enforce an agreement, express or implied, to assume or guarantee the payment of any mortgage, or of any bond or note secured by a mortgage, shall be maintained against a person making such agreement unless the  mortgage shall have been first foreclosed, or extinguished by the foreclosure  of a prior mortgage or lien, provided no such action may be maintained unless:

    a.  The person making such agreement was made a party defendant in the foreclosure action, and

    b.  The action is commenced within 3 months from the date of sale, or if confirmation was or is required, from the date of the confirmation of the sale of the mortgaged premises, in the foreclosure action or in the case of the extinguishment of the mortgage lien by the foreclosure of a prior mortgage or lien, then within 12 months from the date of such extinguishment, and

    c.  A notice of intention to bring the action, is filed in the office of the  register or the clerk as the case may be, of the county wherein the mortgaged  premises are located, before the commencement of the action, and

    d.  The plaintiff shall in his complaint offer to credit upon the indebtedness the fair market value, which shall be specified, of the mortgaged premises as of the date of the sale in the foreclosure suit, in any case where the plaintiff was the purchaser of the mortgaged premises at such sale, and in such case the defendant may contest, in the action, the amount of such fair market value;  and

    e.  The plaintiff shall join in the action any and all persons within the jurisdiction of the State of New Jersey alleged to be liable upon the note or as obligors upon the bond and upon any other agreement of assumption of payment  of the same note or bond, express or implied, and upon any and all agreements  or covenants to pay the same note or bond, or any moneys alleged to be due  thereon, as principal, guarantor, surety or otherwise, whether such persons are  alleged to be liable directly, indirectly, jointly, severally, or in the  alternative.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1979, c. 286, s. 10.

2A:50-23.  Retroactive effect
    This article shall be applicable to all agreements, express or implied, to assume the payment of any bond secured by a mortgage, whether heretofore or hereafter made.

    In the case of such agreements heretofore made, the time within which the action may be brought, unless previously barred by any provision of law, shall be not later than 3 months from the date of the accrual of the cause of action.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-24.  Determination of fair value as prima facie evidence
    In any action specified in section 2A:50-22 of this title wherein the fair value of the mortgaged premises is in issue and such fair value has been determined in any prior action or proceeding, such determination shall be prima  facie evidence of such fair value.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-25.  Determination of rights and interests of parties
    In any action specified in section 2A:50-22 of this title the court shall by  the judgment therein entered determine the respective rights and interests of  all of the parties as between themselves and all of the other parties as to  primary, secondary and other liability to the plaintiff and as to the direct,  or indirect, or alternative liability of any party to any other party.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-26.  When provisions of sections 2A:50-6 and 2A:50-7 applicable to action
    Whenever the bringing of any action specified in section 2A:50-22 of this title shall revive the right to redeem the mortgaged premises and shall open the foreclosure and sale of the mortgaged premises, under section 2A:50-4 of this title, the provisions of sections 2A:50-6 and 2A:50-7 of this title shall be applicable to such action.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-27.  No provisions of chapter repealed or superseded by article
    Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to repeal or supersede any  of the provisions of this chapter.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-28.  Actions commenced before July 3, 1947
    This article shall not apply to any action commenced prior to July 3, 1947.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-29.  Allowance of set-offs
    In any action for the foreclosure of a mortgage, just set-offs shall be allowed, whether the holder of the mortgage is a party plaintiff or defendant.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-30.  Persons having unrecorded liens or claims not recorded or filed against property;  effect of foreclosure judgment;  coming in as parties
    In any action for the foreclosure of a mortgage upon real or personal property in this state, all persons claiming an interest in or an encumbrance or lien upon such property, by or through any conveyance, mortgage, assignment,  lien or any instrument which, by any provision of law, could be recorded,  registered, entered or filed in any public office in this state, and which  shall not be so recorded, registered, entered or filed at the time of the  filing of the complaint in such action shall be bound by the proceedings in the  action so far as such property is concerned, in the same manner as if he had  been made a party to and appeared in such action, and the judgment therein had  been made against him as one of the defendants therein; but such person, upon  causing such conveyance, mortgage, assignment, lien, claim or other instrument  to be recorded, registered, entered or filed as provided by law, may apply to  be made a party to such action.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-31.  Sale pending foreclosure
    When, in an action for the foreclosure or satisfaction of a mortgage covering real or personal property, or both, the property mortgaged is of such a character or so situated as to make it liable to deteriorate in value or to make its care or preservation difficult or expensive pending the determination of the action, the superior court may, before judgment, upon the application of  any party to the action, order a sale of the mortgaged property to be made at  public or private sale through a receiver, sheriff, or otherwise, as the court  may direct.  The proceeds of any such sale shall be brought into court, there  to remain subject to the same liens and equities of the parties in interest as  was the mortgaged property and to be disposed of as the court shall, by order  or judgment, direct.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-32.  Satisfaction of judgment for foreclosure and sale
    When a judgment for the foreclosure and sale of mortgaged premises is paid and satisfied, other than by a sale of the premises, satisfaction thereof shall  be entered by the clerk by virtue of a duly acknowledged or proved warrant or  authority from the party receiving satisfaction, or from his attorney of  record.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-33.  Sale of entire premises when whole amount not due; disposition of proceeds
    When, in cases where the whole sum secured by a mortgage is not due, a judgment of the court shall be made for the sale of the mortgaged premises, either for the nonpayment of any portion or installment of the debt or demand intended to be secured by the mortgage, or the nonpayment of interest due, or both, and it shall appear to the court that a part of the mortgaged premises cannot be sold to satisfy the amount due without material injury to the remaining part of the mortgaged premises, and that it is just and reasonable that the whole of the mortgaged premises should be sold together, the court may  order a sale to be made of all of the mortgaged premises, the proceeds of such  sale, or so much thereof as shall be necessary, to be applied, as well to the  payment of the interest, installments or portions then due, and also the costs  then due and payable, as to the payment of the whole or residue of the debt or  demand not then due and payable;  and the residue of the proceeds of such sale  to be paid to the person or persons entitled to receive the same, or to be  brought into court to abide the further order of the court, as the equity and circumstances of the case require.

    When, however, the residue of the debt or demand intended to be secured by the mortgage is payable at a future day without interest, and the mortgagee is willing to receive the same, the court shall deduct a rebate of legal interest for the amount the mortgagee shall receive on such debt or demand, to be computed from the time of the actual payment thereof to the time when such residue would have become due and payable.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-34.  Gross sum in lieu of dower, curtesy, life estate or estate for years
    If, upon the foreclosure of any mortgage and the sale of the premises therein described, there shall be paid into court moneys representing an estate  in dower or for life or for years, or an estate by the curtesy in such premises  or any part thereof, any person entitled to such estate may make application to  the court for a sum in gross in lieu thereof, and the court shall direct the  payment of such sum in gross out of the proceeds of the sale of the premises to  the person entitled to such estate, as shall be deemed a just and reasonable  satisfaction for such estate, and which the person so entitled shall consent in  writing to accept in lieu thereof.

    If no such consent shall be given before the distribution of the proceeds of  the sale, the court shall ascertain and determine what proportion of such proceeds will be a just and reasonable sum to be invested for the benefit of the person entitled to such estate, and shall order the same deposited with the  court and under the direction and control of the court for the benefit of the  parties entitled, the interest thereon to be paid to the parties entitled as  the same may become due as compensation for and in lieu of such estate. At the  termination of such estate the principal sum shall be paid to or distributed  among the parties entitled thereto.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-35.  Payment of surplus from sale to executor or administrator
    When the mortgagor or the person owning the mortgaged premises is dead at the time of the sale thereof under foreclosure, the court may, if it deems it expedient or necessary for the proper administration of the estate of the decedent, direct that the surplus arising from the proceeds of the sale be paid  to the executor or administrator of the decedent, to be administered in the  same manner as money arising from the sale of real estate by administrators or  executors.  The administrator or executor shall give bond as required by law  upon an application for the sale of real estate.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-36.  When sale under execution authorized;  issue and record of writ
    In any civil action for the foreclosure or satisfaction of any mortgage, the  superior court may order a sale of the mortgaged premises, or such part thereof  as shall be sufficient to discharge the mortgage or encumbrances on the  mortgaged premises, besides costs by virtue of a writ of execution issued for  that purpose.  The writ of execution shall, before it is issued, be recorded by  the clerk of the court in the book kept by him for recording executions against  real estate.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-37.  Sale and conveyance of premises;  estate conveyed; disposition of proceeds;  application for surplus
    The sheriff or other officer to whom a writ of execution under section 2A:50-36 of this title shall be directed and delivered shall make sale pursuant  to the command of such writ, and shall make and execute a deed or deeds for the  premises sold, as the case may require;  but no greater estate in the premises  sold shall, at any time, be granted to a purchaser than would have been vested  in the mortgagee had the equity of redemption been duly foreclosed.

    The moneys arising from a sale pursuant to this section shall be applied to  pay off and discharge the moneys ordered to be paid, and the surplus, if any,  shall be deposited with the court and the same shall be paid to the person or  persons entitled thereto, upon application therefor, as the court shall  determine.  Such surplus moneys may be invested at interest on such security as  the court shall order pending application therefor by the person or persons  entitled thereto.  All charges in connection with applications for surplus  moneys not exceeding $100, shall not exceed the sum of $5.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-38.  Charges where amount due not in excess of $300
    In any foreclosure of a mortgage and sale of the mortgaged premises, where the amount due does not exceed $300, the charges for official services shall be  one-half the amount allowed by law where the amount due exceeds $300.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-39.  Mortgages to which article applies
    This article shall apply to any mortgage in force May 2, 1932, or thereafter  executed and delivered, but it shall not affect any foreclosure proceeding  commenced prior to said date.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-40.  Foreclosure for unpaid interest authorized
    The holder of a mortgage, under the terms of which the mortgagor has agreed  to pay the mortgagee a certain specified sum or sums of money at certain future  time or times as therein specified, or as specified in the evidence of debt to  secure which the mortgage was given, and also interest on the principal thereof  during the term of the mortgage, at certain specified times at a rate not in  excess of the legal annual rate, may, whenever the owner of the mortgaged  premises defaults in making any such interest payment at the time when it has  become due, or within such period of grace as is designated in the mortgage or  the evidence of debt secured thereby, elect to foreclose the mortgage only to  the extent that there is due and unpaid thereunder, upon the evidence of debt  secured thereby, any interest upon the principal sum secured thereby.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-41.  Judgment on foreclosure for unpaid interest;  no merger; lien of  mortgage continued
    The judgment entered in a foreclosure proceeding under authority of section  2A:50-40 of this title shall be only for the amount of unpaid interest due  under the terms of the mortgage to the date of the judgment, and costs, and  shall adjudge that the mortgage shall not be deemed to have merged in the  judgment, but shall remain in full force and effect as security for the payment  of the principal sum then remaining due thereon and secured thereby, and  interest upon the principal sum to become due thereon from the date of the  judgment.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-42.  Sale on foreclosure for unpaid interest subject to lien of mortgage
    The sale of the mortgaged premises under a foreclosure judgment under authority of sections 2A:50-40 and 2A:50-41 of this title shall be specifically  made subject to the lien of the mortgage in the full principal sum then due  thereon and the interest on the principal sum from the date of the judgment.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-43.  Foreclosure for unpaid installment of principal authorized
    Whenever, under the terms of a mortgage it is provided that there shall be paid on account of the principal sum secured thereby any payment on account thereof, due at a time or times therein specified, the holder of the mortgage may, whenever the owner of the mortgaged premises defaults in making any such payment on account of the principal sum, at the time when the same has become due, or within such period of grace as is designated in the mortgage or the evidence of debt secured thereby, elect to foreclose the mortgage only to the extent that there is due and unpaid thereunder any payment required to be made on account of the principal, either by the terms of the mortgage or the evidence of debt secured thereby.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-44.  Judgment on foreclosure for unpaid installment of principal; no merger;  lien of mortgage continued
    The judgment entered in a foreclosure proceeding under authority of section  2A:50-43 of this title shall be only for the amount of the principal which  would have been due as of the date of the filing of the complaint to foreclose,  had there been no default, together with all interest accrued as of the date of  the judgment, and costs, and shall adjudge that the mortgage shall not be  deemed to have merged in the judgment, but shall remain in full force and  effect as security for the principal sum remaining due thereon, after deducting  the principal sum to be paid because of such default, and interest upon such  principal sum to become due thereon from the date of the judgment.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-45.  Sale on foreclosure for unpaid installment of principal subject to lien of mortgage
    The sale of the mortgaged premises under a foreclosure judgment entered under authority of sections 2A:50-43 and 2A:50-44 of this title shall be specifically made subject to the lien of the mortgage in the principal sum remaining due thereon as specified in the judgment, and interest on such principal sum from the date of the judgment.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-46.  Foreclosure for unpaid municipal liens authorized
    Whenever it is provided in a mortgage, or in the evidence of debt secured thereby, that the mortgagee may claim a default for the nonpayment of any municipal lien or liens on the mortgaged premises which shall have remained unpaid for a specified time, the holder of the mortgage, the municipal lien or liens not having been paid within the specified time, may pay or purchase the lien, taking an assignment thereof, and foreclose the mortgage only for the amount due for the municipal lien or liens.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-47.  Judgment on foreclosure for unpaid municipal liens;  no merger; lien of mortgage continued
    The judgment entered in a foreclosure proceeding under authority of section  2A:50-48 of this title shall be only for the amount of the municipal lien or  liens unpaid and paid or purchased by the holder of the mortgage, with interest  on the amount of such lien or liens so paid or purchased by the holder of the  mortgage from the date of such payment or purchase, and shall adjudge that the  mortgage shall be deemed not to have merged therein, but shall remain in full  force and effect as security for the principal sum due thereon, with accrued  interest.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-48.  Foreclosure for either unpaid interest or installment of principal and unpaid municipal liens
    If, at the time of the commencement of a proceeding to foreclose a mortgage  for the nonpayment of interest under authority of section 2A:50-40 of this  title, or the nonpayment of an installment of the principal sum due upon the  mortgage under authority of section 2A:50-43 of this title, there are any  municipal liens upon the mortgaged premises due and unpaid, the holder of the  mortgage may pay such lien or liens and secure a judgment, not only for the  unpaid interest or defaulted portion of the principal sum, but also for the  amount of the municipal lien or liens by him paid, together with interest  thereon from the date of the payment thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-49.  Foreclosure for failure to procure insurance or pay insurance premiums authorized
    Whenever it is provided in a mortgage that the owner of the mortgaged premises shall keep the same insured for the benefit of the mortgagee and that,  in default thereof, or upon the failure, neglect or refusal of the owner to pay  any premium for such insurance protection, the mortgagee may either procure  such insurance or pay any such defaulted premium in order to preserve the  protection of his insurance, and add the cost of procuring such insurance or  the amount paid by him for any such premium to the principal sum due on the  mortgage, to be recovered upon demand or otherwise with interest from the date  of such procurement or payment, or the mortgagee is given the option to declare  the principal sum due on the mortgage whenever the owner fails to furnish  proper insurance protection, the holder of the mortgage may, upon paying for or  procuring such insurance, waive the demand for the payment of the principal sum  due on the mortgage and foreclose the mortgage only for the amount paid by him  to procure such insurance, with interest thereon from the date of such payment.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-50.  Judgment on foreclosure for failure to procure insurance or pay insurance premiums;  no merger;  lien of mortgage continued
    The judgment in a foreclosure proceeding under authority of section 2A:50-49  of this title shall adjudge that the mortgage shall not be deemed to be merged  therein, but shall remain in full force and effect as security for the  principal sum due thereon and accrued interest.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-51.  No merger of fee and mortgage interest on purchase at sale by holder of mortgage;  conveyance by purchaser;  assignment of mortgage
    The purchase by the holder of the mortgage of the real estate, or any interest therein, sold under a judgment in a foreclosure authorized by this article shall not result in a merger of the fee and the mortgage interest. The real estate so purchased may be held or conveyed subject to the lien of the mortgage as stated in the judgment, and the mortgage may be assigned as a valid  and subsisting lien upon the real estate therein described.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-52.  No deficiency judgment
    Upon a foreclosure under authority of this article there shall be no deficiency judgment.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:50-53.	Short title
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Fair Foreclosure Act."

	L.1995,c.244,s.1.

2A:50-54.	Findings, declarations on payment of home mortgages 
	2.	The Legislature hereby finds and declares it to be the public policy of this State that homeowners should be given every opportunity to pay their home mortgages, and thus keep their homes; and that lenders will be benefited when residential mortgage debtors cure their defaults and return defaulted residential mortgage loans to performing status.

	L.1995,c.244,s.2.

2A:50-55  Definitions.
 	3.	As used in this act:

	"Deed in lieu of foreclosure" means a voluntary, knowing and uncoerced conveyance by the residential mortgage debtor to the residential mortgage lender of all claim, interest and estate in the property subject to the mortgage.  In order for a conveyance to be voluntary, the debtor shall have received notice of, and been fully apprised of the debtor's rights as specified in section 4 of this act.  For purposes of this act, "voluntarily surrendered" has the same meaning as "deed in lieu of foreclosure."
 
	"Immediate family" means the debtor, the debtor's spouse, or the mother, father, sister, brother or child of the debtor or debtor's spouse.
 
	"Non-residential mortgage" means a mortgage, security interest or the like which is not a residential mortgage.  If a mortgage document includes separate tracts or properties, those portions of the mortgage document covering the non-residential tracts or properties shall be a non-residential mortgage.
 
	"Obligation" means a promissory note, bond or other similar evidence of a duty to pay.
 
	"Office" means the Office of Foreclosure within the Administrative Office of the Courts.
 
	"Residential mortgage" means a mortgage, security interest or the like, in which the security is a residential property such as a house, real property or condominium, which is occupied, or is to be occupied, by the debtor, who is a natural person, or a member of the debtor's immediate family, as that person's residence.  This act shall apply to all residential mortgages wherever made, which have as their security such a residence in the State of New Jersey, provided that the real property which is the subject of the mortgage shall not have more than four dwelling units, one of which shall be, or is planned to be, occupied by the debtor or a member of the debtor's immediate family as the debtor's or member's residence at the time the loan is originated.
 
	"Residential mortgage debtor" or "debtor" means any person shown on the record of the residential mortgage lender as being obligated to pay the obligation secured by the residential mortgage.
 
	"Residential mortgage lender" or "lender" means any person, corporation, or other entity which makes or holds a residential mortgage, and any person, corporation or other entity to which such residential mortgage is assigned.
 
	"Servicer" means the person, corporation or other entity responsible for servicing a residential mortgage loan, including a residential mortgage lender who makes or holds a loan if the lender also services the loan.
 
	"Servicing" means managing the mortgage loan account on a daily basis, including collecting and crediting periodic loan payments, managing escrow accounts, or enforcing the terms of the mortgage or note.
 
	"Short sale" means the sale of real property in which the lender or servicer agrees to release the lien that is secured by a residential mortgage on the property upon receipt of a lesser amount than is owed on the mortgage.
 
	L.1995, c.244, s.3; amended 2017, c.157, s.1.

2A:50-56  Notice of intention to foreclose.
	4.  a.  Upon failure to perform any obligation of a residential mortgage by the residential mortgage debtor and before any residential mortgage lender may accelerate the maturity of any residential mortgage obligation and commence any foreclosure or other legal action to take possession of the residential property which is the subject of the mortgage, the residential mortgage lender shall give a notice of intention, which shall include a notice of the right to cure the default as provided in section 5 of P.L.1995, c.244 (C.2A:50-57), at least 30 days, but not more than 180 days, in advance of such action as provided in this section, to the residential mortgage debtor, and, if the mortgage is secured by a residence for which a restriction on affordability was recorded in the county in which the property is located, the clerk of the municipality in which the subject property is located, the municipal housing liaison, if one has been appointed by the municipality.  For the purposes of this section, "restriction on affordability" means any conditions recorded with a mortgage or a deed which would limit the sale of such property to income qualified households pursuant to the rules adopted to effectuate the "Fair Housing Act," P.L.1985, c.222 (C.52:27D-301 et al.).
 
	b.	Notice of intention to take action as specified in subsection a. of this section shall be in writing, provided to the Department of Community Affairs in accordance with subsection a. of section 2 of P.L.2019, c.134 (C.46:10B-49.2), sent to the debtor by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at the debtor's last known address, and, if different, to the address of the property which is the subject of the residential mortgage.  The notice is deemed to have been effectuated on the date the notice is delivered in person or mailed to the party.
 
	c.	The written notice shall clearly and conspicuously state in a manner calculated to make the debtor aware of the situation:
 
	(1)	the particular obligation or real estate security interest;
 
	(2)	the nature of the default claimed;
 
	(3)	the right of the debtor to cure the default as provided in section 5 of P.L.1995, c.244 (C.2A:50-57);
 
	(4)	what performance, including what sum of money, if any, and interest, shall be tendered to cure the default as of the date specified under paragraph (5) of this subsection c.;
 
	(5)	the date by which the debtor shall cure the default to avoid initiation of foreclosure proceedings, which date shall not be less than 30 days after the date the notice is effective, and the name and address and phone number of a person to whom the payment or tender shall be made;
 
	(6)	that if the debtor does not cure the default by the date specified under paragraph (5) of this subsection c., the lender may take steps to terminate the debtor's ownership in the property by commencing a foreclosure suit in a court of competent jurisdiction;
 
	(7)	that if the lender takes the steps indicated pursuant to paragraph (6) of this subsection c., a debtor shall still have the right to cure the default pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1995, c.244 (C.2A:50-57), but that the debtor shall be responsible for the lender's court costs and attorneys' fees in an amount not to exceed that amount permitted pursuant to the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey;
 
	(8)	the right, if any, of the debtor to transfer the real estate to another person subject to the security interest and that the transferee may have the right to cure the default as provided in P.L.1995, c.244 (C.2A:50-53 et seq.), subject to the mortgage documents;
 
	(9)	that the debtor is advised to seek counsel from an attorney of the debtor's own choosing concerning the debtor's residential mortgage default situation, and that, if the debtor is unable to obtain an attorney, the debtor may communicate with the New Jersey Bar Association or Lawyer Referral Service in the county in which the residential property securing the mortgage loan is located; and that, if the debtor is unable to afford an attorney, the debtor may communicate with the Legal Services Office in the county in which the property is located;
 
	(10)  the possible availability of financial assistance for curing a default from programs operated by the State or federal government or nonprofit organizations, if any, as identified by the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance and, if the property is subject to restrictions on affordability, the address and phone number of the municipal affordable housing liaison and of the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency.  This requirement shall be satisfied by attaching a list of such programs promulgated by the commissioner;
 
	(11)  the name and address of the lender and the telephone number of a representative of the lender whom the debtor may contact if the debtor disagrees with the lender's assertion that a default has occurred or the correctness of the mortgage lender's calculation of the amount required to cure the default; 
 
	(12)  that if the lender takes the steps indicated pursuant to paragraph (6) of this subsection, the debtor has the option to participate in the Foreclosure Mediation Program following the filing of a mortgage foreclosure complaint by initiating mediation pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection a. of section 4 of P.L.2019, c.64 (C.2A:50-77).  Notice of the option to participate in the Foreclosure Mediation Program shall adhere to the requirements of section 3 of P.L.2019, c.64 (C.2A:50-76) and any court rules, procedures, or guidelines adopted by the Supreme Court;
 
	(13)  that the debtor is entitled to housing counseling, at no cost to the debtor, through the Foreclosure Mediation Program established by the New Jersey Judiciary, including information on how to contact the program; 
 
	(14)  that if the property which is the subject of the mortgage has more than one dwelling unit but less than five, one of which is occupied by the debtor or a member of the debtor's immediate family as the debtor's or member's residence at the time the loan is originated, and is not properly maintained and meets the necessary conditions for receivership eligibility, established pursuant to section 4 of the "Multifamily Housing Preservation and Receivership Act," P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-117), the residential mortgage lender shall file an order to show cause to appoint a receiver; and
 
	(15)  that the lender is either licensed in accordance with the "New Jersey Residential Mortgage Lending Act," sections 1 through 39 of P.L.2009, c.53 (C.17:11C-51 through C.17:11C-89) or exempt from licensure under the act in accordance with applicable law.
 
	d.	The notice of intention to foreclose required to be provided pursuant to this section shall not be required if the debtor has voluntarily surrendered the property which is the subject of the residential mortgage.
 
	e.	The duty of the lender under this section to serve notice of intention to foreclose is independent of any other duty to give notice under the common law, principles of equity, State or federal statute, or rule of court and of any other right or remedy the debtor may have as a result of the failure to give such notice.
 
	f.	Compliance with this section and subsection a. of section 2 of P.L.2019, c.134 (C.46:10B-49.2) shall be set forth in the pleadings of any legal action referred to in this section.  If the plaintiff in any complaint seeking foreclosure of a residential mortgage alleges that the property subject to the residential mortgage has been abandoned or voluntarily surrendered, the plaintiff shall plead the specific facts upon which this allegation is based.
 
	g.	If more than 180 days have elapsed since the date the notice required pursuant to this section is sent, and any foreclosure or other legal action to take possession of the residential property which is the subject of the mortgage has not yet been commenced, the lender shall send a new written notice at least 30 days, but not more than 180 days, in advance of that action.
 
	h.	If the property which is the subject of the notice of intention to foreclose has more than one dwelling unit but less than five, one of which is occupied by the debtor or a member of the debtor's immediate family as the debtor's or member's residence at the time the loan is originated, and is not properly maintained and meets the necessary conditions for receivership eligibility, established pursuant to section 4 of the "Multifamily Housing Preservation and Receivership Act," P.L.2003, c.295 (C.2A:42-117), the residential mortgage lender shall file an order to show cause to appoint a receiver.
 
	L.1995, c.244, s.4; amended 2003, c.298; 2019, c.64, s.8; 2019, c.69; 2019, c.70, s.2; 2019, c.132, s.1; 2019, c.134, s.4; 2024, c.2, s.8.

2A:50-56a  Creditor, foreclosure proceeding, agent, responsible, property, vacant, abandoned, immunity, liability.
	3. a. In situations in which a creditor has instituted a foreclosure proceeding pursuant to the "Fair Foreclosure Act," P.L.1995, c.244 (C.2A:50-53 et seq.) and a creditor employs an agent to be responsible for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the property if it becomes vacant and abandoned, the creditor and agent who peacefully enter the property and exercise reasonable care in doing so, shall be immune from liability, before and after the bid, for any damage to the property or any person entering the property.
 
	b.	Persons bidding on the property shall not enter the property prior to the time of sale of the property to the successful bidder.
 
L.2023, c.255, s.3.

2A:50-56.1  Statute of limitations relative to residential mortgage foreclosures.
	1.	An action to foreclose a residential mortgage shall not be commenced following the earliest of:
 
	a.	Six years from the date fixed for the making of the last payment or the maturity date set forth in the mortgage or the note, bond, or other obligation secured by the mortgage, whether the date is itself set forth or may be calculated from information contained in the mortgage or note, bond, or other obligation, except that if the date fixed for the making of the last payment or the maturity date has been extended by a written instrument, the action to foreclose shall not be commenced after six years from the extended date under the terms of the written instrument; 
 
	b.	Thirty-six years from the date of recording of the mortgage, or, if the mortgage is not recorded, 36 years from the date of execution, so long as the mortgage itself does not provide for a period of repayment in excess of 30 years; or
 
	c.	Six years from the date on which the debtor defaulted, which default has not been cured, as to any of the obligations or covenants contained in the mortgage or in the note, bond, or other obligation secured by the mortgage, except that if the date to perform any of the obligations or covenants has been extended by a written instrument or payment on account has been made, the action to foreclose shall not be commenced after  six years from the date on which the default or payment on account thereof occurred under the terms of the written instrument.
 
	L.2009, c.105, s.1; amended 2019, c.67.

2A:50-56.2  Response by servicers to offer relative to short sale.
 	2. a. A servicer shall respond to a good faith offer from a seller, seller's agent, or authorized third party to purchase the property through a short sale within 60 days of the date of the offer.  A response would include an approval, a denial, or a request for further information.  If the servicer decides not to approve a short sale, or fails to respond to the seller's, seller's agent's, or authorized third party's offer within 60 days, any deposit made by the buyer in connection with the purchase of the property shall be refunded in its entirety and the potential purchaser shall have no further obligation with respect to the sale or other disposition of the property.
 
	b.	Nothing in this section shall constitute a limitation on the ability of the servicer and debtor to participate in the New Jersey Judiciary's Foreclosure Mediation Program or any other form of mediation or settlement discussion, or enter into an agreement as a result of that mediation or settlement discussion.
 
	L.2017, c.157, s.2.

2A:50-56.3  Dismissal of action, reinstatement.
	2. a.  If a plaintiff's action to foreclose a residential mortgage has been dismissed without prejudice pursuant to R.4:64-8 of the Rules Governing the Courts of New Jersey of the State of New Jersey, reinstatement of the plaintiff's action may be permitted only on motion for good cause shown.  Reinstatements shall be limited to three for any action, except that a reinstatement which is granted following a dismissal without prejudice that resulted from the plaintiff's compliance with federal law or regulation shall not count toward the limit established by this subsection. The fee for a plaintiff to reinstate a residential mortgage foreclosure action shall be twice the amount set for filing a foreclosure complaint. The plaintiff shall not charge or otherwise pass a reinstatement fee onto the debtor or any other person.
 
	b.	The amounts paid by plaintiffs for reinstating a mortgage pursuant to subsection a. of this section, that are over and above the amounts set for filing a foreclosure complaint, shall be aggregated and divided equally on an annual basis, with one-half dedicated to the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency for the purposes of funding the counseling component provided by the agency for the New Jersey Judiciary's Foreclosure Mediation Program, and one-half dedicated to the Administrative Office of the Courts for the general operations provided by the office for the New Jersey Judiciary's Foreclosure Mediation Program.
 
	L.2019, c.69, s.2.

2A:50-56.4  Certification of diligent inquiry.
	1. a. In addition to any other requirements under law, regulation or court rule, in all residential mortgage foreclosure actions, an attorney filing a foreclosure complaint shall include a certification of diligent inquiry.  The certification of diligent inquiry shall certify:
 
	(1) that the attorney has communicated with an employee or employees of the plaintiff or of the plaintiff's mortgage loan servicer who: (a) personally reviewed the complaint and confirmed the accuracy of its content, based on business records kept in the regular course of business by the plaintiff or the plaintiff's mortgage loan servicer, and who, if employed by the plaintiff's mortgage loan servicer, identified the relationship between the mortgage loan servicer and the plaintiff; and (b) confirmed the authority of the mortgage loan servicer to act on behalf of the plaintiff;
 
	(2) the names and titles, and the responsibilities in those titles, of the plaintiff's or plaintiff's mortgage loan servicer's employees with whom the attorney communicated pursuant to paragraph (1) of this section and the date and mode of communication employed to contact them;
 
	(3) that the attorney has reviewed the facts of the case and that, based on the information received pursuant to this section and the attorney's review of the pertinent documents, to the best of the attorney's knowledge, information and belief there is a reasonable basis for the commencement of the action and that the plaintiff is currently the residential mortgage lender entitled to enforce rights under those documents; and
 
	(4) that the attorney is aware that the failure to comply with the provisions of this section may result in the penalties provided for in subsection b. of this section or, where the failure constitutes a violation of the Rules of Professional Conduct, may include sanctions imposed by the Supreme Court of New Jersey.  
 
	b.	If the court finds that the plaintiff has failed to comply with the provisions of subsection a. of this section, the court may dismiss the complaint or deny the accrual of any costs, attorney's fees and other fees relating to the mortgage debt.

	L. 2021, c.337.

2A:50-57.	Curing of default
	5. a.  Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, as to any residential mortgage for which a notice of intention to foreclose is required to be given pursuant to section 4 of this act, whether or not such required notice was in fact given, the debtor, or anyone authorized to act on the debtor's behalf, shall have the right at any time, up to the entry of final judgment or the entry by the office or the court of an order of redemption pursuant to subsection g. of section 11 of this act, to cure the default, de-accelerate and reinstate the residential mortgage by tendering the amount or performance specified in subsection b. of this section.  The payment or tender shall be made to the person designated in the notice pursuant to paragraph (5) of subsection c. of section 4 of this act.  The debtor may exercise the right to cure a default as to a particular mortgage and reinstate that mortgage only once every 18 months, provided, however, that this limitation shall not apply if the mortgage debtor cures a default by the date specified in paragraph (5) of subsection c. of section 4 of this act.  The 18-month time period shall run from the date of cure and reinstatement.

	b. 	To cure a default under this section, a debtor shall:

	(1) 	pay or tender to the person identified pursuant to paragraph (5) of subsection c. of section 4 of this act, in the form of cash, cashier's check, or certified check, all sums which would have been due in the absence of default, at the time of payment or tender;

	(2) 	perform any other obligation which the debtor would have been bound to perform in the absence of the default or the exercise of an acceleration clause, if any;

	(3) 	pay or tender court costs, if any, and attorneys' fees in an amount which shall not exceed the amount permitted under the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey; and

	(4) 	pay all contractual late charges, as provided for in the note or security agreement.

	c. 	To cure a default under this section, a debtor shall not be required to pay any charge, fee or penalty attributable to the exercise of the right to cure a default as provided for in this act.

	d. 	Cure of a default reinstates the debtor to the same position as if the default had not occurred.  It nullifies, as of the date of cure, any acceleration of any obligation under the mortgage, note or bond arising from the default.

	e. 	If a default is cured prior to the filing of a foreclosure action, the lender shall not institute a foreclosure action for that default.  If a default is cured after the filing of a foreclosure action, the lender shall give written notice of the cure to the court.  Upon such notice, the court shall dismiss the action without prejudice.

	f. 	The right to cure a default under this section is independent of any right of redemption or any other right or remedy under the common law, principles of equity, State or federal statute, or rule of court.

	L.1995,c.244,s.5.

2A:50-58  Application for entry of final judgment; entry of order of redemption.
 	6.  a.  (1) If a plaintiff's action to foreclose a residential mortgage is uncontested, pursuant to R.4:64-1(a) of the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey and the plaintiff chooses not to use the optional procedure for the disposition of foreclosed premises pursuant to section 11 of this act, a lender shall apply for entry of final judgment and provide the debtor with a notice, mailed at least 14 calendar days prior to the submission of proper proofs for entry of a foreclosure judgment, providing the debtor with the name and address of the lender and the telephone number of a representative of the lender whom the debtor may contact to obtain the amount required to cure the default, and advising that, absent a response from the debtor pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection a., proper proofs will be submitted for entry of final judgment in the foreclosure action and that upon entry of final judgment, the debtor shall lose the right, provided pursuant to section 5 of this act, to cure the default.  The lender shall attach a copy of the required 14-day notice to the application for final judgment.  The manner and address for mailing and the effective date of the notice shall be the same as set forth in subsection b. of section 4 of this act.
 
	(2)	A debtor may, no later than 10 days after receipt of the notice required pursuant to subsection a. of this section, mail to the lender a statement in which the debtor in good faith certifies as true that there is a reasonable likelihood that the debtor will be able to provide payment necessary to cure the default within 45 days of the date the notice required pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection a. became effective.  This statement shall be sent registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the lender who gave notice as required pursuant to subsection a. of this section.
 
	(3)	A lender who receives a statement sent by the debtor pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection a., shall not submit proper proofs for entry of final judgment in foreclosure with a return date earlier than 46 days after the date the notice required pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection a. became effective.
 
	b. (1) If a plaintiff's action to foreclose a residential mortgage is uncontested, pursuant to R.4:64-1(a) of the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey and the lender chooses to use the optional procedure for the disposition of the foreclosed premises pursuant to section 11 of this act, the lender shall provide the debtor with a notice, mailed at least 14 calendar days prior to filing an affidavit or certification with the office or court pursuant to subsection f. of section 11 of this act.  The notice shall provide the debtor with the  name and address of the lender and the telephone number of a representative of the lender whom the debtor may contact to obtain the amount required to cure the default, and advise the debtor that, absent a response from the debtor pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection b., the lender shall file an affidavit or certification with the office or court requesting the office or court to enter an order of redemption and that upon the entry of the order of redemption the debtor shall lose the right provided pursuant to section 5 of this act, to cure the default.  The lender shall attach a copy of the required  14-day notice to the  affidavit or certification for filing with the office or court requesting the office or court to enter an order of redemption  .  The manner and address for mailing and the effective date of the notice shall be the same as set forth in subsection b. of section 4 of this act.
 
	(2)	A debtor may, no later than 10 days after receipt of the notice required pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection b., mail to the lender a statement in which the debtor in good faith certifies as true that there is a reasonable likelihood that the debtor will be able to provide payment necessary to cure the default within 45 days of the date the notice required pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection b. became effective.  This statement shall be sent registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the lender who gave notice as required pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection b.
 
	(3)	A lender who receives a statement sent by the debtor pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection b., shall not file an affidavit or certification with the office or court earlier than 46 days after the date the notice required pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection b. became effective.
 
	L.1995,c.244,s.6; amended 2006, c.13.

2A:50-59.	Reinstatement of mortgage relationship 
	7.	If a debtor is successful in curing the default under a repayment plan approved by the United States Bankruptcy Court, the residential mortgage relationship between the parties is reinstated, and the debtor is restored to the same position held before the default or acceleration.

	L.1995,c.244,s.7.

2A:50-60.	Federal law not limited, modified 
	8.	Nothing herein is intended to limit or modify any provision of federal law regarding notice of the availability of homeownership counselling.

	L.1995,c.244,s.8.

2A:50-61.	Waivers against public policy, unlawful, void 
	9.	Waivers by the debtor of rights provided pursuant to this act are against public policy, unlawful, and void, unless given after default pursuant to a workout agreement in a separate written document signed by the debtor.

	L.1995,c.244,s.9.

2A:50-62.	Nonapplicability of act
	10.	The provisions of sections 1 through 9 of this act shall not apply to the foreclosure of a non-residential mortgage nor to collection of the obligation by means other than enforcing the lender's lien on the residential property.  A lender shall not be required to foreclose a residential mortgage and a non-residential mortgage securing the same obligation in the same proceeding.

	L.1995,c.244,s.10.

2A:50-63  Optional foreclosure procedure.
 	11. a. An optional foreclosure procedure without sale for the disposition of a foreclosed premises is hereby established pursuant to subsection b. of this section, wherein a lender may elect to proceed according to the provisions of this act and R.4:64-1(d) of the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey.
 
	b.	Use of the optional procedure without sale, as provided in this section, shall be permitted only when:
 
	(1)	the debtor has abandoned the property which is the subject of the residential mortgage;
 
	(2)	the debtor has voluntarily surrendered the property which is the subject of the residential mortgage by signing a deed in lieu of foreclosure in favor of the lender; or
 
	(3)	there is no equity in the property which is the subject of the residential mortgage, as defined in subsection e. of this section .
 
	 c.	Pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection b. of this section, and for purposes of this section only, abandonment of the property subject to the residential mortgage shall be established by an affidavit or certification from an individual having personal knowledge of the contents thereof, setting forth the specific facts upon which that conclusion is based.  The affidavit or certification shall be submitted to the office or the court at the same time that the lender applies to the office or the court for the order fixing the amount, time and place for redemption.
 
	 d.	Pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection b. of this section and for purposes of this section only, if the lender receives a deed in lieu of foreclosure, the conveyance shall be effective only if the deed clearly and conspicuously provides: that the debtor may, without penalty, rescind the conveyance within seven days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays; and that such rescission is effective upon delivery of a written notice to the lender or its agent or upon mailing of such notice to the lender or its agent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested.
 
	e. (1) For purposes of paragraph (3) of subsection b. of this section, a property subject to a residential mortgage shall be deemed to have no equity if the total unpaid balance of all liens and encumbrances against the property, including mortgages, tax liens and judgments actually against the property (not including similar name judgments), and any other lien, is equal to or greater than 92 percent of the fair market value of the property.  An affidavit setting forth with specificity the fair market value of the property, the unpaid balance of the obligation, including all mortgages and liens and the method by which the lender determined that the property has no equity, shall be submitted to the office or the court at the time the lender applies for the order fixing the amount, time and place for redemption.
 
	(2)	If a lender proceeds with the optional procedure under this subsection, and if the debtor has not objected and requested a public sale pursuant to this section, when the foreclosed property is resold by the lender following judgment and provided the resale price received by the lender is in excess of the amount necessary to repay the debt, interest and reasonable costs of the lender, and all carrying charges, including, but not limited to, the reasonable costs of maintenance and resale, the lender shall deposit any such excess in accordance with R.4:57 et seq. of the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey.
 
	(3)	Upon deposit of any such excess with the Superior Court, the lender shall notify the debtor and any lien holder who held a lien junior to the lender and whose lien was lost in whole or in part as a result of the foreclosure.  Such notification shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the debtor and such lien holders.  The debtor and the lien holders shall then have six months to make an application to the Superior Court, in the form of an application for surplus funds, upon appropriate notice to all other parties in interest, to seek an order for turnover of the excess funds.  Failure of a lender to comply with the provisions of paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection e. shall not affect title to the foreclosed property.
 
	 f. (1) In accordance with the provisions of R.4:64-1(d) of the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey, and subject to compliance with the provisions of this act, a lender may elect to proceed with the optional procedure by filing an affidavit or certification with the office or the court.
 
	(2)	The affidavit or certification shall set forth the facts which the lender alleges show that it is entitled to proceed under one or more paragraphs of subsection b. of this section and shall be supported by the proofs required by this section and such other proofs as may be required by the office or the court.
 
	 g.	In accordance with the provisions of R.4:64-1(d) of the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey, and subject to compliance with the provisions of this act, the office or the court may enter an order fixing the amount, time, and place for redemption, which shall be not less than 45 days nor more than 60 days after the date of the order.  The office or the court may grant an extension of time for good cause shown.  The order shall provide that:
 
	(1)	the redeeming defendant pay to the plaintiff's attorney the amount fixed by the office or the court for redemption, together with interest to the date of redemption, plus all court costs;
 
	(2)	redemption shall be by cash, cashier's check or certified check and made at the office of the plaintiff's attorney, if such office is located in the county where the property is situated, or at such other place as designated by the office or the court, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. of the date set by the office or the court in the order; and
 
	(3)	in the absence of redemption, the defendants shall stand absolutely debarred and foreclosed from all equity of redemption.
 
	 h. (1) The order for redemption or notice thereof shall be mailed to each defendant's last known address and, if different, also to the address of the property being foreclosed.  The order for redemption or notice thereof shall be sent by ordinary mail and certified mail, return receipt requested, within 20 days after the date the order is entered, except that, as to defendants whose addresses are unknown and who were served by publication, no further publication of the order for redemption or notice thereof need be made.
 
	(2)	The notice shall:
 
	(a)	inform the defendants that the plaintiff is proceeding under an optional procedure authorized by section 11 of this act and set out the steps of the optional procedure;
 
	(b)	inform all defendants of the terms and conditions under which a defendant may request a public sale of the mortgaged premises pursuant to subsection i. of this section; and
 
	(c)	clearly state that no request for a public sale made after 30 days from the date of service will be granted, except for good cause shown.
 
	 i.	In any matter in which the office or the court has issued an order for redemption and the lender is permitted to proceed by the optional procedure, a defendant who wishes to object to the optional procedure and request a public sale with respect to the mortgaged premises being foreclosed, shall submit to the office or the court a written request for a public sale within 30 days of the date the order or notice thereof is served.  If a defendant requests a public sale within the required time period, and subject to compliance with the provisions of this act, the office or court shall enter a judgment of foreclosure which provides for a public sale of the premises in accordance with applicable law.  Any such defendant who requests a public sale, other than a natural person who is the owner or a voluntary transferee from that owner, shall be required to post a cash deposit or bond prior to the date fixed for redemption.  This cash deposit or bond shall be in an amount which is 10% of the amount found due in the order fixing the amount, time and place for redemption and shall be held to secure the plaintiff against any additional interest and costs, as well as any deficiency, as a result of the public sale.  The office or the court may dispense with this requirement for good cause shown.  The defendant who requests a public sale, other than a natural person who is the owner or a voluntary transferee from that owner, shall pay all expenses and costs associated with the public sale, including, but not limited to, all sheriff's fees and commissions.
 
	j.	In the event of any dispute among defendants over the right to redeem, the court shall enter such order as is necessary to secure the plaintiff pending the resolution of the dispute, including, but not limited to, payment of plaintiff's additional interest and costs which accrue as a result of the dispute.
 
	k.	Upon redemption, the plaintiff shall furnish the redemptioner with an appropriate certificate of redemption and the redemptioner shall acquire all rights provided by law and equity but shall not be entitled to a deed or title to the mortgaged premises solely by virtue of the redemption.  A redemptioner in proper cases may proceed to foreclose the redemptioner's interest.
 
	l.	In the absence of redemption, and on proof of mailing of the order for redemption or notice thereof pursuant to subsection h. of this section and an affidavit of non-redemption, the plaintiff shall be entitled to a judgment debarring and foreclosing the equity of redemption of the defendants and each of them and any person claiming by, through or under them, and adjudging the plaintiff be vested with a valid and indefeasible estate in the mortgaged premises.  Anything to the contrary notwithstanding, redemption shall be permitted at any time up until the entry of judgment including the whole of the last day upon which judgment is entered.  A certified copy of the judgment shall be accepted for recording by the county recording officer pursuant to P.L.1939, c.170 (C.46:16-1.1).
 
	m.	Upon entry of a judgment vesting title in the plaintiff pursuant to subsection l. of this section, the debt which was secured by the foreclosed mortgage shall be deemed satisfied, and the plaintiff shall not be permitted to institute any further or contemporaneous action for the collection of the debt.
 
	L.1995, c.244, s.11; amended 2019, c.132, s.2.

2A:50-64  Procedures for sale.
	12. a. With respect to the sale of a mortgaged premises under foreclosure action, each sheriff in this State shall provide for, but not be limited to, the following uniform procedures:
 
	(1)	Bidding in the name of the assignee of the foreclosing plaintiff.
 
	(2)	That adjournment of the sale of the foreclosed property shall be in accordance with N.J.S.2A:17-36.
 
	(3) (a) The sheriff shall conduct a sale within 150 days of the sheriff's receipt of any writ of execution issued by the court in any foreclosure proceeding.
 
	(b)	If it becomes apparent that the sheriff cannot comply with the provisions of subparagraph (a) of this paragraph (3), the foreclosing plaintiff may apply to the office for an order appointing a Special Master to hold the foreclosure sale.
 
	(c)	Upon the foreclosing plaintiff making such application to the office, the office shall issue the appropriate order appointing a Special Master to hold the foreclosure sale. The office may issue the order to appoint a Special Master to hold foreclosure sales for one or more properties within a vicinage.
 
	(4)	That notice for the sale of a foreclosed upon residential property be mailed to the primary address of the foreclosed upon defendant and to the address of the foreclosed upon residential property.  Notice of the sale shall be mailed in an envelope that plainly states on its exterior that the envelope is a notice for the sale of the foreclosed upon residential property. The language used on the exterior of the envelope shall comply with the federal "Fair Debt Collection Practices Act," 15 U.S.C. s.1692 et seq.
 
	(5) (a) That notice of the upset price for the sale of a foreclosed upon residential property be provided at least four weeks prior to the sheriff's sale and posted on the Internet website of the sheriff's office and on any other medium used to provide notice of the sheriff's sale.  The upset price provided in the notice shall be a good faith estimate of the upset price on the day of the sheriff's sale; however, the upset price on the day of the sheriff's sale shall not increase by more than three percent from the upset price originally provided in the notice.  If the sheriff's sale is delayed or postponed, or if circumstances occur that require unforeseen advances to protect the borrower or the foreclosed upon residential property in the event of vandalism, weather damage, or other emergency property preservation needs, the upset price may be adjusted to reflect these costs in the latest price; and
 
	(b)	Prior to providing the upset price to the sheriff's office pursuant to subparagraph (a) of this paragraph, the foreclosing plaintiff or agent of the foreclosing plaintiff shall be prohibited from contacting the foreclosed upon defendant, next of kin of the foreclosed upon defendant, or a nonprofit community development corporation to inquire whether the foreclosed upon defendant, next of kin, or nonprofit community development corporation intends to participate in the sheriff's sale for the foreclosed upon property or exercise the provisions of P.L.2023, c.255 (C.2A:50-56a et al.). If, after providing notice of the upset price pursuant to subsection a. of this section, the foreclosing plaintiff is informed that the foreclosed upon defendant, next of kin, or nonprofit community development corporation intends to participate in the sheriff's sale or exercise the provisions of P.L.2023, c.255 (C.2A:50-56a et al.), the foreclosing plaintiff shall not attempt to delay or postpone the sheriff's sale by reason of the foreclosed upon defendant, next of kin, or nonprofit community development corporation's intention to participate in the sheriff's sale or exercise the provisions of P.L.2023, c.255 (C.2A:50-56a et al.).  Any notice required pursuant to this paragraph shall comply with the federal "Fair Debt Collection Practices Act," 15 U.S.C. s.1692 et seq.
 
	(6)	Prior to the sale of residential property, the foreclosing plaintiff shall disclose, if known, whether the property is vacant, tenant-occupied, or owner-occupied.  If the property is vacant, the foreclosing plaintiff shall provide the successful bidder access to the property if the foreclosing plaintiff has such access and may condition access by the successful bidder on being accompanied by a representative of the foreclosing plaintiff.
 
	(7) (a) Except as otherwise provided in subparagraphs (b) and (c) of this paragraph, the successful bidder at the sheriff's sale shall pay a 20 percent deposit in either cash or by a certified or cashier's check, made payable to the sheriff of the county in which the sale is conducted, immediately upon the conclusion of the foreclosure sale.
 
	(b)	In the case of residential property in which the successful bidder is the foreclosed upon defendant, next of kin, tenant, nonprofit community development corporation, or a bidder who shall occupy the property as the bidder's primary residence for a period of at least 84 months, the successful bidder who has fulfilled the requirements set forth in subsection e. of this section shall pay a 3.5 percent deposit of the original upset price listed in the notice provided by the foreclosing plaintiff pursuant to subparagraph (a) of paragraph (5) of this subsection, or the final starting upset price listed for the sale of the property, whichever is less, with the rest of the balance due within 90 business days by cash, certified or cashier's check, or by wire transfer, made payable to the sheriff of the county in which the sale is conducted or to the Special Master, if the sheriff cannot comply with the provisions of subparagraph (a) of paragraph (3) of this subsection, immediately upon the conclusion of the foreclosure sale.
 
	(c)	If the successful bidder cannot satisfy the requirement of this paragraph that is applicable to the bidder, or the applicable requirement of this paragraph respectively, the bidder shall be in default and the sheriff shall immediately void the sale and proceed further with the resale of the premises without the necessity of adjourning the sale, without renotification of any party to the foreclosure and without the republication of any sales notice.  Upon such resale, the defaulting bidder shall be liable to the foreclosing plaintiff for any additional costs incurred by such default including, but not limited to, any difference between the amount bid by the defaulting bidder and the amount generated for the foreclosing plaintiff at the resale.  In the event the plaintiff is the successful bidder at the resale, the plaintiff shall provide a credit for the fair market value of the property foreclosed.
 
	(8) It is permissible, upon consent of the sheriff conducting the sheriff's sale, that it shall not be necessary for an attorney or representative of the person who initiated the foreclosure to be present physically at the sheriff's sale to make a bid.  A letter containing bidding instructions may be sent to the sheriff in lieu of an appearance.
 
	(9) That each sheriff's office shall use, and the plaintiff's attorney shall prepare and submit to the sheriff's office, a deed which shall be in substantially the following form:
 

 

 

 
THIS INDENTURE,
 
made this ..................... (date) day of ..................... (month), ........... (year).  Between ................................ (name), Sheriff of the County of ................. (name) in the State of New Jersey, party of the first part and .................................................... (name(s)) party of the second part, witnesseth.
 
	WHEREAS, on the ...................... (date) day of ......................... (month), ....... (year), a certain Writ of Execution was issued out of the Superior Court of New Jersey, Chancery Division- .................... (name) County, Docket No.                directed and delivered to the Sheriff of the said County of .................. (name) and which said Writ is in the words or to the effect following that is to say:
 

 
	THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY to the Sheriff of the County of .................. (name),
 
Greeting:
 

 
	WHEREAS, on the ................. (date) day of ............. (month), ............... (year), by a certain judgment made in our Superior Court of New Jersey, in a certain cause therein pending, wherein the PLAINTIFF is:
 
...................................................................
 
...................................................................
 
...................................................................
 
	and the following named parties are the DEFENDANTS:
 
...................................................................
 
...................................................................
 
...................................................................
 

 
	IT WAS ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that certain mortgaged premises, with the appurtenances in the Complaint, and Amendment to Complaint, if any, in the said cause particularly set forth and described, that is to say:  The mortgaged premises are described as set forth upon the RIDER ANNEXED HERETO AND MADE A PART HEREOF.
 
BEING KNOWN AS Tax Lot ........ (number) in Block ......... (number) COMMONLY KNOWN AS (street address) ....................... .
 
TOGETHER, with all and singular the rights, liberties, privileges, hereditaments and appurtenances thereunto belonging or in anywise appertaining, and the reversion and remainders, rents, issues and profits thereof, and also all the estate, right, title, interest, use, property, claim and demand of the said defendants of, in, to and out of the same, to be sold, to pay and satisfy in the first place unto the plaintiff,
 
...................................................................
 
...................................................................
 
the sum of $ ......... (amount) being the principal, interest and advances secured by a certain mortgage dated ............... (date, month, year) and given by ........................ (name) together with lawful interest from
 
...................................................................
 
...................................................................
 
...................................................................
 
until the same be paid and satisfied and also the costs of the aforesaid plaintiff with interest thereon.
 

 
AND for that purpose a Writ of Execution should issue, directed to the Sheriff of the County of .............. (name) commanding him to make sale as aforesaid; and that the surplus money arising from such sale, if any there be, should be brought into our said Court, as by the judgment remaining as of record in our said Superior Court of New Jersey, at Trenton, doth and more fully appear; and whereas, the costs and Attorney's fees of the said plaintiff have been duly taxed at the following sum:  $ ............. (amount)
 

 
THEREFORE, you are hereby commanded that you cause to be made of the premises aforesaid, by selling so much of the same as may be needful and necessary for the purpose, the said sum of $......... (amount) and the same you do pay to the said plaintiff together with contract and lawful interest thereon as aforesaid, and the sum aforesaid of costs with interest thereon.
 
And that you have the surplus money, if any there be, before our said Superior Court of New Jersey, aforesaid at Trenton, within 30 days after pursuant to R.4:59-1(a), to abide the further Order of the said Court, according to judgment aforesaid, and you are to make return at the time and place aforesaid, by certificate under your hand, of the manner in which you have executed this our Writ, together with this Writ, and if no sale, this Writ shall be returnable within 24 months.
 

 
WITNESS, the Honorable ........... (name), Judge of the Superior Court at Trenton, aforesaid, the ........... (date) day of ............. (month), ...... (year).
 
				/s/ ........... (Clerk)
 
				Superior Court of New Jersey
 
/s/.............................
 
Attorney for Plaintiff
 
As by the record of said Writ of Execution in the Office of the Superior Court of New Jersey, at Trenton, in Book ............ (number) of Executions, Page ........ (number) etc., may more fully appear.
 

 
	AND WHEREAS I, the said .......................... (name), as such Sheriff as aforesaid did in due form of law, before making such sale give notice of the time, place, and upset price of such sale by public advertisement signed by myself, and set up in my office in the .......................... (name) Building in .................. (name) County, being the County in which said real estate is situate and also set up at the premises to be sold at least three weeks next before the time appointed for such sale.
 
	I also caused such notice to be published four times in two newspapers designated by me and printed and published in the said County, the County wherein the real estate sold is situate, the same being designated for the publication by the Laws of this State, and circulating in the neighborhood of said real estate, at least once a week during four consecutive calendar weeks.  One of such newspapers, ......................... (name of newspaper) is a newspaper with circulation in ................. (name of town), the County seat of said ................. (name) County.  The first publication was at least twenty-one days prior and the last publication not more than eight days prior to the time appointed for the sale of such real estate, and by virtue of the said Writ of Execution, I did offer for sale said land and premises at public vendue at the County ................ (name) Building in ...................... (name of town) on the ............... (date) day of ........................, .... (month) (year) at the hour of ............. (time) in the ......... (a.m. or p.m.).
 

 
	WHEREUPON the said party of the second part bidding therefore for the same, the sum of $................ (amount) and no other person bidding as much I did then and there openly and publicly in due form of law between the hours of ............... (time) and ................ (time) in the ........ (a.m. or p.m.), strike off and sell tracts or parcels of land and premises for the sum of $ ................ (amount) to the said party of the second part being then and there the highest bidder for same.  And on the ............ (date) of ................. (month) in the year last aforesaid I did truly report the said sale to the Superior Court of New Jersey, Chancery Division and no objection to the said sale having been made, and by Assignment of Bid filed with the Sheriff of .................. (name) County said bidder assigned its bid to:
 

 
...................................................................
 
...................................................................
 
...................................................................
 

 
	NOW, THEREFORE, This Indenture witnesseth, that I, the said .................. (name), as such Sheriff as aforesaid under and by the virtue of the said Writ of Execution and in execution of the power and trust in me reposed and also for and in consideration of the said sum of $ ............... (amount) therefrom acquit, exonerate and forever discharge to the said party of the second part, its successors and assigns, all and singular the said tract or parcel of lands and premises, with the appurtenances, privileges, and hereditaments thereunto belonging or in any way appertaining; to have and hold the same, unto the said party of the second part, its successors and assigns to its and their only proper use, benefit, and behoof forever, in as full, ample and beneficial manner as by virtue of said Writ of Execution I may, can or ought to convey the same.
 
And, I, the said ................ (name), do hereby covenant, promise and agree, to and with the said party of the second part, its successors and assigns, that I have not, as such Sheriff as aforesaid, done or caused, suffered or procured to be done any act, matter or thing whereby the said premises, or any part thereof, with the appurtenances, are or may be charged or encumbered in estate, title or otherwise.
 

 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I the said ..................... (name) as such Sheriff as aforesaid, have hereunto set my hand and seal the day and year aforesaid.
 
Signed, sealed and delivered
 
	 in the presence of
 
..................................	..............................
 
Attorney at Law of New Jersey	...........(name) Sheriff
 

 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY)   SS.
 
.......(county     )
 
	I, ............... (name), Sheriff, of the County of ............... (name), do solemnly swear that the real estate described in this deed made to
 
...................................................................
 
...................................................................
 
...................................................................
 
was by me sold by virtue of a good and subsisting execution (or as the case may be) as is therein recited, that the money ordered to be made has not been to my knowledge or belief paid or satisfied, that the time and place of the same of said real estate were by me duly advertised as required by law, and that the same was cried off and sold to a bona fide purchaser for the best price that could be obtained and the true consideration for this conveyance as set forth in the deed is $ ........................ (amount).
 
				.................................. 
 
				......... (name), Sheriff
 
	Sworn before me, ................. (name), on this .......... (date) day of .................. (month), ......... (year), and I having examined the deed above mentioned do approve the same and order it to be recorded as a good and sufficient conveyance of the real estate therein described.
 

 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY  )    ss.	........................
 
.......... (Name) County)	Attorney or Notary Public
 
On this ................... (date) day of ................. (month), ........ (year), before me, the subscriber, ........................ (name) personally appeared ...................... (name), Sheriff of the County of ................ (name) aforesaid, who is, I am satisfied, the grantor in the within Indenture named, and I having first made known to him the contents thereof, he did thereupon acknowledge that he signed, sealed and delivered the same on his voluntary act and deed, for the uses and purposes therein expressed.
 
				.............................
 
				Attorney or Notary Public
 
	b.	At the conclusion of the sheriff's sale, the attorney for the plaintiff shall prepare and deliver to the sheriff a deed which shall be in the form provided pursuant to paragraph (9) of subsection a. of this section for the sheriff's execution and the deed shall be delivered to the sheriff within 10 days of the date of the sale.  The sheriff shall be entitled to the authorized fee, as a review fee, even if the plaintiff's attorney prepares the deed.
 
	c. (1) The sheriff's office shall, within two weeks of the date of the sale, deliver a fully executed deed to the successful bidder at the sale provided that the bidder pays the balance of the monies due to the Sheriff by either cash or certified or cashier's check.  In the event a bid is satisfied after the expiration and additional interest is collected from the successful bidder, the sheriff shall remit to the plaintiff the total amount, less any fees, costs and commissions due the sheriff, along with the additional interest.
 
	(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection, in the case of residential property in which the successful bidder is permitted to pay a 3.5 percent deposit upon the conclusion of the foreclosure sale pursuant to subparagraph (b) of paragraph (7) of subsection a. of this section, no interest shall accrue on the balance of the sale of the property until 60 business days have passed following the date of the sale, and thereafter, the successful bidder shall have 30 business days to fulfill the balance.  If the successful bidder fails to fulfill the balance within this 90 business day period, the bidder shall forfeit the deposit on the property and shall be responsible for the payment of accrued interest incurred as a result of the sale being void, unless the failure to fulfill the balance is due to the bidder's inability to close a mortgage through no fault of their own, which includes, but is not limited to, the appraised value of the property being less than the purchase value of the property or the financial institution denying financing, in which case the bidder shall be refunded the deposit on the property and shall be responsible only for the payment of accrued interest.  In addition, if a successful bidder fails to fulfill the balance within this 90 business day period, any subsequent foreclosure sale involving the same residential property and the same foreclosing plaintiff and foreclosed upon defendant shall be subject to the procedures set forth in subparagraph (a) of paragraph (7) of subsection a. of this section and there shall be no right of first or second refusal pursuant to subsections d. and g. of this section.  
 
	d.	In the case of a foreclosed residential property where the foreclosed upon defendant is an individual and not a corporate entity, if the foreclosed upon defendant, next of kin of the foreclosed upon defendant, or tenant of the foreclosed upon property has secured financing or assets sufficient to meet terms offered by the foreclosing plaintiff or an alternative financial institution to purchase the property, the foreclosed upon defendant, next of kin of the foreclosed upon defendant, or tenant shall have the right of first refusal to purchase the property for the original upset price listed in the notice provided pursuant to subparagraph a. of paragraph (5) of subsection a. of this section, or at the final starting upset price listed for the sale of the property, whichever is less.  The right of first refusal shall only be made available to the foreclosed upon defendant, next of kin of the foreclosed upon defendant, or tenant for the initial sale of the foreclosed upon property, unless the sale is delayed or postponed, upon which the foreclosed upon defendant, next of kin of the foreclosed upon defendant, or tenant shall retain the right of first refusal for the rescheduled date of sale.  Such right shall be deemed exercised if, prior to the opening of the bidding on the foreclosed property, the foreclosed upon defendant, next of kin of the foreclosed upon defendant, or tenant pays a 3.5 percent deposit with the rest of the balance due within 90 business days, pursuant to the provisions of this section, by cash, certified or cashier's check, or by wire transfer, made payable to the sheriff of the county in which the sale is conducted or to the Special Master, if the sheriff cannot comply with the provisions of subparagraph (a) of paragraph (3) of subsection a. of this section.
 
	e.	A bidder who is permitted to pay a 3.5 percent deposit upon the conclusion of the foreclosure sale pursuant to the provisions of this section may purchase residential property at a sheriff's sale by way of financing if the bidder provides documentation that the bidder has been pre-approved by a financial institution regulated by the Department of Banking and Insurance or by a federal banking agency, as defined by section 3 of the "New Jersey Residential Mortgage Lending Act," P.L.2009, c.53 (C.17:11C-53), for financing a residential property.
 
	(1) A bidder who is permitted to pay a 3.5 percent deposit upon the conclusion of the foreclosure sale pursuant to the provisions of this section and intends to finance the purchase of residential property at a sale shall be:
 
	(a) preapproved for the amount of the original upset price listed in the notice provided pursuant to subparagraph a. of paragraph (5) of subsection a. of this section or the final starting upset price listed for the sheriff's sale of the property, whichever is less;
 
	(b) limited to submitting bids no higher than the amount for which the bidder has been pre-approved for financing; and 
 
	(c) if the bidder is an individual, required to present current and valid photo identification that substantially conforms to the name and information contained on the financing pre-approval forms obtained by the bidder.
 
	(2) A tenant or a successful bidder who intends to occupy the property for 84 months, and finances the purchase of the property and pays a 3.5 percent deposit pursuant to the provisions of this section, shall have received eight hours of homebuyer education and counseling through a United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) certified housing counseling agency, and shall present a certificate of completion or proof of enrollment in that program to the sheriff.
 
	(3) To ensure that the provisions of this section only apply to a foreclosed upon defendant or next of kin of the foreclosed upon defendant who has entered foreclosure proceedings due to circumstances outside of the foreclosed upon defendant's control, subsections d. through f. of this section shall only apply to a foreclosed upon defendant or next of kin of the foreclosed upon defendant that demonstrates to the foreclosing plaintiff that the foreclosed upon defendant experienced:
 
	(a) financial hardship;
 
	(b) a physical or mental illness preventing the foreclosed upon defendant from earning an income;
 
	(c) divorce or legal separation;
 
	(d) proof of death of the foreclosed upon defendant, or the foreclosed upon defendant's spouse, or child; or
 
	(e) predatory loan practices.
 
	Any information provided under this paragraph shall be provided at the request of the foreclosing plaintiff prior to the date of sale for the foreclosing property and shall not conflict with subparagraph (b) of paragraph (5) of subsection a. of this section.
 
	(4)	If a bidder intending to finance the purchase of the residential property is a current tenant, the tenant shall provide documentation confirming:
 
	(a)	that the tenant has resided at the property for at least a year; and
 
	(b)	that the tenant is not in arrears with rent payments as of the date the foreclosed upon defendant received a notice of foreclosure from the foreclosing plaintiff.
 
	(5)	To prove the residency requirement pursuant to subparagraph (a) of paragraph (4) of this subsection, the tenant shall also be required to present at least two current and valid forms of identification that substantially conform to the name and property address contained in the tenant's lease agreement, which shall include but not be limited to:
 
	(a) a driver's license issued by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission;
 
	(b) a utility bill; 
 
	(c) a checking or savings account statement from a bank or credit union issued at least 60 days prior to submitting documentation required pursuant to this subparagraph; 
 
	(d) a statement, receipt, or letter of correspondence from a federal, State, or local government office delivered at least one year prior to submitting documentation required pursuant to this subparagraph; or
 
	(e) any other form of identification that the sheriff deems valid pursuant to this paragraph. 
 
	(6)	A tenant shall be allowed to purchase residential property pursuant to this subsection if a foreclosed upon defendant or next of kin of the foreclosed upon defendant decides not to participate in the sheriff's sale or exercise the provisions of P.L.2023, c.255 (C.2A:50-56a et al.).  A tenant shall have up to 90 business days to purchase the residential property after successfully bidding for the property.
 
	(7)	With exception to the foreclosed upon defendant, the foreclosed upon defendant's next of kin, or a nonprofit community development corporation, an individual bidder purchasing residential property in a sheriff's sale pursuant to this subsection shall be required to occupy the property as the bidder's primary residence for a fixed term of at least 84 months after taking possession.  The deed for the property shall clearly state that the property may not be sold for 84 months from the date of the sheriff's sale, except pursuant to the exceptions permitting a successful bidder to vacate the property prior to residing in the property for 84 months in paragraph (8) of this subsection.
 
	(8)	With exception to the foreclosed upon defendant, the foreclosed upon defendant's next of kin, or a nonprofit community development corporation, a successful individual bidder who finances the purchase pursuant to this subsection and does not occupy the residence for a period of at least 84 months shall be assessed a fine by a court of competent jurisdiction up to $100,000 for the first violation, and $500,000 thereafter for each subsequent violation.  These penalties shall not be assessed against a bidder who finances the purchase with good faith and intent and is thereafter required to vacate the property prior to residing in the property for 84 months due to:
 
	(a)	death of the bidder or the bidder's spouse or child;
 
	(b)	disability of the bidder or a member of the bidder's household; 
 
	(c)	divorce; 
 
	(d)	legal separation; 
 
	(e)	military deployment; 
 
	(f)	a change in employment of the bidder or a member of the bidder's household that results in a reduction in income or a need to move out-of-state; 
 
	(g)	a change in the number of permanent residents of the household due to: the birth or adoption of a child; or the permanent relocation of an elder into the household, as proved by a note from the doctor or social worker of the elder;
 
	(h)	a need to move to care for a family member for a period of at least six months, as evidenced by: an address change; and a note from the family member in need of care, the doctor of the family member, or the social worker for the family member; or
 
	(i)	foreclosure.
 
	A bidder who finances the purchase of the residential property in good faith and intent and is thereafter required to vacate the property prior to residing in the property for 84 months pursuant to paragraph (8) of this subsection shall retain the deed to the property until the deed is transferred.
 
	In the event of the death of a successful bidder, the property may be transferred to another owner in accordance with applicable laws governing estate, inheritance, and probate matters and the occupancy requirement shall be extinguished.
 
	A fraudulent violation of subparagraphs (a) through (i) of this paragraph by a bidder shall be an unlawful practice and a violation of P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-1 et seq.).
 
	f.	If the foreclosed upon defendant, next of kin of the foreclosed upon defendant, or tenant of the foreclosed upon property fails to secure financing or assets sufficient to meet the terms offered by the foreclosing plaintiff or an alternative financial institution to purchase the residential property, the foreclosed upon defendant, next of kin of the foreclosed upon defendant, or tenant may request that a nonprofit community development corporation purchase the property.  If the nonprofit community development corporation agrees in writing to purchase the property for the foreclosed upon defendant, next of kin of the foreclosed upon defendant, or tenant to reside in, the corporation shall:
 
	(1)	allow the foreclosed upon defendant, next of kin of the foreclosed upon defendant, or tenant to reside at the property for a period of time as agreed upon in paragraph (2) of this subsection; and
 
	(2)	negotiate with the foreclosed upon defendant, next of kin of the foreclosed upon defendant, or tenant on an affordable lease schedule that shall include an option to purchase the property from the corporation.
 
	g.	In the case of a foreclosed residential property, a nonprofit community development corporation, that has a written agreement with a foreclosed upon defendant, next of kin of the foreclosed upon defendant, or tenant of the foreclosed upon property pursuant to subsection f. of this section, shall have a right of second refusal to purchase the property which is subordinate to the first right of refusal provided to a foreclosed upon defendant, next of kin of the foreclosed upon defendant, or tenant pursuant to subsection d. of this section.  If the foreclosed upon defendant, next of kin of the foreclosed upon defendant, or tenant decides not to participate in the sheriff's sale, enter into an agreement with the corporation pursuant to subsection f. of this section, or fails to secure financing or assets sufficient to meet the terms offered by the foreclosing plaintiff or an alternative financial institution to purchase the property, a nonprofit community development corporation shall have the right of second refusal to purchase the property in the amount approved for the final starting upset price on the day of the sheriff's sale at the time of the sale.  Such right shall be deemed exercised if, prior to the opening of the bidding on the foreclosed property, the corporation pays a 3.5 percent deposit with the rest of the balance due within 90 business days by cash, certified or cashier's check, or by wire transfer, made payable to the sheriff of the county in which the sale is conducted or to the Special Master, if the sheriff cannot comply with the provisions of subparagraph (a) of paragraph (3) of subsection a. of this section. A nonprofit community development corporation shall only have a right of second refusal to purchase the property if it satisfies the requirements set forth in subsection h. of this section and fulfills the conditions set forth in subsection j. of this section.
 
	h. (1) If a foreclosed upon defendant, next of kin of the foreclosed upon defendant, or tenant of the foreclosed upon property does not participate in the sheriff's sale, secure financing or assets sufficient to meet the terms offered by the foreclosing plaintiff or an alternative financial institution, or enter into agreement with a nonprofit community development corporation pursuant to subsection f. of this section, the nonprofit community development corporation may enter a bid for the foreclosed upon residential property.  
 
	(2)	A nonprofit community development corporation intending to bid in a sheriff's sale for residential property and pay a 3.5 percent deposit as permitted by this section shall, on the date of the sheriff's sale, register its participation with the sheriff or Special Master if the sheriff cannot comply with the provisions of paragraph (3) of subsection a. of this section.  In registering its participation in the sale, a corporation shall provide the most recent form 1023 filing provided to the United States Internal Revenue Service, stating the corporation's mission includes community revitalization and the creation or preservation of affordable housing through the restoration of vacant and abandoned property.
 
	i. (1) If more than one nonprofit community development corporation seeks to exercise the right of second refusal, the right shall belong in the first instance to a nonprofit community development corporation that fulfills the conditions set forth in subsection f. of this section.  If no such nonprofit community development corporation exists, priority shall belong to the nonprofit community development corporation that first registers its participation in the foreclosure sale pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection h. of this section.
 
	(2)	If an individual or nonprofit community development corporation exercises a right of first or second refusal pursuant to subsection d. or f. of this section, the foreclosure sale shall be deemed concluded and the person or corporation shall be deemed to be the successful bidder and shall be subject to the applicable provisions and procedures of this section.
 
	j. (1) A nonprofit community development corporation that successfully bids on the purchase of a residential property in a sheriff's sale and satisfies the conditions set forth in subsection h. of this section shall be subject to the fines assessed pursuant to paragraph (3) of this subsection if the nonprofit corporation does not:
 
	(a)	restore as need be and sell the property to a household earning no more than 120 percent below area median income or rent the property as an affordable housing unit to a household who earns no more than 100 percent below area median income, if the property is vacant or abandoned at the time of the sheriff's sale; or
 
	(b)	if the property is occupied at the time of sale by either a tenant or the foreclosed upon defendant with whom the nonprofit community development corporation does not already have an agreement pursuant to subsection f. of this section, the nonprofit community development corporation shall negotiate in good faith with the foreclosed upon defendant or tenant on an affordable lease schedule that will allow the foreclosed upon defendant or tenant to continue to occupy the property should the foreclosed upon defendant or tenant desire to do so.  If after 120 business days the foreclosed upon defendant or tenant does not respond to the requests of the nonprofit community development corporation to negotiate, the corporation may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to remove the foreclosed upon defendant or tenant.  If removal has successfully occurred, the nonprofit community development corporation shall comply with the requirements of subparagraph (a) of paragraph (1) of this subsection.
 
	(2)	A nonprofit community development corporation that successfully bids on the purchase of a residential property and satisfies the conditions set forth in subsection f. of this section shall ensure that, in any future sale of the property pursuant to subparagraph (a) of paragraph (1) of this subsection, the property be subject to a renewable deed restriction, with the minimum number of affordability years being 30 years and with the option to renew, requiring any future property owner to sell the property to a household earning no more than 120 percent below area median income or rent the property as an affordable housing unit to a household who earns no more than 100 percent below area median income.
 
	(3)	A nonprofit community development corporation that successfully bids on and completes the purchase of a residential property in a sheriff's sale and satisfies the conditions set forth in subsection f. of this section and fails to meet the requirements of this subsection shall be assessed a fine by a court of competent jurisdiction of up to $100,000 for the first violation, and $500,000 thereafter for each subsequent violation.  If the appropriate sheriff's office, county administrative agent, or affordable housing administrative agent that is hired by the county determines based upon its oversight that there has been a violation of this subsection, the sheriff's office, county administrative agent, or affordable housing administrative agent shall bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction so that the sheriff's office, county administrative agent, or affordable housing administrative agent can pursue enforcement of penalties for the violation.  If the nonprofit community development corporation dissolves, the deed of the residential property shall be transferred to another nonprofit community development corporation who shall be bound by the requirements of this subsection.
 
	k.	In the case of a residential property for which the successful bidder is subject to the occupancy requirement pursuant to paragraphs (7) and (8) of subsection e. of this section, the appropriate sheriff's office, county administrative agent, or affordable housing administrative agent that is hired by the county shall oversee the occupancy of the property, which may include the mailing of a questionnaire to the successful bidder within 84 months following the sale or requiring the bidder to respond to questions and submit documentation evidencing the bidder's continued residence at the property using the proof of residency documents provided pursuant to paragraph (5) of subsection e. of this section.  If the appropriate sheriff's office, county administrative agent, or affordable housing administrative agent that is hired by the county determines based upon its oversight that there has been an occupancy violation, the sheriff's office, county administrative agent, or affordable housing administrative agent hired by the county shall refer the matter to the county counsel's office to bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction so that the sheriff's office can pursue enforcement of penalties for the violation.
 
	l.	Each sheriff's office shall maintain information, written in plain language, regarding the program to finance the purchase of residential property in a foreclosure sale in accordance with this section on its Internet website, and in any other medium used by the office to advertise a foreclosure sale, in a manner that is accessible to the public.  Additionally, each sheriff's office shall display information, written in plain language, regarding the Community Wealth Preservation Program in its office in a manner that is conspicuous to the public.  The information posted on a sheriff's Internet website or displayed in a sheriff's office concerning the program shall further contain language notifying the public that the program shall exclude those purchasing property for investment purposes.  For any county in which the primary language of 10 percent or more of the residents is a language other than English, the sheriff's office shall provide the information required by this subsection in that other language or languages in addition to English.  The alternate language shall be determined based on information from the latest federal decennial census.
 
	m.	Any sheriff's sales conducted virtually shall be subject to the provisions of P.L.2023, c.255 (C.2A:50-56a et al.).
 
	n.	Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding commenced by the appropriate sheriff's office pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).  Fifty percent of any monies collected pursuant to this section shall be forwarded to the municipality in which the foreclosed upon property is located to be deposited in the affordable housing trust fund of the municipality for use on low income housing or moderate income housing needs as defined in section 4 of P.L.1985, c.222 (C.52:27D-304), to the extent the municipality maintains such a fund, and if the municipality does not maintain such a fund, to the State Treasurer, and shall annually be appropriated to the "New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund," section 20 of P.L.1985, c.222 (C.52:27D-320) for the purpose of developing and supporting housing programs that create for-sale and rental affordable housing.  The remaining 50 percent of any monies collected pursuant to this section shall provide for administrative and enforcement costs, including costs incurred by the appropriate sheriff's office, county administrative agent, or county counsel's office, necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section.
 
	o.	The provisions of P.L.2023, c.255 (C.2A:50-56a et al.) shall only apply to residential property as defined pursuant to subsection p. of this section.
 
	p.	As used in this section:
 
	"Area median income" means the midpoint of a region's household income distribution, as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
 
	"Community Wealth Preservation Program" means the program created by P.L.2023, c.255 (C.2A:50-56a et al.) to assist prospective owner-occupants, nonprofit community development corporations, foreclosed upon defendants, next of kin of foreclosed upon defendants, and tenants of foreclosed upon defendants in purchasing and financing foreclosed upon residential properties in sheriff's sales with an initial 3.5 percent deposit.
 
	"Nonprofit community development corporation" means a not-for-profit organization, whose mission includes community revitalization through the restoration of vacant and abandoned property to create or preserve affordable housing, as indicated in the corporation's most recent form 1023 filing provided to the United States Internal Revenue Service.
 
	"Residential property" means real property located in this State which is utilized as a primary residence or dwelling, and shall not include any real property which is acquired for investment, commercial, or business purposes or real property containing more than four residential units.
 
	"Upset price" means the minimum amount that a foreclosed upon property shall be sold for in a sheriff's sale as determined by the foreclosing plaintiff.
 
	L.1995, c.244, s.12; amended 2019, c.71, s.1; 2023, c.255, s.1.

2A:50-65.	Provision of judgment creditor's address for service 
	13.	Any judgment creditor shall, upon entry of judgment in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court, provide the Court with its current address for service.  If the judgment creditor's address for service changes, it shall be incumbent upon the judgment creditor to effect a change of address for service by filing an appropriate form with the court in a timely manner.  If any judgment creditor fails to provide the Court with a current or change of address for service, in any foreclosure proceeding, the plaintiff may, without having to first make a more diligent inquiry or publish notice in a newspaper, serve the judgment creditor by ordinary mail and certified mail at the address that is reflected in the records of the Clerk of the Superior Court.  The judgment creditor shall, if known, provide the Clerk of the Court with the judgment debtor's social security number or taxpayer identification number.

	L.1995,c.244,s.13.

2A:50-66.	Letter in lieu of appearance by Attorney General 
	15. a.  The United States Attorney for the District of New Jersey may send a letter to the Clerk of the Superior Court of New Jersey which notes the appearance of the Attorney General of the United States and states that neither an answer will be filed nor a default opposed.  This letter shall be accepted by the Clerk of the Superior Court of New Jersey in lieu of an appearance by the Attorney General of the United States.  The acceptance by the Clerk shall allow the foreclosing plaintiff to proceed as if the United States had filed a non-contesting answer.

	b. 	The Attorney General of New Jersey may send a letter to the Clerk of the Superior Court of New Jersey which notes the appearance of the Attorney General of New Jersey and states that neither an answer will be filed nor a default opposed.  This letter shall be accepted by the Clerk of the Superior Court of New Jersey in lieu of an appearance by the Attorney General of New Jersey.  The acceptance by the Clerk shall allow the foreclosing plaintiff to proceed as if the State of New Jersey had filed a non-contesting answer.

	L.1995,c.244,s.15.

2A:50-67.	Partial payment
	17.	In the absence of an express agreement between the parties to the contrary, a debtor may tender, and a lender may accept, partial payment of any sum owing and due without either party waiving any rights.

	L.1995,c.244,s.17.

2A:50-68.	Regulations
	18.	The Attorney General, in consultation with the Commissioner of Banking, shall promulgate regulations pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14A-1 et seq.) necessary to implement this act, including, but not limited to, regulations governing the form and content of notices of intention to foreclose.

	L.1995,c.244,s.18.

2A:50-69 Short title.
 
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Foreclosure Fairness Act."
 
	L.2009, c.296, s.1.

2A:50-70 Notice to tenants, protection from eviction.
 
	2. a. A person who takes title, as a result of a sheriff's sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure, to a residential property containing one or more dwelling units occupied by residential tenants, shall provide notice to the tenants, in both English and Spanish, no later than 10 business days after the transfer of title, in accordance with the provisions of subsection c. of this section. The notice shall be in the following form:
 
NOTICE TO TENANTS
 
	THE FORMER OWNER OF . . . . . . . . . . . . (insert property address) HAS LOST THE PROPERTY AS A RESULT OF A FORECLOSURE. FROM THE TIME YOU RECEIVE THIS AND UNTIL FURTHER NOTICE, YOU SHOULD PAY RENT TO ......(insert name and address of person to whom rent is due).   PLEASE SEND RENT BY ......(insert method of transmission) ON THE ......(insert day) OF EACH MONTH.
 
	WITH LIMITED EXCEPTIONS, THE NEW JERSEY ANTI-EVICTION ACT, N.J.S.A.2A:18-61.1 ET SEQ., PROTECTS YOUR RIGHT TO REMAIN IN YOUR HOME. FORECLOSURE ALONE IS NOT GROUNDS FOR EVICTION OF A TENANT. YOU ARE PROTECTED BY THIS LAW EVEN IF YOU DO NOT HAVE A WRITTEN LEASE.
 
	THE NEW OWNER CANNOT EVICT YOU WITHOUT "GOOD CAUSE," AS DETERMINED BY A COURT. EXAMPLES OF "GOOD CAUSE" ARE FAILURE TO PAY RENT, WILLFULLY DAMAGING THE PREMISES, OR PERSONAL OCCUPANCY BY THE NEW OWNER OF THE HOUSE OR APARTMENT THAT YOU NOW LIVE IN.
 
	A RESIDENTIAL TENANT IN NEW JERSEY CAN BE EVICTED ONLY THROUGH A COURT PROCESS. ONLY A COURT OFFICER WITH A COURT ORDER MAY REMOVE YOU FROM THE PREMISES, AND ONLY AFTER YOU HAVE BEEN GIVEN THE OPPORTUNITY TO DEFEND YOURSELF IN COURT.
 
	INDIVIDUALS CAN BE SUBJECT TO BOTH CIVIL AND CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR TRYING TO FORCE YOU TO LEAVE YOUR HOME IN ANY OTHER MANNER, INCLUDING SHUTTING OFF UTILITIES OR OTHER VITAL SERVICE OR FAILING TO MAINTAIN THE PREMISES. YOU MAY, HOWEVER, ACCEPT FINANCIAL COMPENSATION FOR LEAVING VOLUNTARILY IF THE NEW OWNER OFFERS SUCH COMPENSATION.
 
	IF SOMEONE IS PRESSURING YOU TO LEAVE, CONSULT WITH AN ATTORNEY.
 
	b. (1) The notice required pursuant to subsection a. of this section shall be printed in no less than 14 point bold point type, on paper at least eight and one-half inches by 11 inches in size, and shall contain contact information, including the name, mailing address, e-mail address, and telephone number of the new owner or a person authorized to act on behalf of the new owner.
 
	(2)	The Department of Community Affairs shall prepare and make available for distribution, both in print and in an easily printable format on the department's Internet website, a notice in English with a Spanish translation that may be used by the new owner or person authorized to act on behalf of the new owner to satisfy the notice requirements of this section.
 
	c. (1) In buildings containing 10 or fewer dwelling units, the new owner shall make a good faith effort to obtain the names of all tenants occupying the property for which a notice is required pursuant to subsection a. of this section. The notice shall be addressed to tenants by name; provided, however, that in the event a good faith search fails to identify the tenant by name, the new owner shall address the notice required pursuant to subsection a. of this section to "Tenant." The new owner shall post the notice prominently on the front door of each tenant's unit and send the notice to each tenant via certified and regular mail.
 
	(2)	In a residential property containing more than 10 dwelling units, the new owner shall provide notice to tenants occupying the property for which notice is required pursuant to subsection a. of this section by causing a copy of the notice to be conspicuously displayed in a prominent place in a common area of each residential building or structure on the property. If there is no common area, the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous location in each building or structure on the premises, including, but not limited to the walls of the front vestibule or any foyer or hallway near the main entrance of the building or structure.
 
	d.	Any person taking title to the residential property as a result of a sheriff's sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure, or that person's agent or employee, shall provide a copy of the notice as set forth in subsection a. of this section with the initial and final written or verbal communication to a tenant for the purposes of inducing a tenant to vacate the property in accordance with the provisions of section 3 of P.L.2009, c.296 (C.2A:50-71).
 
	e.	Service on any tenant of a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose a mortgage on any residential property by any person, or the initial written or verbal communication by a foreclosing creditor to a tenant in a residential property subject to ongoing foreclosure proceedings, or any written or verbal communication that seeks to induce the tenant to vacate the property prior to the transfer of the property through sheriff's sale or a deed in lieu of foreclosure, shall include a copy of the notice regarding residential tenant rights during foreclosure as required by the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey, as adopted by the Supreme Court of New Jersey.
 
	f.	Any person, or that person's agent or employee, who violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to the same civil remedies as are provided for in subsection a. of section 3 of P.L.1975, c.311 (C.2A:18-61.6), or, at the tenant's sole discretion, damages in the amount of $2,000 per violation, plus attorney's fees and costs. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the liability, either civil or criminal, of a person, or a person's agent or employee, who violates any other law or regulation.
 
	L.2009, c.296, s.2.

2A:50-71 Inducing tenant to vacate property prohibited.
 
	3. a. No person, or the person's agent or employee, who has filed a complaint in an action to foreclose a mortgage on a residential property, as described in section 2 of P.L.2009, c.296 (C.2A:50-70), or who takes title to a residential property as a result of a sheriff's sale or other transaction following the filing of a complaint in an action to foreclose a mortgage on the property shall make any communication to induce the tenant to vacate the property except through a bona fide monetary offer, which shall be made in accordance with the provisions of subsections d. and e. of section 2 of P.L.2009, c.296 (C.2A:50-70). A tenant shall have five business days from the date of receipt of any bona fide monetary offer to vacate the property in order to accept or reject the offer. An acceptance of an offer by a tenant shall be in writing, and include an affirmative acknowledgement of the date of receipt of the offer, and an understanding that the tenant had a five-day review period as required by this subsection to accept or reject the offer presented.
 
	b.	No person, or the person's agent or employee, who has filed a complaint in an action to foreclose a mortgage on a residential property, as described in section 2 of P.L.2009, c.296 (C.2A:50-70), or who takes title to a residential property as a result of a sheriff's sale or other transaction following the filing of a complaint in an action to foreclose a mortgage on the property shall, during the pendency of the foreclosure proceeding or within one year of the transfer of title following such proceeding, take any action placing pressure on a tenant to accept any offer to vacate the property, including, but not limited to:
 
	(1)	Mischaracterizing or misrepresenting the rights of the tenant under the Anti-Eviction Act, P.L.1974, c.49 (C.2A:18-61.1 et seq.), or any other State law or municipal ordinance;
 
	(2)	Implying the tenant is obligated to accept an offer or implying consequences against the tenant for failing to accept an offer;
 
	(3)	Any form of tenant harassment, including, but not limited to, discontinuance of electricity, heat, or other utilities, failure to maintain the common areas or facilities of the property, or any other failure to maintain the premises in a habitable condition;
 
	(4)	Implementing an increase in rent in excess of any governing municipal rent control or rent leveling ordinance, or in the event the property is not subject to rent control, an increase in rent exceeding the limitation imposed by the Anti-Eviction Act, P.L.1974, c.49 (C.2A:18-61.1 et seq.) or any other State or federal law or municipal ordinance.
 
	c.	Any person, their agent or employee, who violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to the civil remedies provided for in subsection a. of section 3 of P.L.1975, c.311 (C.2A:18-61.6), or, at the tenant's sole discretion, damages in the amount of $2,000 per violation, plus attorney's fees and costs. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the liability, either civil or criminal, of a person, or a person's agent or employee, who violates any other law or regulation.
 
	L.2009, c.296, s.3.

2A:50-72 Supersedure.
 
	6.	The provisions of any regulation, ordinance, rule, or resolution of any municipality, county or other subdivision of the State, or any agency or instrumentality of that municipality, county or other subdivision, relating to foreclosure practices, or the extension, delay, forbearance or imposition of moratorium periods concerning foreclosures, are superseded by the provisions of the "Save New Jersey Homes Act of 2008," P.L.2008, c.86 (C.46:10B-36 et seq.) and the forbearance and nuisance abatement provisions of the "Mortgage Stabilization and Relief Act," P.L.2008, c.127 (C.55:14K-82 et al.).
 
	L.2009, c.296, s.6.

2A:50-73  Summary action to foreclose mortgages on certain properties.
	1. a. For the purposes of this section, "vacant and abandoned" residential property means residential real estate with respect to which the mortgagee proves, by clear and convincing evidence, that the mortgaged real estate is vacant and has been abandoned or where a notice of violation has been issued pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2021, c.444 (C.40:48-2.12s3).  Where a notice of violation has not been issued pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2021, c.444 (C.40:48-2.12s3), real property shall be deemed "vacant and abandoned" if the court finds that the mortgaged property is not occupied by a mortgagor or tenant as evidenced by a lease agreement entered into prior to the service of a notice of intention to commence foreclosure according to section 4 of the "Fair Foreclosure Act," P.L.1995, c.244 (C.2A:50-56), and at least two of the following conditions exist:
 
	(1)	overgrown or neglected vegetation;
 
	(2)	the accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail on the property;
 
	(3)	disconnected gas, electric, or water utility services to the property;
 
	(4)	the accumulation of hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or materials on the property;
 
	(5)	the accumulation of junk, litter, trash or debris on the property;
 
	(6)	the absence of window treatments such as blinds, curtains or shutters;
 
	(7)	the absence of furnishings and personal items;
 
	(8)	statements of neighbors, delivery persons, representatives of a common interest community association, or government employees indicating that the residence is vacant and abandoned;
 
	(9)	windows or entrances to the property that are boarded up or closed off or multiple window panes that are damaged, broken and unrepaired;
 
	(10) doors to the property that are smashed through, broken off, unhinged, or continuously unlocked;
 
	(11) a risk to the health, safety or welfare of the public, or any adjoining or adjacent property owners, exists due to acts of vandalism, loitering, criminal conduct, or the physical destruction or deterioration of the property;
 
	(12) an uncorrected violation of a municipal building, housing, or similar code during the preceding year, or an order by municipal authorities declaring the property to be unfit for occupancy and to remain vacant and unoccupied;
 
	(13) the mortgagee or other authorized party has secured or winterized the property due to the property being deemed vacant and unprotected or in danger of freezing;
 
	(14) a written statement issued by any mortgagor expressing the clear intent of all mortgagors to abandon the property;
 
	(15) any other reasonable indicia of abandonment.
 
	b.	For the purposes of this section, a residential property shall not be considered "vacant and abandoned" if, on the property:
 
	(1) there is an unoccupied building which is undergoing construction, renovation, or rehabilitation that is proceeding diligently to completion, and the building is in compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes, regulations, and statutes;
 
	(2)  there is a building occupied on a seasonal basis, but otherwise secure; or
 
	(3)  there is a building that is secure, but is the subject of a probate action, action to quiet title, or other ownership dispute.
 
	c.	In addition to the residential mortgage foreclosure procedures set out in the "Fair Foreclosure Act," P.L.1995, c.244 (C.2A:50-53 et seq.), a summary action to foreclose a mortgage debt secured by residential property that is vacant and abandoned may be brought by a lender in the Superior Court.  In addition, a lender may, at any time after filing a foreclosure action, file with the court, in accordance with the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey, an application to proceed in a summary manner because the residential property that is the subject of the foreclosure action is believed to be "vacant and abandoned"; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to a foreclosure of a timeshare interest secured by a mortgage.
 
	d. (1) In addition to the service of process required by the Rules of Court, a lender shall establish, for the entry of a residential foreclosure judgment under this section, that a process server has made two unsuccessful attempts to serve the mortgagor or occupant at the residential property, which attempts must be at least 72 hours apart, and during different times of the day, either before noon, between noon and 6 P.M., or between 6 P.M. and 10 P.M.
 
	(2)  In addition to any notices required to be served by law or the Rules of Court, a lender shall, with any order to show cause served as original service of process or a motion to proceed summarily, serve a notice that the lender is seeking, on the return date of the order to show cause, or on the date fixed by the court, to proceed summarily for entry of a residential foreclosure judgment because the property is vacant and abandoned.
 
	(3)  When a property is deemed vacant and abandoned as herein defined, a lender shall not be required to serve the debtor with the notice to cure required by section 6 of the "Fair Foreclosure Act," P.L.1995, c.244 (C.2A:50-58).
 
	e. (1) The court may enter a final residential mortgage foreclosure judgment under this section upon a finding, (a) by clear and convincing evidence, that the residential property is vacant and abandoned as defined under subsection a. of this section, and (b) that a review of the pleadings and documents filed with the court, as required by the Rules of Court, supports the entry of a final residential mortgage foreclosure judgment.
 
	(2)  A final residential mortgage foreclosure judgment under this section shall not be entered if the court finds that:
 
	(a)	the property is not vacant or abandoned; or
 
	(b)	the mortgagor or any other defendant has filed an answer, appearance, or other written objection that is not withdrawn and the defenses or objection asserted provide cause to preclude the entry of a final residential mortgage foreclosure judgment.
 
	f.	If a final residential mortgage foreclosure judgment under this section is not entered on the original or adjourned return date of an order to show cause or the date fixed by the court to proceed summarily, the court may direct that the foreclosure action continue on the normal track for residential mortgage foreclosure actions for properties that are not vacant and abandoned and the notice to cure served with the order to show cause or the order fixing that date for the matter to proceed summarily shall be of no effect.
 
	g.	All actions brought to foreclose on real property pursuant to this section shall proceed in accordance with the Rules of Court.
 
	h.	Nothing in this section is intended to supersede or limit other procedures adopted by the Court to resolve residential mortgage foreclosure actions, including, but not limited to, foreclosure mediation.
 
	i.	Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the rights of a tenant to possession of a leasehold interest under the Anti-Eviction Act, P.L.1974, c.49 (C.2A:18-61.1 et seq.), the "New Jersey Foreclosure Fairness Act," P.L.2009, c.296 (C.2A:50-69 et seq.), or any other applicable law.
 
	j. (1) Notwithstanding paragraph (3) of subsection a. of section 12 of P.L.1995, c.244 (C.2A:50-64) to the contrary, the sheriff shall sell the property within 90 days of the sheriff's receipt of any writ of execution issued by the court if:
 
	(a)	the court makes a finding in the foreclosure judgment that the property is vacant and abandoned; or
 
	(b)	the court issues an order directing the sheriff to sell the property within 90 days, pursuant to the provisions of subsection k. of this section.
 
	(2)	If it becomes apparent that the sheriff cannot comply with the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection, the foreclosing plaintiff shall apply to the court for an order appointing a Special Master or judicial agent to hold the foreclosure sale within 90 days of the date of application.
 
	k.	(1) Following issuance of a foreclosure judgment, in which the court did not make a finding that the property is vacant and abandoned, a foreclosing plaintiff may make application to the court for the property to be sold by the sheriff within 90 days of the date of application.  The application shall include a certification that the mortgaged real estate is vacant and abandoned.
 
	(2)	Upon application that meets the criteria set forth in paragraph (1) of this subsection, the court shall issue an order directing the sheriff to sell the property in accordance with the provisions of subsection j. of this section.  A hearing shall not be required unless the application is contested.
 
	L.2012, c.70, s.1; amended 2014, c.35, s.3; 2019, c.72; 2021, c.444, s.4.

2A:50-74  Short title.
  	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Foreclosure Mediation Act."
 
	L.2019, c.64, s.1.

2A:50-75  Findings, declarations relative to foreclosure mediation; definitions.
 	2. a.	 The Legislature finds and declares that the New Jersey Judiciary established a Foreclosure Mediation Program in 2008 in response to the increase in residential foreclosures. This act ensures the continuation of mediation services provided under that program to assist homeowners and lenders in pursuing a mutually agreeable alternative to mortgage foreclosure litigation and to avoid the harmful effects of residential property foreclosure on homeowners, families, and communities.
 
	b.	For the purposes of P.L.2019, c.64 (C.2A:50-74 et al.):
 
	"Certification document" means the document that the homeowner-borrower is required to submit to the court upon the initiation of foreclosure mediation, pursuant to subsection b. of section 4 and subsection a. of section 5 of P.L.2019, c.64 (C.2A:50-77 and C.2A:50-78).
 
	"Eligible property" means an owner-occupied one- to four-dwelling unit residence, one of which is occupied, or is planned to be occupied, by the homeowner-borrower, or a member of the homeowner-borrower's immediate family.
 
	"Foreclosure Mediation Program" or "mediation program" means the New Jersey Judiciary's Foreclosure Mediation Program as authorized by the Supreme Court of New Jersey.
 
	"Homeowner-borrower" means the borrower who executed the mortgage loan for an eligible property that is subject to a foreclosure complaint filed by the original residential mortgage lender or an assignee of the original residential mortgage lender.
 
	"Trained foreclosure prevention and default mitigation counselor" means a housing counselor employed by a housing counseling agency certified by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, who has successfully completed a foreclosure prevention and default mitigation training course.
 
	L.2019, c.64, s.2.

2A:50-76  Written notice of eligibility to participate.
 	3. a.  A homeowner-borrower shall receive written notice from the residential mortgage lender of the option to participate in the Foreclosure Mediation Program in accordance with the court rules, procedures, and guidelines adopted by the Supreme Court at the time the homeowner-borrower receives a notice of intention to foreclose, pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1995, c.244 (C.2A:50-56).  Upon the filing of a mortgage foreclosure complaint against an eligible property, the homeowner-borrower shall again receive written notice of the option to participate in the Foreclosure Mediation Program in accordance with the court rules, procedures, and guidelines adopted by the Supreme Court.  
 
	b.	The written notice required pursuant to this section shall be available in both English and Spanish, and shall alert the homeowner-borrower that:
 
	(1)	pursuant to subsection b. of section 4 of P.L.2019, c.64 (C.2A:50-77), obtaining the assistance of a trained foreclosure prevention and default mitigation counselor is a prerequisite to participation in mediation; and
 
	(2)	pursuant to subsection c. of section 4 of P.L.2019, c.64 (C.2A:50-77), the homeowner-borrower is not required to pay any fees in order to participate in mediation.
 
	L.2019, c.64, s.3; amended 2021, c.35.

2A:50-77  Participation in mediation.
 	4. a. (1) A court may order mediation whenever a homeowner-borrower files an answer to a foreclosure complaint.
 
	(2)	Alternatively, the homeowner-borrower may initiate mediation in accordance with court rules.  The courts shall provide the homeowner-borrower no less than 60 days following receipt of the foreclosure complaint and summons to initiate mediation. 
 
	b.	The homeowner-borrower may not participate in mediation unless the certification document required pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2019, c.64 (C.2A:50-78) is submitted to the court and signed by a trained foreclosure prevention and default mitigation counselor, verifying that the homeowner-borrower is cooperating with the counselor.
 
	c.	The homeowner-borrower shall not be required to pay any fees to participate in the mediation program.
 
	L.2019, c.64, s.4.

2A:50-78  Certification document; attendance; sanctions, penalties.
  	5. a. Whenever a homeowner-borrower initiates mediation or is ordered to participate in the mediation program, that homeowner-borrower shall be responsible for submitting a certification document to the court, confirming that they meet the definition of a homeowner-borrower, pursuant to subsection b. of section 2 of P.L.2019, c.64 (C.2A:50-75), and that the property being foreclosed upon continues to be an eligible property pursuant to subsection b. of section 2 of P.L.2019, c.64 (C.2A:50-75).  Pursuant to subsection b. of section 4 of P.L.2019, c.64 (C.2A:50-77), the certification document submitted to the court shall also be signed by the trained foreclosure prevention and default mitigation counselor, verifying that the trained foreclosure prevention and default mitigation counselor is counseling the homeowner-borrower.
 
	b.	Each party shall participate in foreclosure mediation, and shall attend the mediation session in person or by telephone through a person with the authority to consider alternatives to foreclosure so that the parties may reach a mutually acceptable loan modification, loan workout, refinancing agreement, or other resolution.  If any party or attorney for a party fails to attend a mediation session, the court, in addition to any sanction the court deems appropriate, may sanction a party or attorney for a violation of this subsection with a civil penalty of up to $1,000 or allow a party to recover reasonable attorney's fees or litigation expenses, or both.  In determining the type of sanction to impose against a party, the court may consider whether the conduct was intentional and whether the party has engaged in a pattern of similar conduct with respect to the current complaint or any previous complaints.
 
	L.2019, c.64, s.5.

2A:50-79  Recording of results, publication on website.
  	6.	The Judiciary shall record the result of each foreclosure mediation session, and compile this information into an accessible format so that the frequency of the program's success can be identified, and shall publish the compiled information on the Judiciary's Internet website.  The information shall include the aggregate data regarding: the number of cases in mediation; the number of mediation sessions held; the number of mediation sessions that did not go forward because either party did not participate; the number of successful mediations delineated by loan modification, forbearance, deed in lieu of foreclosure, short sale agreement, or other agreement resulting in the dismissal of the complaint for foreclosure; and the number of homeowners against whom another complaint for foreclosure was not filed in the following two years.  The information published on the Judiciary's Internet website shall be updated at least annually.  However, the first report shall be published two years after the effective date of P.L.2019, c.64 (C.2A:50-74 et al.).
 
	L.2019, c.64, s.6.

2A:50-80  "Foreclosure Mediation Fund."
 	7.	There is created in the General Fund a dedicated, non-lapsing fund to be known as the "Foreclosure Mediation Fund," to be held separate and apart from all other funds of the State.  The Foreclosure Mediation Fund shall be administered by the Administrative Office of the Courts.  In each action for foreclosure, the plaintiff shall pay $155 to the clerk of the court in addition to the fee associated with the filing of the first paper. Of that $155 payment, $60 and all monies collected from each civil penalty imposed for violations of subsection b. of section 5 of P.L.2019, c.64 (C.2A:50-78), shall be deposited in the Foreclosure Mediation Fund.  The monies shall be appropriated annually by the Legislature to the Administrative Office of the Courts for the purposes of the operation of the Foreclosure Mediation Program, including the compensation of mediators, and to enhance the integrity of the mortgage foreclosure review process. All interest or other income earned on monies deposited into the Foreclosure Mediation Fund, and any monies that may be appropriated or otherwise become available for the purpose of the Foreclosure Mediation Fund, shall be credited and deposited into the Foreclosure Mediation Fund. The remaining $95 collected from each filing fee shall be deposited into the New Jersey Foreclosure Counseling Fund on the first day of each calendar quarter.

	L.2019, c.64, s.7; amended 2021, c.373, s.3.

2A:50-81  Findings, declarations.
	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that:
 
	a.	The Foreclosure Mediation Assistance Program administered by the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency provides trained foreclosure prevention and default mitigation counselors for homeowner-borrowers participating in the Foreclosure Mediation Program established by the New Jersey Judiciary.
 
	b.	As provided by section 7 of the "New Jersey Foreclosure Mediation Act," P.L.2019, c.64 (C.2A:50-80), trained foreclosure prevention and default mitigation counselors are paid using a portion of funds paid by a foreclosure plaintiff in an action for foreclosure.
 
	c.	During the public health emergency declared by the Governor in Executive Order No. 103 of 2020 due to the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency expanded its Foreclosure Mediation Assistance Program to provide other supports to New Jersey residents including renter and pre-foreclosure counseling.
 
	d.	Since the expansion began, nearly 5,000 households have been served.
 
	e.	Sufficient funding exists for trained foreclosure prevention and default mitigation counselors to continue to provide pre-foreclosure counseling services although the public health emergency declared by the Governor in Executive Order No. 103 of 2020 has concluded.
 
	f.	In the event of a declaration of a state of emergency, persons who have been trained to provide foreclosure counseling services under the Foreclosure Mediation Assistance Program are well positioned to help disaster victims prepare and submit applications for State and federal disaster assistance.

	L.2021, c.373, s.1; amended 2023, c.123, s.1.

2A:50-82  "New Jersey Foreclosure Counseling Fund" established.
	2. a. There is established in the General Fund a separate, non-lapsing, dedicated account administered by the Department of Community Affairs to be known as the "New Jersey Foreclosure Counseling Fund."
 
	b.	The funds within the New Jersey Foreclosure Counseling Fund shall be paid to the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency no later than the 15th day of each quarter to reimburse trained foreclosure prevention and default mitigation counselors for costs expended thereby in:
 
	(1) providing pre-foreclosure counseling services in accordance with guidance established by the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency and for the agency's services required under P.L.2019, c.64 (C.2A:50-74 et seq.); and
 
	(2) providing, to homeowners and renters who have been impacted by real property damage to, or destruction on, their primary residence, as a result of an event that prompted the Governor or the President of the United States to declare a state of emergency or issue an emergency disaster declaration, assistance in the preparation and submission of applications for housing related expenses, including, but not limited to: (a) rental payments; (b) mortgage payments; (c) insurance payments; (d) property tax payments; and (e) repair, rehabilitation, or relocation assistance payments that have been made available, by the State or federal government, in response to the declared emergency or disaster.
 
	c.	The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency may assess up to five percent of New Jersey Foreclosure Counseling Fund's annual allocation amounts for administrative costs.
 
	d.	For purposes of this section, "trained foreclosure prevention and default mitigation counselors" shall have the same definition as in section 2 of the "New Jersey Foreclosure Mediation Act," P.L.2019, c.64 (C.2A:50-75).

	L.2021, c.373, s.2; amended 2023, c.123, s.2.

2A:51-1.     When authorized; proof required  
     2A:51-1. Where a mortgage on real estate or chattels, or both, is recorded in the office of the county clerk or register of deeds and mortgages of any county, the Superior Court in a summary or other action brought by any mortgagor or party in interest may direct the county clerk or register to cancel the mortgage of record, provided the plaintiff shall:  

    a.   Present satisfactory proof that the principal and interest due on the mortgage have been fully paid; or  

    b.   Deposit with the clerk of the Superior Court in the county in which the mortgage is of record any balance of principal and interest due on the mortgage according to the terms thereof; or  

    c.   Present such special circumstances as to satisfy the court that the mortgagee and his successors, if any, in right, title and interest have no further interest in the mortgage or the debt secured thereby.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.106.  

2A:51-2.  Record entry of cancellation by county clerk or register of deeds  and mortgages
    When the judgment for the cancellation of record of a mortgage, or a certified copy thereof, is filed or recorded, with the county clerk or the office of the register of deeds and mortgages, if any, of the county in which the mortgage is of record, and the money due on the mortgage, if any, deposited  as required by the judgment, the county clerk or register of deeds and  mortgages shall discharge and cancel of record the mortgage, and shall enter on  the margin of the record or registry of the mortgage, and opposite thereto the  words  "canceled by judgment" , entering the date of the judgment and filing,  or recording the certified copy as above provided.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:51-3.  Record entry of cancellation by county clerk or register of deeds  and mortgages where lands transferred to another county
    Where, after the recording of any mortgage on real estate in any county in this state, the real estate so mortgaged shall, by an act of the legislature, be set off to another county or be transferred to the territorial limits thereof, and an action or other proceeding for the cancellation of such mortgage is or has been instituted in the county in which the mortgaged real estate is situate at the time of the institution of the proceeding, and a judgment or order in such proceeding is or has been made for the cancellation of the mortgage, the county clerk or register of deeds and mortgages, as the case may be, of the county in which the mortgage so canceled is of record, shall, upon the production and filing of a copy of such judgment or order for cancellation, certified to be a true copy by the county clerk or register of deeds and mortgages of the county in which the mortgaged real estate is situate  at the time of the entry of the judgment or order, cancel and discharge the  record of the mortgage and enter on the margin of the record or registry  thereof, and opposite thereto, the words  "canceled by judgment" , entering the  date of such judgment or order and of the filing of the certified copy  thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:51-4.  Proceedings in county where mortgaged real estate situate valid although mortgage of record in another county
    Any action instituted for the cancellation of a mortgage in the county in which the mortgaged real estate may be situate, shall, although the record of the mortgage so canceled may be in the county in which the real estate was situate at the time of the recording thereof, be as valid and effectual for the  cancellation of the record of such mortgage in the county in which the same may  be recorded, as if the proceedings had been instituted in the county in which  the mortgage was recorded.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:51-5.  Payment of money deposited with county clerk;  application; court  order
    Upon application of a person claiming to be entitled to moneys deposited pursuant to section 2A:51-1 of this title, the court wherein the money is deposited may make such order for the payment to him of the money, or any portion thereof, with accrued interest, as it may deem proper.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:52-1.     Action for change of name  
    2A:52-1.     Any person may institute an action in Superior Court, for authority to assume another name.  The complaint for a change of name shall be accompanied by a sworn affidavit stating the applicant's name, date of birth, social security number, whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime, and whether any criminal charges are pending against him and, if such convictions or pending charges exist, shall provide such details in connection therewith sufficient to readily identify the matter referred to. The sworn affidavit shall also recite that the action for a change of name is not being instituted for purposes of avoiding or obstructing criminal prosecution or for avoiding creditors or perpetrating a criminal or civil fraud. If criminal charges are pending, the applicant shall serve a copy of the complaint and affidavit upon any State or county prosecuting authority responsible for the prosecution of any pending charges. A person commits a crime of the fourth degree if he knowingly gives or causes to be given false information under this section.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1981,c.362,s.1, 1993,c.228,s.1.  

2A:52-2.     Effect of judgment, copy to State Bureau of Identification  
    2A:52-2.     Such person, from and after the day specified therefor in the judgment in the action, shall be known by the name which, by the judgment, he is authorized to assume, and by no other.  The judgment for change of name shall include the applicant's social security number and date of birth. The clerk of the court shall forward a copy of the judgment to the State Bureau of Identification in the Division of State Police if the person has been convicted of a crime or if there are criminal charges pending against him.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1981,c.362,s.2; 1993,c.228,s.2.  

2A:52-3.  Effect of change of name on actions or other proceedings
    No action, or other legal proceeding commenced in his former name against any person whose name shall have been changed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall, by reason of such misnomer, be abated, nor shall any relief  of recovery sought thereby be prevented.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:52-4.  Correction of record of birth or marriage
    Upon the receipt of either of the following documents:

    a.  A certified copy of a judgment permitting a change of name;  or

     b.  A certification issued in connection with a naturalization proceeding authorized by Act of Congress that a change of name was permitted by decree or order of a court vested with jurisdiction to naturalize persons as citizens of the United States;  together with a request for correction of an existing record of the birth or marriage of the individual, the State Registrar of Vital  Statistics or local registrar of vital statistics shall adjust the record or  records to show the new name and the date and manner by which obtained.  When  the request and such copy or certification are received by a local registrar,  he shall forward them to the State Registrar after having adjusted his local  record.

    In the event the name of any child or children shall be permitted to be changed in the naturalization proceedings of the parent of such child or children, the certification of the parent's naturalization record or proceedings disclosing such change of name of such child or children shall be sufficient authority for the State Registrar of Vital Statistics or the local registrar, as the case may be, upon request, to correct the birth certificate or marriage certificate of such child or children in the same manner as provided for the correction of the parent's birth certificate or marriage certificate.  The fee to be paid a local registrar or the State Registrar for each birth certificate or for each marriage certificate so corrected shall be $2.00.  Any certified copy of a record changed as provided for in this chapter shall show the name at birth or marriage and the new name and date and manner by which obtained, but upon request shall show only the new name.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1955, c. 249, p. 927, s. 1;  L.1958, c. 81, p. 521, s. 1, eff. June 24, 1958;  L.1983, c. 275, s. 1, eff. July 18, 1983.

2A:53-1.     Jurisdiction  
     2A:53-1. The Superior Court shall have jurisdiction of declarations of intention, and of applications of aliens to become citizens of the United States.  

   	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.107.  

2A:53-2.  Naturalization not to be granted within 30 days of an election
    No person shall be naturalized or admitted to be a citizen of the United States by any such court within 30 days next preceding any national, state, municipal, general, special, local or charter election.

    An applicant who may become eligible to citizenship during such period of 30  days, shall not be prevented from receiving a certificate of naturalization and  citizenship on the proper day during such period, if the application shall have  been made and allowed prior to the commencement of the period of 30 days.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:53-3.  Political committees and candidates forbidden to pay fees; penalty
    No political committee or committee of any political party, and no person who has received or accepted a nomination for a political office, shall pay or promise to pay any money to or on behalf of a person for fees for the declaration or application for naturalization, for services as attorney or counsel or otherwise assisting or enabling a person to make the declaration or application.

    Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall, upon  conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than  $1,000.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:53-4.  Penalty for violations of chapter by clerk
    Any clerk or other person who records or files a declaration or application  in any case of naturalization, or issues a certificate in any such case in  violation of the provisions of this chapter, shall be punished by a fine of  $100.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:53A-1.  Joint tortfeasors;  single tortfeasor
    For the purpose of this act the term  "joint tortfeasors"  means two or more  persons jointly or severally liable in tort for the same injury to person or  property, whether or not judgment has been recovered against all or some of  them.  A master and servant or principal and agent shall be considered a single  tortfeasor.

     L.1952, c. 335, p. 1075, s. 1.

2A:53A-2.  Right of contribution
    The right of contribution exists among joint tortfeasors.

     L.1952, c. 335, p. 1075, s. 2.

2A:53A-3.  Judgment against joint tortfeasor;  contribution
    Where injury or damage is suffered by any person as a result of the wrongful  act, neglect or default of joint tortfeasors, and the person so suffering  injury or damage recovers a money judgment or judgments for such injury or  damage against one or more of the joint tortfeasors, either in one action or in  separate actions, and any one of the joint tortfeasors pays such judgment in  whole or in part, he shall be entitled to recover contribution from the other  joint tortfeasor or joint tortfeasors for the excess so paid over his pro rata  share;  but no person shall be entitled to recover contribution under this act  from any person entitled to be indemnified by him in respect to the liability  for which the contribution is sought.

     L.1952, c. 335, p. 1075, s. 3.

2A:53A-4.  Application of act
    This act shall apply to all actions for contribution commenced, and to all judgments recovered, after the effective date hereof irrespective of the time of the commission of the wrongful act or acts by the joint tortfeasors; provided, that it shall not apply with respect to payments made prior to the effective date hereof.

     L.1952, c. 335, p. 1075, s. 4.

2A:53A-5.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the  "Joint Tortfeasors Contribution Law."

     L.1952, c. 335, p. 1076, s. 5.

2A:53A-5.1  Prohibiting discrimination in calculation of certain damages.
	1. a. In any civil action arising from personal injury or wrongful death, any estimations, measures, or calculations of damages for lost earnings or impaired earning capacity shall not be reduced because of race, ethnicity, gender, gender identity or expression, or affectional or sexual orientation, as those terms are defined or interpreted under the "Law Against Discrimination," P.L.1945, c.169 (C.10:5-1 et seq.).
 
	b.	In any such civil action, determination of damages shall not be based upon statistical tables alone unless agreed to by all parties in the civil action.

	L.2021, c.405.

2A:53A-6.  Contributory negligence of conditional vendee, etc., as defense by third person in suit brought by conditional vendor, etc.
	Whenever a conditional vendor, bailor, or owner of the general property in goods or chattels or a secured party as defined in section 12A:9-102a.(72) of the New Jersey Statutes or the assignee or assignees of said conditional vendor, bailor or owner of the general property in goods or chattels or of any such secured party, shall institute suit for damages to said goods or chattels or the collateral as defined in said section of the New Jersey Statutes, while the same are in the custody, control or possession of the conditional vendee, bailee, or owner of the special property in said goods or chattels or debtor as defined in said section of the New Jersey Statutes or the agents, servants, or employees of said conditional vendee, bailee, or owner of the special property in said goods and chattels or of such debtor, against a third party or parties, or against the agents, servants, or employees of said third party or parties, or both, based on the negligence of the said third party or parties, or the agents, servants, or employees of said third party or parties, the contributory negligence of the conditional vendee, bailee, or owner of the special property in said goods or chattels or of such debtor, or of the agents, servants, or employees of said conditional vendee, bailee or owner of the said special property in said goods or chattels or of such debtor, shall constitute a proper and valid defense to said action and be a complete bar to recovery in the same manner as though suit were brought by the conditional vendee, bailee, or owner of the special property in said goods or chattels or such debtor or by the agents, servants or employees of the conditional vendee, bailee, or owner of the special property in said goods and chattels or of such debtor.

	L.1939,c.53,s.1; amended 1961, c.121, s.6; 2001, c.117, s.24.

2A:53A-7  Immunity from liability for negligence.
	1. a. No nonprofit corporation, society or association organized exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes or its trustees, directors, officers, employees, agents, servants or volunteers shall, except as is hereinafter set forth, be liable to respond in damages to any person who shall suffer damage from the negligence of any agent or servant of such corporation, society or association, where such person is a beneficiary, to whatever degree, of the works of such nonprofit corporation, society or association; provided, however, that such immunity from liability shall not extend to any person who shall suffer damage from the negligence of such corporation, society, or association or of its agents or servants where such person is one unconcerned in and unrelated to and outside of the benefactions of such corporation, society or association.  
 
	 Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to grant immunity to any health care provider, in the practice of his profession, who is a compensated employee, agent or servant of any nonprofit corporation, society or association organized exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes. 
 
	b.	No nonprofit corporation, society or association organized exclusively for hospital purposes or its trustees, directors, officers or volunteers shall, except as is hereinafter set forth, be liable to respond in damages to any person who shall suffer damage from the negligence of any agent or servant of such corporation, society or association, where such person is a beneficiary, to whatever degree, of the works of such nonprofit corporation, society or association; provided, however, that such immunity from liability shall not extend to any person who shall suffer damage from the negligence of such corporation, society, or association or of its agents or servants where such person is one unconcerned in and unrelated to and outside of the benefactions of such corporation, society or association; but nothing herein contained shall be deemed to exempt the agent, employee or servant individually from their liability for any such negligence. 
 
	c.	Nothing in this section shall be deemed to grant immunity to:  (1) any nonprofit corporation, society or association organized exclusively for religious, charitable, educational or hospital purposes, or its trustee, director, officer, employee, agent, servant or volunteer, causing damage by a willful, wanton or grossly negligent act of commission or omission, including sexual assault, any other crime of a sexual nature, a prohibited sexual act as defined in section 2 of P.L.1992, c.7 (C.2A:30B-2), or sexual abuse as defined in section 1 of P.L.1992, c.109 (C.2A:61B-1); (2) any trustee, director, officer, employee, agent, servant or volunteer causing damage as the result of the negligent operation of a motor vehicle; or (3) an independent contractor of a nonprofit corporation, society or association organized exclusively for religious, charitable, educational or hospital purposes.
 
	L.1959, c.90, s.1; amended 1995, c.183; 2019, c.120, s.5.

2A:53A-7.1.  Volunteers of certain organizations exempt from liability, damages  
    a.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person serving without compensation, other than reimbursement for actual expenses, as a trustee, director, officer or voluntary member of any board, council or governing body of any nonprofit corporation, society or association as provided in P.L.1959, c.90 (C.2A:53A-7 to 2A:53A-11), or nonprofit federation council or affiliated group composed of these organizations or a voluntary association as provided by P.L.1979, c.172 (C.18A:11-3) or to a conference under the jurisdiction of such a voluntary association, shall be liable for damages resulting from the exercise of judgment or discretion in connection with the duties of his office unless the actions evidence a reckless disregard for the duties imposed by the position.  

   b.   Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, no person who provides volunteer service or assistance for any nonprofit corporation, society or association as provided in P.L.1959, c.90 (C.2A:53A-7 to 2A:53A-11), or nonprofit federation council or affiliated group composed of these organizations or a voluntary association as provided by P.L.1979, c.172 (C.18A:11-3) or to a conference under the jurisdiction of such a voluntary association shall be liable in any action for damages as a result of his acts of commission or omission arising out of and in the course of his rendering the volunteer service or assistance.  

   Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to grant immunity to any person causing damage by his willful, wanton or grossly negligent act of commission or omission.  

   Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to grant immunity to any person causing damage as the result of his negligent operation of a motor vehicle.  

   c.   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to supersede or modify any provision of P.L.1986, c.13 (C.2A:62A-6) dealing with the civil liability of persons involved with nonprofit sports teams.  

     d. (1)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the provisions of subsection a. of this section shall be applicable to any person serving without compensation, other than reimbursement for actual expenses, as a trustee, director, officer or voluntary member of the board or governing body of any nonprofit corporation, society or association which is organized pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey for the purpose of operating or maintaining a cemetery or place of burial.  

   (2)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the provisions of subsection b. of this section shall be applicable to any person who provides volunteer service or assistance to any nonprofit corporation, society or association organized pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey for the purpose of operating or maintaining a cemetery or place of burial.  

   e.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the provisions of subsection a. of this section shall be applicable to any person serving without compensation, other than reimbursement for actual expenses, as a trustee, director, officer or voluntary member of the board or governing body of any nonprofit corporation which is organized pursuant to the provisions of Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes and whose purpose is the encouragement of economic development in a municipality or a county.  

   L.1987, c.87, s.1; amended 1988,c.87,s.2; 1989,c.249; 1989,c.283,s.1.  

2A:53A-7.2.  Limited immunity 
     a.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person serving without compensation, other than reimbursement for actual expenses, as a trustee, director, officer or voluntary member of a nonprofit blood bank shall be liable for damages resulting from the exercise of judgment or discretion in connection with the duties of his office unless the actions evidence a reckless disregard for the duties imposed by the position. 

    b.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person who provides volunteer service or assistance for any nonprofit blood bank shall be liable for damages as a result of his acts of commission or omission arising out of and in the course of his rendering the volunteer service or assistance. 

    Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to grant immunity to any person causing damage by his willful, wanton or grossly negligent act of commission or omission. 

    Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to grant immunity to any person causing damage as the result of his negligent operation of a motor vehicle. 

    L. 1988, c. 179, s. 1. 

2A:53A-7.3.  Exemption from liability for library trustees, members of commission 
     Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person serving as a member of the board of trustees of a free public library or regional library, or as a member of a county library commission, shall be liable for damages resulting from the exercise of judgment or discretion in connection with the duties of his office unless the actions evidence a reckless disregard for the duties imposed by the position. 

    L.1989,c.171,s.1. 

2A:53A-7.4  Inapplicability, certain, of civil immunity granted to certain charitable entities.

	1.	The immunity from civil liability granted to a nonprofit corporation, society or association organized exclusively for religious, charitable, educational or hospital purposes pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1959, c.90 (C.2A:53A-7 to 2A:53A-11) shall not apply to a claim in any civil action that the negligent hiring, supervision or retention of any employee, agent or servant resulted in a sexual offense being committed against a person under the age of 18 who was a beneficiary of the nonprofit organization.  As used in this supplementary act, P.L.2005, c.264 (C.2A:53A-7.4 et seq.), "sexual offense" means any actions that would constitute any crime set forth in chapter 14 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes or set forth in paragraph (3) or (4) of subsection b. of N.J.S.2C:24-4.

	L.2005,c.264,s.1.

2A:53A-7.5  Application of act.
 	2. a. The provisions of this supplementary act, P.L.2005, c.264 (C.2A:53A-7.4 et seq.), shall apply prospectively and also shall be applicable to all civil actions for which the statute of limitations has not expired as of the effective date of this act, and subsequently, not expired as of the effective date of P.L.2019, c.120 (C.2A:14-2a et al.), including the statute of limitations set forth in N.J.S.2A:14-2, section 2 of P.L.2019, c.120 (C.2A:14-2a), section 1 of P.L.1964, c.214 (C.2A:14-2.1), or any other statute. These applicable actions include but are not limited to matters filed with a court that have not yet been dismissed or finally adjudicated as of the effective date of this act or P.L.2019, c.120 (C.2A:14-2a et al.).
 
	b.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection a. of this section, the provisions of P.L.2005, c.264 (C.2A:53A-7.4 et seq.) shall apply to all civil actions for an injury resulting from an act that occurred prior to the effective date of P.L.2019, c.120 (C.2A:14-2a et al.), and these actions shall be subject to the statute of limitations set forth in section 2 of P.L.2019, c.120 (C.2A:14-2a).
 
	L.2005, c.264, s.2; amended 2019, c.120, s.6.

2A:53A-8.    Liability of nonprofit hospital corporation  
     Notwithstanding the provisions of the foregoing paragraph, any nonprofit corporation, society or association organized exclusively for hospital purposes shall be liable to respond in damages to such beneficiary who shall suffer damage from the negligence of such corporation, society or association or of its agents or servants to an amount not exceeding $250,000, together with interest and costs of suit, as the result of any one accident and to the extent to which such damage, together with interest and costs of suit, shall exceed the sum of $250,000 such nonprofit corporation, society or association organized exclusively for hospital purposes shall not be liable therefor.  

    L.1959,c.90,s.2; amended 1991,c.187,s.48.  

2A:53A-9.  Character of buildings used
    For the purposes of this act but not in limitation thereof, the buildings and places actually used for colleges, schools, academies, seminaries, historical societies, public libraries, religious worship, charitable or hospital purposes, the moral and mental improvement of men, women and children,  nursing homes, rest homes, parish houses, auditoriums, houses of and for prayer  and buildings and places, however named or designated, operated and maintained  for equivalent uses, when so operated and maintained by any such nonprofit  corporation, society or association, shall be deemed to be operated and  maintained for a religious, charitable, educational or hospital purpose.

     L.1959, c. 90, p. 222, s. 3.

2A:53A-10.  Remedial legislation;  liberal construction
    This act shall be deemed to be remedial and shall be liberally construed so  as to afford immunity to the said corporations, societies and associations from  liability as provided herein in furtherance of the public policy for the protection of nonprofit corporations, societies and associations organized for religious, charitable, educational or hospital purposes.

     L.1959, c. 90, p. 223, s. 4.

2A:53A-11.  Severability
    The provisions of this act shall be deemed to be severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence or provision of this act is declared to be unconstitutional or the applicability thereof to any person is held invalid the  remainder of this act shall not thereby be deemed to be unconstitutional or  invalid.

     L.1959, c. 90, p. 223, s. 5.

2A:53A-12.  Members of volunteer first aid, rescue or emergency squads or national ski patrol system;  liability for damages
    No member of a volunteer first aid, rescue or emergency squad, or volunteer  member of the National Ski Patrol System, which provides emergency public first  aid and rescue services shall be liable in any civil action to respond in  damages as a result of his acts of commission or omission arising out of and in  the course of his rendering in good faith any such services as such member but  such immunity from liability shall not extend to the operation of any motor  vehicle in connection with such services.

    Nothing herein shall be deemed to grant any such immunity to any person causing damage by his willful or wanton act of commission or omission.

     L.1962, c. 242, s. 1, eff. Feb. 28, 1963.  Amended by L.1977, c. 276, s. 2, eff. Oct. 30, 1977.

2A:53A-13.  Liability of member of volunteer fire company, authorized active  volunteer, first aid or rescue squad worker providing emergency services
    No member of a volunteer fire company, which provides emergency public first  aid and rescue services or services for the control and extinguishment of  fires, or both, and no authorized active volunteer first aid or rescue squad  worker who is not a member of the volunteer fire company within which the first  aid or rescue squad may have been created, doing public first aid or rescue  duty, shall be liable in any civil action to respond in damages as a result of  his acts of commission or omission arising out of and in the course of his  rendering in good faith any such services, or arising out of and in the course  of participation in any authorized drill, but such immunity from liability  shall not extend to the operation of any motor vehicle in connection with the  rendering of any such services.

    Nothing herein shall be deemed to grant any such immunity to any person causing damage by his willful or wanton act of commission or omission.

     L.1963, c. 71, s. 1, eff. May 28, 1963.  Amended by L.1968, c. 44, s. 2, eff.  May 22, 1968;  L.1983, c. 29, s. 1, eff. Jan. 25, 1983.

2A:53A-13.1.  Liability of volunteer fire company, volunteer first aid, rescue or emergency squad or civil defense unit providing services
    No volunteer fire company or volunteer first aid, rescue or emergency squad,  civil defense unit, incorporated or unincorporated, which provides services for  the control and extinguishment of fires or emergency public first aid and  rescue services, or both, shall be liable in any civil action to respond in  damages as a result of any acts of commission or omission arising out of and in  the course of the rendition in good faith of any such services, or arising out  of and in the course of participation in any authorized drill, by any member of  the volunteer fire company or the volunteer first aid, rescue or emergency  squad, or civil defense unit, and in the case of a volunteer fire company  within which a first aid or rescue squad has been created, by any authorized  active volunteer first aid or rescue squad worker therefor, notwithstanding  that he is not a member of the volunteer fire company.  No such immunity from  liability shall extend to the operation of any motor vehicle in connection with  the rendering of any such services.

     L.1975, c. 196, s. 1, eff. Aug. 21, 1975.  Amended by L.1983, c. 29, s. 2, eff. Jan. 25, 1983.

2A:53A-14.  Legislative findings
    The Legislature finds that malicious acts of vandalism by youths are increasing at an alarming rate;  that such acts are frequently attributable to lack of care, custody and control exercised by the parent;  that parents should  have some responsibility for the conduct of their children;  that while there  is a reluctance to charge a child with juvenile delinquency there should be  some legal deterrent to juvenile acts of vandalism and to parental neglect of  child supervision.  The Legislature therefore finds it desirable to establish a  civil procedure for the recovery of damages for such acts from the neglectful  parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of the child who caused  such damage.

     L.1965, c. 111, s. 1, eff. June 15, 1965.

2A:53A-15.  Liability of parent or guardian for willful destruction of property by infant under 18
    A parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of an infant under 18 years of age who fails or neglects to exercise reasonable supervision and control of the conduct of such infant, shall be liable in a civil action for any willful, malicious or unlawful injury or destruction by such infant of the real or personal property of another.

     L.1965, c. 111, s. 2.  Amended by L.1979, c. 318, s. 2, eff. Jan. 18, 1980.

2A:53A-16  Parental liability for certain acts of minor.
	1.	The parents of any minor who shall maliciously or willfully injure any property of a railroad, street railway, traction railway or autobus public utility shall be liable for damages in the amount of the injury to a limit of $5,000, to be collected by the property owner in the Superior Court, together with costs of suit.

	L.1970,c.246,s.1; amended 2001, c.413, s.1.

2A:53A-17.  Application to parents without parental custody and control
    This act shall not apply to parents whose parental custody and control of such infant has been removed by court order, decree, judgment, military service, or marriage of such infant.

     L.1970, c. 246, s. 2, eff. Oct. 28, 1970.

2A:53A-17.1  Liability of parent or guardian.
	4.	Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, a parent or guardian having legal custody of a minor who demonstrates willful or wanton disregard in the exercise of the supervision and control of the conduct of a minor adjudicated delinquent of cyber-harassment, pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2013, c.272 (C.2C:33-4.1), or harassment, pursuant to N.J.S.2C:33-4, may be liable in a civil action. 

	L. 2021, c.338, s.4.

2A:53A-18.   Bar to judgment 
    Notwithstanding any law or judicial ruling to the contrary, any person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a criminal offense, shall be barred from receiving a judgment, other than a judgment for damages resulting from negligent or intentional conduct showing reckless disregard for the value of human life, against any person who otherwise would have been liable in a civil action for damages arising under the circumstances set forth in section 2 of this act which is initiated by the person who has been found guilty or who has pleaded guilty, provided that liability does not arise from conduct which would itself constitute a criminal offense. 

   L. 1985, c. 223, s. 1, eff. July 2, 1985. 

2A:53A-19.   Scope 
    For the purposes of this act, the scope of the bar to judgment shall be limited to all actions in preparation of the criminal activity, all actions during the criminal activity, and all actions in connection with the attempted escape from the scene of the criminal activity or subsequent apprehension. 

   L. 1985, c. 223, s. 2, eff. July 2, 1985. 

2A:53A-20.   Stay of civil action 
    In the event that the prosecution of the alleged criminal activity shall not have been brought to conclusion prior to the start of a civil action for damages by one who has been arrested for a criminal offense, the civil action for damages shall be stayed pending the final disposition of the criminal matter.  For the purposes of this section, the final disposition of the criminal matter shall mean the point at which the judgment of conviction is entered against one who is arrested for a criminal offense. 

   L. 1985, c. 223, s. 3, eff. July 2, 1985. 

2A:53A-21  Civil cause of action for bias crime victims.
 
	1. a. A person, acting with purpose to intimidate an individual or group of individuals because of race, color, religion, gender, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, or ethnicity, who engages in conduct that is an offense under the provisions of the "New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice," Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes, commits a civil offense.  
 
	b.	Any person who sustains injury to person or property as a result of a violation of subsection a. shall have a cause of action against the person or persons who committed the civil offense resulting in the injury.  In the case of a homicide committed in violation of subsection a., the estate of the deceased shall have a cause of action.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to preclude the parent or legal guardian of a person who has sustained injury as a result of a violation of subsection a. from initiating a civil action on behalf of a minor child or ward.  
 
	c.	The Attorney General, as parens patriae, may initiate a cause of action against any person who violates subsection a. of this section on behalf of any person or persons who have sustained injury to person or property as a result of the commission of the civil offense.  
 
	d.	Upon proof, by a preponderance of the evidence, of a defendant's violation of subsection a. of this section and of resulting damages, the defendant shall be liable as follows:  
 
	(1)	To the person or persons injured, for an award in the amount of damages incurred as a result of the commission of the civil offense, including damages for any emotional distress suffered as a result of the civil offense, such punitive damages as may be assessed, and any reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit incurred;  
 
	(2)	To the State, in any case in which the Attorney General has participated, reasonable attorney's fees and costs of investigation and suit; 
 
	(3)	Such injunctive relief as the court may deem necessary to avoid the defendant's continued violation of subsection a.; and  
 
	(4)	Any additional appropriate equitable relief, including restraints to avoid repeated violation.  
 
	e.	An award entered pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection d. of this section shall be reduced by the amount of any restitution that has been awarded for the same injury following criminal conviction or juvenile adjudication, and, notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1) of subsection d., damages awarded for injuries that have previously been compensated by the Victims of Crime Compensation Agency shall be paid to the agency for deposit in the Violent Crimes Compensation Board Account.  
 
	f.	All fees and costs assessed for the benefit of the State pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection d. of this section shall be paid to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Civil Rights Enforcement Fund established pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1993, c.137 (C.2A:53A-22).  
 
	g.	The parent or guardian of a juvenile against whom an award has been entered pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection d. of this section shall be liable for payment only if the parent has been named as a defendant and it has been established, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the parent or guardian's conduct was a significant contributing factor in the juvenile's commission of the offense.  
 
	L.1993, c.137, s.1; amended 2007, c.303, s.2.

2A:53A-22.   Civil Rights Enforcement Fund established  
    2.   There shall be established in the State Treasury a separate, nonlapsing fund designated the Civil Rights Enforcement Fund.  Amounts credited to the fund shall be used by the Attorney General for the payment of expenses and costs incurred by the Attorney General in enforcement of the laws of this State protecting civil rights, in the development and delivery of training for public employees, including law enforcement officers, responsible for enforcement of these laws and in the development and delivery of related public education programs.  

   L.1993,c.137,s.2.  

2A:53A-23.   Availability of authorized civil actions  
    3.   The provisions of this act are intended to provide remedies independent of and in addition to those that may apply under the provisions of the "New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice."  The civil actions authorized by this act are available whether or not the conduct has been prosecuted as an offense under the provisions of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes and whether or not any such prosecution has resulted in a conviction.  

   L.1993,c.137,s.3.  

2A:53A-24.   Terms defined  
    4.   The terms "conduct" and "offense" shall have the meaning provided in N.J.S.2C:1-14.  The term "juvenile" shall have the meaning provided in section 24 of P.L.1982, c.77 (C.2A:4A-43).  

   L.1993,c.137,s.4.  

2A:53A-25.    Definitions; accountants' liability  
    1.  a.  As used in this act:

   (1)  "Accountant" means a person who is registered as a certified public accountant pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1977, c.144 (C.45:2B-1 et seq.), or an accounting firm which is organized for the practice of public accounting pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1977, c.144 (C.45:2B-1 et seq.) and P.L.1969, c.232 (C.14A:17-1 et seq.).  

   (2)  "Bank" means a State or federally chartered bank, savings bank, savings and loan association, credit union, a group of such institutions or its affiliates, subsidiaries, co-lenders, successors or assigns.  

   (3)  "Client" means the party directly engaging an accountant to perform a professional accounting service.  

   (4)  "Professional accounting service" includes, but is not limited to, the compilation, review, certification, or audit of, or the expression of a professional opinion or other reporting on, a financial statement or other information covering a specified period of time.  

   (5)  "Specified transaction" means a particular transaction between a client and a claimant.  

   b.   Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, no accountant shall be liable for damages for negligence arising out of and in the course of rendering any professional accounting service unless:  

   (1)  The claimant against the accountant was the accountant's client; or  

   (2)  The accountant:

   (a)  knew at the time of the engagement by the client, or agreed with the client after the time of the engagement, that the professional accounting service rendered to the client would be made available to the claimant, who was specifically identified to the accountant in connection with a specified transaction made by the claimant;  

   (b)  knew that the claimant intended to rely upon the professional accounting service in connection with that specified transaction; and  

   (c) directly expressed to the claimant, by words or conduct, the accountant's understanding of the claimant's intended reliance on the professional accounting service; or  

   (3)  In the case of a bank claimant, the accountant acknowledged the bank's intended reliance on the professional accounting service and the client's knowledge of that reliance in a written communication.  

   L.1995,c.49.

2A:53A-26  "Licensed person" defined.
 	1.	As used in this act, "licensed person" means any person who is licensed as:

	a.	an accountant pursuant to P.L.1997, c.259 (C.45:2B-42 et seq.);
 
	b.	an architect pursuant to R.S.45:3-1 et seq.;
 
	c.	an attorney admitted to practice law in New Jersey;
 
	d.	a dentist pursuant to R.S.45:6-1 et seq.;
 
	e.	an engineer pursuant to P.L.1938, c.342 (C.45:8-27 et seq.);
 
	f.	a physician in the practice of medicine or surgery pursuant to R.S.45:9-1 et seq.;
 
	g.	a podiatrist pursuant to R.S.45:5-1 et seq.;
 
	h.	a chiropractor pursuant to P.L.1989, c.153 (C.45:9-41.17 et seq.);
 
	i.	a registered professional nurse pursuant to P.L.1947, c.262 (C.45:11-23 et seq.);
 
	j.	a health care facility as defined in section 2 of P.L.1971, c.136 (C.26:2H-2);
 
	k.	a physical therapist pursuant to P.L.1983, c.296 (C.45:9-37.11 et seq.);
 
	l.	a land surveyor pursuant to P.L.1938, c.342 (C.45:8-27 et seq.);
 
	m.	a registered pharmacist pursuant to P.L.2003, c.280 (C.45:14-40 et seq.);
 
	n.	a veterinarian pursuant to R.S.45:16-1 et seq.; 
 
	o.	an insurance producer pursuant to P.L.2001, c.210 (C.17:22A-26 et seq.);
 
	p.	a certified midwife, certified professional midwife, or certified nurse midwife pursuant to R.S.45:10-1 et seq.; and 
 
	q.	a licensed site remediation professional pursuant to section 7 of P.L.2009, c.60 (C.58:10C-7).  
 
	L.1995, c.139, s.1; amended 2001, c.372; 2010, c.88; 2019, c.263, s.2.

2A:53A-27  Affidavit of lack of care in action for professional, medical malpractice or negligence; requirements.
	2.	In any action for damages for personal injuries, wrongful death or property damage resulting from an alleged act of malpractice or negligence by a licensed person in his profession or occupation, the plaintiff shall, within 60 days following the date of filing of the answer to the complaint by the defendant, provide each defendant with an affidavit of an appropriate licensed person that there exists a reasonable probability that the care, skill or knowledge exercised or exhibited in the treatment, practice or work that is the subject of the complaint, fell outside acceptable professional or occupational standards or treatment practices.  The court may grant no more than one additional period, not to exceed 60 days, to file the affidavit pursuant to this section, upon a finding of good cause.

	In the case of an action for medical malpractice, the person executing the affidavit shall meet the requirements of a person who provides expert testimony or executes an affidavit as set forth in section 7 of P.L.2004, c.17 (C.2A:53A-41).  In all other cases, the person executing the affidavit shall be licensed in this or any other state; have particular expertise in the general area or specialty involved in the action, as evidenced by board certification or by devotion of the person's practice substantially to the general area or specialty involved in the action for a period of at least five years.  The person shall have no financial interest in the outcome of the case under review, but this prohibition shall not exclude the person from being an expert witness in the case.

	L.1995,c.139,s.2; amended 2004, c.17, s.8.

2A:53A-28.   Affidavit not required; conditions  
    3.   An affidavit shall not be required pursuant to section 2 of this act if the plaintiff provides a sworn statement in lieu of the affidavit setting forth that: the defendant has failed to provide plaintiff with medical records or other records or information having a substantial bearing on preparation of the affidavit; a written request therefor along with, if necessary, a signed authorization by the plaintiff for release of the medical records or other records or information requested, has been made by certified mail or personal service; and at least 45 days have elapsed since the defendant received the request.  

   L.1995,c.139,s.3.  

2A:53A-29.   Noncompliance deemed failure to state cause of action  
    4.   If the plaintiff fails to provide an affidavit or a statement in lieu thereof, pursuant to section 2 or 3 of this act, it shall be deemed a failure to state a cause of action.  

   L.1995,c.139,s.4.  

2A:53A-30.  Short title
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Health Care Carrier Accountability Act."

	L.2001,c.187,s.1.

2A:53A-31.  Findings, declarations relative to liability for certain health care treatment decisions
	2.	The Legislature hereby finds and declares that:

	a.	Health and dental carriers, in particular health maintenance organizations and other managed care entities, have become increasingly involved in health care treatment decisions, including, but not limited to, the use of financial incentives to providers and practice guidelines, in an effort to reduce health care costs;

	b.	As a result, many carriers have been reducing or denying medically necessary health care treatments for their insured patients;

	c.	Since the carriers are in many instances making medical decisions when they deny, delay, or diminish health care treatments, they should be held to the same level of legal responsibility as physicians and other health care providers who make decisions regarding the necessity and appropriateness of medical care; and

	d.	It is fair and appropriate that insured patients have the opportunity to dispute carrier or organized delivery system decisions in court, as well as in internal and external appeals procedures, so that these disputes may be quickly and efficiently resolved in ways that best accommodate the needs of the insured patient.

	L.2001,c.187,s.2.

2A:53A-32.  Definitions relative to liability for certain health care treatment decisions
	3.	As used in this act:

	"Appropriate and medically necessary" means the standard for health care services as determined by health care providers in accordance with generally accepted standards of health care practice.

	"Carrier" means an insurance company, health, hospital or medical service corporation, or health maintenance organization authorized to issue health benefits plans in this State or a dental service corporation or dental plan organization authorized to issue dental benefits plans in this State. 

	"Covered person" means a person on whose behalf a carrier or organized delivery system offering a health or dental benefits plan is obligated to pay benefits or provide services pursuant to the plan.

	"Covered service" means a health care service provided to a covered person under a health or dental benefits plan for which the carrier or organized delivery system is obligated to pay benefits or provide services.

	"Dental benefits plan" means a benefits plan which pays or provides dental expense benefits for covered services and is delivered or issued for delivery in this State by or through a dental carrier.

	"Health benefits plan" means a benefits plan which pays or provides hospital and medical expense benefits for covered services, and is delivered or issued for delivery in this State by or through a carrier.  Health benefits plan includes, but is not limited to, Medicare supplement coverage and risk contracts to the extent not otherwise prohibited by federal law.  For the purposes of this act, health benefits plan shall not include the following plans, policies or contracts:  accident only, credit, disability, long-term care, CHAMPUS supplement coverage, coverage arising out of a workers' compensation or similar law, automobile medical payment insurance, personal injury protection insurance issued pursuant to P.L.1972, c.70 (C.39:6A-1 et seq.) or hospital confinement indemnity coverage.

	"Health care provider" means an individual or entity which, acting within the scope of its licensure or certification, provides a covered service defined by the health or dental benefits plan.  Health care provider includes, but is not limited to, a physician, dentist and other health care professionals licensed pursuant to Title 45 of the Revised Statutes, and a hospital and other health care facilities licensed pursuant to Title 26 of the Revised Statutes.

	"Health care service" means a service or product provided by a health care provider to a covered person pursuant to a health or dental benefits plan.

	"Health care treatment decision" means a decision made by a health or dental benefits plan at the time health care services are provided or to be provided, which decision affects the diagnosis, care or treatment provided to a covered person.

	"Organized delivery system" means an organized delivery system certified or licensed pursuant to P.L.1999, c.409 (C.17:48H-1 et seq.).

	"Serious or significant harm" means death, serious and protracted or permanent impairment of a bodily function or system, loss of a body organ necessary for normal bodily function, loss of a body member, or exacerbation of a serious or life-threatening disease or condition that results in serious or significant harm or requires substantial medical treatment.

	L.2001,c.187,s.3.

2A:53A-33  Liability of carrier, organized delivery system to covered persons
	4.  a.  Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, a carrier or organized delivery system shall be liable to a covered person for economic and non-economic loss that occurs as a result of the carrier's or organized delivery system's negligence with respect to the denial of or delay in approving or providing medically necessary covered services, which denial or delay is the proximate cause of the covered person's: (1) death; (2) serious and protracted or permanent impairment of a bodily function or system; (3) loss of a body organ necessary for normal bodily function; (4) loss of a body member; (5) exacerbation of a serious or life-threatening disease or condition that results in serious or significant harm or requires substantial medical treatment; (6) a physical condition resulting in chronic and significant pain; or (7) substantial physical or mental harm which resulted in further substantial medical treatment made medically necessary by the denial or delay of care.

	Under the provisions of this section, a carrier or organized delivery system shall be liable for the health care treatment decisions of its employees, agents or other representatives over whom the carrier or organized delivery system has the right to exercise influence or control, or has actually exercised influence or control.

	b.	It shall be a defense to any action brought against a carrier or organized delivery system that:

	(1)	neither the carrier or organized delivery system nor any employee, agent or other representative of the carrier or organized delivery system, for whose conduct the carrier or organized delivery system is liable pursuant to subsection a. of this section, controlled, influenced or participated in the health care treatment decision; and

	(2)	the carrier or organized delivery system did not deny or delay authorization for any treatment prescribed or recommended to the covered person by a health care provider.

	c.	The provisions of subsection a. of this section shall not be construed to:

	(1)	require a carrier or organized delivery system to pay benefits for or provide a health care service that is not a covered service;

	(2)	create any liability on the part of an employer or other entity that purchases a contract for health care services or assumes risk on behalf of its employees; or

	(3)	create any liability on the part of a labor/management Taft-Hartley welfare trust fund established pursuant to 29 U.S.C. s.186.

	d.  (1)  A carrier or organized delivery system shall not include a provision in a contract with a health care provider that exempts the carrier or organized delivery system from liability for the acts or conduct of the carrier or organized delivery system.  Any such provision in a contract executed or renewed after the date of enactment of this act shall be void as contrary to the public policy of this State.

	(2)	The provisions of subsection a. of this section  shall not be waived, shifted or modified by contract or agreement and responsibility for the provisions shall be a duty that cannot be delegated. Any effort to waive, modify, delegate or shift the liability established by subsection a. of this section through a contract for  indemnification or otherwise, that is executed or renewed after the date of enactment of this act, shall be void as contrary to the public policy of this State.

	e.	The provisions of any State law that prohibit a carrier or organized delivery system from practicing medicine or dentistry, or being licensed to practice medicine or dentistry, may not be asserted as a defense by a carrier or organized delivery system in an action brought against it pursuant to subsection a. of this section.

	f.	In an action brought against a carrier or organized delivery system pursuant to subsection a. of this section, a finding that a health care provider is an employee, agent or other representative of the carrier or organized delivery system shall not be based solely on proof that the provider's name appears on a list of approved health care providers made available to covered persons under a health or dental benefits plan.

	L.2001,c.187,s.4.

2A:53A-34.  Exhausting appeal before filing action; exception
	5.	An individual who brings an action against a carrier or organized delivery system pursuant to subsection a. of section 4 of this act shall be required to exhaust an appeal through the Independent Health Care Appeals Program created pursuant to section 11 of P.L.1997, c.192 (C.26:2S-11) before filing an action, unless serious or significant harm to the covered person has occurred or will imminently occur.

	L.2001,c.187,s.5.

2A:53A-35  Use of alternative dispute resolution methods
	6.  a.  The court hearing the action authorized by subsection a. of section 4 of this act shall, with the plaintiff's consent, employ alternative dispute resolution methods, including, but not limited to, mediation, binding arbitration and non-binding arbitration, in order to expedite the action and accommodate the needs of the parties to the dispute.

	b.	If alternative dispute resolution methods are employed, the mediator or arbitrator, as the case may be, may consider whether services denied or delayed are covered services under the health or dental benefits plan.

	c.	Nothing in this act shall prohibit a covered person from pursuing other appropriate remedies, including injunctive relief, a declaratory judgment, or any other relief available under applicable law, if serious or significant harm to the covered person has occurred or will imminently occur.

	L.2001,c.187,s.6.

2A:53A-36.  Affidavit of loss as a result of denial or delay; requirements
	7. a. In any action for economic or non-economic loss to a covered person pursuant to subsection a. of section 4 of this act, the plaintiff shall, within 60 days following the date of filing of the answer to the complaint by the defendant, provide each defendant with an affidavit of a physician or other appropriate licensed natural person that there exists a reasonable probability that the loss that occurred was a result of the carrier's or organized delivery system's negligence with respect to the denial of or delay in approving or providing medically necessary covered services.

	b.	The court may grant no more than one additional period, not to exceed 60 days, to file the affidavit pursuant to this section, upon a finding of good cause.  The person executing the affidavit shall be licensed in this or any other state and have particular expertise in the general area or specialty involved in the action, as evidenced by board certification or by devotion of the person's practice substantially to the general area or specialty involved in the action for a period of at least five years.  The person shall have no financial interest in the outcome of the case under review, but this prohibition shall not exclude the person from being an expert witness in the case.

	c.	An affidavit shall not be required pursuant to subsection a. of this section if the plaintiff provides a sworn statement in lieu of the affidavit setting forth that: the defendant or other appropriate party involved in the treatment of the covered person has failed to provide the plaintiff with medical records or other records or information having a substantial bearing on preparation of the affidavit; a written request therefor along with, if necessary, a signed authorization by the plaintiff for release of the medical records or other records or information requested, has been made by certified mail or personal service; and at least 45 days have elapsed since the defendant received the request.  

	d.	If the plaintiff fails to provide an affidavit or a statement in lieu thereof, pursuant to this section, it shall be deemed a failure to state a cause of action.  

	L.2001,c.187,s.7.

2A:53A-37  Short title.
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Medical Care Access and Responsibility and Patients First Act."

	L.2004,c.17,s.l.

2A:53A-38  Findings, declarations relative to medical professional liability, insurance reform and patient protection.
	2.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	One of the most vital interests of the State is to ensure that high-quality health care continues to be available in this State and that the residents of this State continue to have access to a full spectrum of health care providers, including highly trained physicians in all specialties;

	b.	The State's health care system and its residents' access to health care providers are threatened by a dramatic escalation in medical malpractice liability insurance premiums, which is creating a crisis of affordability in the purchase of necessary liability coverage for our health care providers;

	c.	One particularly alarming result of rising premiums is that there are increasing reports of doctors retiring or moving to other states where insurance premiums are lower, dropping high-risk patients and procedures, and practicing defensive medicine in a manner that may significantly increase the cost of health care for all our citizens;

	d.	The reasons for the steep increases in the cost of medical malpractice liability insurance are complex and involve issues related to: the State's tort liability system; the State's health care system, which includes issues related to patient safety and medical error reporting; and the State's regulation and requirements concerning medical malpractice liability insurers;

	e.	It is necessary and appropriate for the State to take meaningful and prompt action to address the various interrelated aspects of these issues that are impacted by, or impact on, the State's health care system; and

	f.	To that end, this act provides for a comprehensive set of reforms affecting the State's tort liability system, health care system and medical malpractice liability insurance carriers to ensure that health care services continue to be available and accessible to residents of the State and to enhance patient safety at health care facilities.

	L.2004,c.17,s.2.

2A:53A-39  Judge may refer medical malpractice action to complementary dispute resolution mechanism.
	5.	The judge presiding over a medical malpractice action, or the judge's designee, shall, within 30 days after the discovery end date, determine whether referral to a complementary dispute resolution mechanism may encourage early disposition or settlement of the action.  If the judge makes such a determination, the matter shall be referred to complementary dispute resolution pursuant to Rule 1:40 of the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey.

	Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the judge to refer an action to complementary dispute resolution prior to the discovery end date.

	L.2004,c.17,s.5.

2A:53A-40  Affidavit of noninvolvement.
	6.  a.  A health care provider named as a defendant in a medical malpractice action may cause the action against that provider to be dismissed upon the filing of an affidavit of noninvolvement with the court.  The affidavit of noninvolvement shall set forth, with particularity, the facts that demonstrate that the provider was misidentified or otherwise not involved, individually or through its servants or employees, in the care and treatment of the claimant, and was not obligated, either individually or through its servants or employees, to provide for the care and treatment of the claimant, and could not have caused the alleged malpractice, either individually or through its servants or employees, in any way.

	b.	A codefendant or claimant shall have the right to challenge an affidavit of noninvolvement by filing a motion and submitting an affidavit that contradicts the assertions of noninvolvement made by the health care provider in the affidavit of noninvolvement.

	c.	If the court determines that a health care provider named as a defendant falsely files or makes false or inaccurate statements in an affidavit of noninvolvement, the court, upon motion or upon its own initiative, shall immediately reinstate the claim against that provider.  Reinstatement of a party pursuant to this subsection shall not be barred by any statute of limitations defense that was not valid at the time the original action was filed.

	In any action in which the health care provider is found by the court to have knowingly filed a false or inaccurate affidavit of noninvolvement, the court shall impose upon the person who signed the affidavit or represented the party, or both, an appropriate sanction, including, but not limited to, an order to pay to the other party or parties the amount of the reasonable expenses incurred as a result of the filing of the false or inaccurate affidavit, including a reasonable attorney fee.  The court shall also refer the matter to the Attorney General and the appropriate professional licensing board for further review.

	d.	If the court determines that a plaintiff falsely objected to a health care provider's affidavit of noninvolvement, or knowingly provided an inaccurate statement regarding a health care provider's affidavit, the court shall impose upon the plaintiff or the plaintiff's counsel, or both, an appropriate sanction, including, but not limited to, an order to pay to the other party or parties the amount of the reasonable expenses incurred as a result of the submission of the false objection or inaccurate statement, including a reasonable attorney fee. The court shall also refer the matter to the Attorney General and the appropriate professional licensing board for further review.

	e.	As used in this section, "health care provider" means an individual or entity, which, acting within the scope of its licensure or certification, provides health care services, and includes, but is not limited to:  a physician, dentist, nurse, pharmacist or other health care professional whose professional practice is regulated pursuant to Title 45 of the Revised Statutes; and a health care facility licensed pursuant to P.L.1971, c.136 (C.26:2H-1 et seq.)

	L.2004,c.17,s.6.

2A:53A-41  Requirements for person giving expert testimony, executing affidavit.
	7.	In an action alleging medical malpractice, a person shall not give expert testimony or execute an affidavit pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1995, c.139 (C.2A:53A-26 et seq.) on the appropriate standard of practice or care unless the person is licensed as a physician or other health care professional in the United States and meets the following criteria:

	a.	If the party against whom or on whose behalf the testimony is offered is a specialist or subspecialist recognized by the American Board of Medical Specialties or the American Osteopathic Association and the care or treatment at issue involves that specialty or subspecialty recognized by the American Board of Medical Specialties or the American Osteopathic Association, the person providing the testimony shall have specialized at the time of the occurrence that is the basis for the action in the same specialty or subspecialty, recognized by the American Board of Medical Specialties or the American Osteopathic Association, as the party against whom or on whose behalf the testimony is offered, and if the person against whom or on whose behalf the testimony is being offered is board certified and the care or treatment at issue involves that board specialty or subspecialty recognized by the American Board of Medical Specialties or the American Osteopathic Association, the expert witness shall be:

	(1)	a physician credentialed by a hospital to treat patients for the medical condition, or to perform the procedure, that is the basis for the claim or action; or

	(2)	a specialist or subspecialist recognized by the American Board of Medical Specialties or the American Osteopathic Association who is board certified in the same specialty or subspecialty, recognized by the American Board of Medical Specialties or the American Osteopathic Association, and during the year immediately preceding the date of the occurrence that is the basis for the claim or action, shall have devoted a majority of his professional time to either:

	(a)	the active clinical practice of the same health care profession in which the defendant is licensed, and, if the defendant is a specialist or subspecialist recognized by the American Board of Medical Specialties or the American Osteopathic Association, the active clinical practice of that specialty or subspecialty recognized by the American Board of Medical Specialties or the American Osteopathic Association; or

	(b)	the instruction of students in an accredited medical school, other accredited health professional school or accredited residency or clinical research program in the same health care profession in which the defendant is licensed, and, if that party is a specialist or subspecialist recognized by the American Board of Medical Specialties or the American Osteopathic Association, an accredited medical school, health professional school or accredited residency or clinical research program in the same specialty or subspecialty recognized by the American Board of Medical Specialties or the American Osteopathic Association; or

	(c)	both.

	b.	If the party against whom or on whose behalf the testimony is offered is a general practitioner, the expert witness, during the year immediately preceding the date of the occurrence that is the basis for the claim or action, shall have devoted a majority of his professional time to:

	(1)	active clinical practice as a general practitioner; or active clinical practice that encompasses the medical condition, or that includes performance of the procedure, that is the basis of the claim or action; or

	(2)	the instruction of students in an accredited medical school, health professional school, or accredited residency or clinical research program in the same health care profession in which the party against whom or on whose behalf the testimony is licensed; or

	(3)	both.

	c.	A court may waive the same specialty or subspecialty recognized by the American Board of Medical Specialties or the American Osteopathic Association and board certification requirements of this section, upon motion by the party seeking a waiver, if, after the moving party has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the court that a good faith effort has been made to identify an expert in the same specialty or subspecialty, the court determines that the expert possesses sufficient training, experience and knowledge to provide the testimony as a result of active involvement in, or full-time teaching of, medicine in the applicable area of practice or a related field of medicine.

	d.	Nothing in this section shall limit the power of the trial court to disqualify an expert witness on grounds other than the qualifications set forth in this section.

	e.	In an action alleging medical malpractice, an expert witness shall not testify on a contingency fee basis.

	f.	An individual or entity who threatens to take or takes adverse action against a person in retaliation for that person providing or agreeing to provide expert testimony, or for that person executing an affidavit pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1995, c.139 (C.2A:53A-26 et seq.), which adverse action relates to that person's employment, accreditation, certification, credentialing or licensure, shall be liable to a civil penalty not to exceed $10,000 and other damages incurred by the person and the party for whom the person was testifying as an expert.

	L.2004,c.17,s.7.

2A:53A-42  Procedure to evaluate award by judge following verdict.
	9.	A judge presiding over an action alleging medical malpractice, in which the jury has rendered a verdict in favor of the complaining party, shall, upon a motion by any party for additur or remittitur on the issue of the quantum of damages, consider the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party and determine whether the award is clearly inadequate or excessive in view of the nature of the medical condition or injury that is the cause of action or because of passion or prejudice by the jury.

	L.2004,c.17,s.9.

2A:53A-43  Short title.
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Baseball Spectator Safety Act of 2006."

	L.2005,c.362,s.1.

2A:53A-44  Provision of protected seating for spectators, recognition of inherent risks, statement
 of intent.	2.	The Legislature recognizes that baseball stadium owners and operators have a duty to provide protected seating to spectators who, seeking to avoid the risk of injury, desire protection.  However, the Legislature also recognizes that persons who attend professional baseball games may be injured as a result of the risks inherent in being a spectator at such games.  The Legislature further finds that attendance at such professional baseball games is a family and community based activity to be encouraged.  Moreover, the State derives economic benefit from spectators attending professional baseball games.  Therefore, it is the intent of the Legislature to encourage attendance at professional baseball games.  Limiting the civil liability of those who own professional baseball teams and those who own the stadiums where professional baseball games are played will help contain costs, thereby keeping ticket prices affordable.

	L.2005,c.362,s.2.

2A:53A-45  Definitions relative to baseball spectator safety.
	3.	As used in this act:

	a.	"Owner" means a person, including a corporation, partnership, or limited liability company, who is in lawful possession and control of a professional baseball team or a stadium in which a professional baseball game is played.  "Owner" shall also include the owner's shareholders, partners, directors, officers, employees and agents.

	b.	"Professional baseball game" means any baseball game, whether for exhibition or competition, in which the participating baseball teams are members of a league of professional baseball clubs, commonly known as a major league or a minor league, and which teams are comprised of paid baseball players.  "Professional baseball game" shall also include pregame activities and shall include any baseball game or pregame activity.

	c.	"Spectator" means a person who is present at a baseball game for the purpose of observing the game, whether or not a fee is paid.

	L.2005,c.362,s.3.

2A:53A-46  Assumption of inherent risks by spectators, bar, defense to suit.
	4.  a.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, spectators of professional baseball games are presumed to have knowledge of and to assume the inherent risks of observing professional baseball games. These risks are defined as injuries which result from being struck by a baseball or a baseball bat anywhere on the premises during a professional baseball game.

	b.  (1)  Except as provided in section 5 of this act, the assumption of risk set forth in this section shall be a complete bar to suit and shall serve as a complete defense to a suit against an owner by a spectator for injuries resulting from the assumed risks.

	(2)	Except as provided in section 5 of this act, an owner shall not be liable for an injury to a spectator resulting from the inherent risks of attending a professional baseball game.  Except as provided in section 5 of this act, no spectator or spectator's representative shall make any claim against, maintain an action against, or recover from an owner for injury, loss, or damage to the spectator resulting from any of the inherent risks of attending a professional baseball game.

	c.	Nothing in this act shall preclude a spectator from bringing an action against another spectator for an injury to person or property  resulting from such other spectator's acts or omissions.

	L.2005,c.362,s.4.

2A:53A-47  Liability for non-compliance.
	5. a. Nothing in section 4 of this act shall prevent or limit the liability of an owner who fails to post and maintain the warning signs required pursuant to section 6 of this act.

	b.	Nothing in section 4 of this act shall prevent or limit the liability of an owner who fails to provide protection for spectators in the most dangerous sections of the stands. This limited duty may be satisfied by having a net behind home plate.

	L.2005,c.362,s.5.

2A:53A-48  Posting, maintenance of signs; warning.
	6.  a.  Every owner of a stadium where professional baseball games are played shall post and maintain signs which contain the warning notice set forth in subsection b. of this section.  Such signs shall be posted in conspicuous places at the entrances outside the stadium and at stadium facilities where tickets to professional baseball games are sold.

	b.	The signs described in subsection a. of this section shall contain the following warning notice:

WARNING

UNDER NEW JERSEY LAW, A SPECTATOR OF PROFESSIONAL BASEBALL ASSUMES THE RISK OF ANY INJURY TO PERSON OR PROPERTY RESULTING FROM ANY OF THE INHERENT DANGERS AND RISKS OF SUCH ACTIVITY AND MAY NOT RECOVER FROM AN OWNER OF A BASEBALL TEAM OR AN OWNER OF A STADIUM WHERE PROFESSIONAL BASEBALL IS PLAYED FOR INJURY RESULTING FROM THE INHERENT DANGERS AND RISKS OF OBSERVING PROFESSIONAL BASEBALL, INCLUDING BEING STRUCK BY A BASEBALL OR A BASEBALL BAT ANYWHERE ON THE PREMISES DURING A PROFESSIONAL BASEBALL GAME.

	L.2005,c.362,s.6.

2A:53A-49  Short title.
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Uniform Public Expression Protection Act."
 
L.2023, c.155, s.1.

2A:53A-50  Definitions; scope.
	2.	Scope.
 
	a.	In this section:
 
	(1) "Goods or services" does not include the creation, dissemination, exhibition, or advertisement or similar promotion of a dramatic, literary, musical, political, journalistic, or artistic work.
 
	(2) "Governmental unit" means a public corporation or government or governmental subdivision, agency, or instrumentality.
 
	(3) "Person" means an individual, estate, trust, partnership, business or nonprofit entity, governmental unit, or other legal entity.
 
	b.	Except as otherwise provided in subsection c., this act applies to a cause of action asserted in a civil action against a person based on the person's:
 
	(1) communication in a legislative, executive, judicial, administrative, or other governmental proceeding;
 
	(2) communication on an issue under consideration or review in a legislative, executive, judicial, administrative, or other governmental proceeding; or
 
	(3) exercise of the right of freedom of speech or of the press, the right to assembly or petition, or the right of association, guaranteed by the United States Constitution or the New Jersey Constitution, on a matter of public concern.
 
	c.	This act does not apply to a cause of action asserted:
 
	(1) against a governmental unit or an employee or agent of a governmental unit acting or purporting to act in an official capacity;
 
	(2) by a governmental unit or an employee or agent of a governmental unit acting in an official capacity to enforce a law to protect against an imminent threat to public health or safety; or
 
	(3) against a person primarily engaged in the business of selling or leasing goods or services if the cause of action arises out of a communication related to the person's sale or lease of the goods or services.
 
L.2023, c.155, s.2.

2A:53A-51  Order, show cause.
	3.	Order to Show Cause.
 
	Not later than 60 days after a party is served with a petition or complaint, crossclaim, counterclaim, third-party claim, or other pleading that asserts a cause of action to which this act applies or at a later time on a showing of good cause, the party may file an application for an order to show cause with the court to dismiss the cause of action or part of the cause of action.
 
L.2023, c.155, s.3.

2A:53A-52  Court, order, stay.
	4.	Stay.
 
	a.	Except as otherwise provided in subsections d. through g., upon the filing of an application for an order to show cause under section 3 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-51) the court may order:
 
	(1) all other proceedings between the moving party and responding party, including discovery and a pending hearing or motion, to be stayed;
 
	(2) on motion by the moving party, the court may stay an action or proceeding involving another party, or discovery by another party, if the hearing or ruling in that proceeding would adjudicate, or the discovery would relate to, an issue material to an order to show cause under section 3 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-51); and
 
	(3) In determining whether to stay any proceedings, there shall be a presumption that such a stay shall be granted.
 
	b.	A stay under subsection a. remains in effect until lifted by the court.
 
	c.	Except as otherwise provided in subsections e., f. and g., if a party appeals from an order ruling on an order to show cause under section 3 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-51), all proceedings between all parties in the action may be stayed by the court until the conclusion of the appeal.
 
	d.	During a stay under subsection a., the court may allow limited discovery if a party shows that specific information is necessary to establish whether a party has satisfied or failed to satisfy a burden under subsection a. of section 7 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-55) and the information is not reasonably available unless discovery is allowed.
 
	e.	A motion under section 10 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-58) for costs, attorney's fees, and expenses is not subject to a stay under this section.
 
	f.	A stay under this section does not affect a party's ability voluntarily to dismiss a cause of action or party of a cause of action or move to sever a cause of action.
 
	g.	If the court issues a stay under this section, the court for good cause may hear and rule on:
 
	(1) a motion unrelated to an order to show cause under section 3 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-51); and
 
	(2) a motion seeking a special or preliminary injunction to protect against an imminent threat to public health or safety.
 
L.2023, c.155, s.4.

2A:53A-53  Hearing.
	5.	Hearing.
 
	a.	The court shall hear an order to show cause under section 3 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-51) as expeditiously as possible.
 
	b.	If the Court allows for discovery under subsection d. of section 4 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-52), the court shall hear the order to show cause under section 3 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-51) as soon as practicable after the conclusion of time set forth in its order permitting limited discovery pursuant to subsection d. of section 4 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-52).
 
L.2023, c.155, s.5.

2A:53A-54  Proof.
	6.	Proof.
 
	In ruling on an order to show cause under section 3 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-51), the court may consider the pleadings, the order to show cause application and supporting certifications, briefs, any reply or response to the order to show cause, and any evidence that could be considered in ruling on a motion for summary judgment.
 
L.2023, c.155, s.6.

2A:53A-55  Cause of action, dismissal, whole, part.
	7.	Dismissal of cause of action in whole or part.
 
	a.	In ruling on an order to show cause under section 3 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-51), the court shall dismiss with prejudice a cause of action, or part of a cause of action, if:
 
	(1) the moving party established under subsection b. of section 2 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-50) that this act applies;
 
	(2) the responding party fails to establish under subsection c. of section 2 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-50) that this act does not apply; and 
 
	(3) either:
 
	(a) the responding party fails to establish a prima facie case as to each essential element of any cause of action in the complaint; or
 
	(b) the moving party establishes that:
 
	(i) the responding party failed to state a cause of action upon which relief can be granted; or
 
	(ii) there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law on the cause of action or part of the cause of action.
 
	b.	A voluntary dismissal without prejudice of a responding party's cause of action, or part of a cause of action, that is the subject of an order to show cause under section 3 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-51) does not affect a moving party's right to obtain a ruling on the order to show cause and seek costs, attorney's fees, and expenses under section 10 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-58).
 
	c.	A voluntary dismissal with prejudice of a responding's party cause of action, or part of a cause of action, that is the subject of an order to show cause under section 3 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-51) establishes for the purpose of section 10 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-58) that the moving party prevailed on the motion.
 
L.2023, c.155, s.7.

2A:53A-56  Ruling.
	8.	Ruling.
 
	The court shall rule on an order to show cause under section 3 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-51) as soon as practicable after a hearing under section 5 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-53).
 
L.2023, c.155, s.8.

2A:53A-57  Appeal.
	9.	Appeal.
 
	A moving party may appeal as a matter of right from an order denying, in whole or in part, an order to show cause under section 3 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-51).  The appeal must be filed not later than 20 days after entry of the order.
 
L.2023, c.155, s.9.

2A:53A-58  Costs, attorney's fees, expenses.
	10.	Costs, Attorney's Fees, and Expenses.
 
	On a motion under section 3 of P.L.2023, c.155 (C.2A:53A-51), the court shall award court costs, reasonable attorney's fees, and reasonable litigation expenses related to the order to show cause:
 
	(1) to the moving party if the moving party prevails on the order to show cause; or
 
	(2) to the responding party if the responding party prevails on the order to show cause and the court finds that the order to show cause was frivolous or filed solely with intent to delay the proceeding.
 
L.2023, c.155, s.10.

2A:53A-59  Construction.
	11.	Construction.
 
	This act shall be broadly construed and applied to protect the exercise of the right of freedom of speech and of the press, the right to assembly and petition, and the right of association, guaranteed by the United States Constitution or the New Jersey Constitution.
 
L.2023, c.155, s.11.

2A:53A-60  Application, construction uniformity.
	12.	Uniformity of Application and Construction.
 
	In applying and construing this uniform act, consideration must be given to the need to promote uniformity of the law with respect to its subject matter among states that enact it.
 
L.2023, c.155, s.12.

2A:53A-61  Severability.
	13.	Severability.
 
	If any provision of this act or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this act which can be given effect with the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this act are severable.
 
L.2023, c.155, s.13.

2A:54A-1.  Civil action to abate
    In addition to any criminal prosecution brought for violation of N.J.S. 2C:33-12, whenever a nuisance as defined in subsection c. of N.J.S. 2C:33-12 exists, the Attorney General or the prosecutor of the county in which the nuisance exists may bring a civil action in the name of the State to abate the nuisance and to permanently enjoin the person from maintaining the nuisance.

     L.1983, c. 234, s. 3, eff. June 30, 1983.

2A:54A-2.  Venue;  preliminary injunction
    a.  Any action instituted pursuant to the provisions of section 3 of this amendatory and supplementary act shall be brought in the Superior Court of the county in which the alleged nuisance exists.  An action shall be instituted by the filing of a verified petition alleging the facts constituting the nuisance.

    b.  After the filing of the petition, application for a preliminary injunction may be made to the court, which shall grant a hearing within 10 days  after the filing of the application.  If an application for a preliminary  injunction is made, the court, on request of the applicant, may issue an ex  parte order to preserve samples of materials located at the premises which are  allegedly involved in the nuisance.  The restraining order shall be served by  delivering a copy of the order to a person in charge of the location or  residing there or by posting a copy of the order upon one of the principal  doors or entrances to the location.  The officer serving the restraining order  shall make and return to the court an inventory of the personal property used  in maintaining the alleged nuisance and an inventory of the samples being held.   A violation of the restraining order or the removal or mutilation of a posted  restraining order shall constitute contempt of court.

    c.  A copy of the petition, together with a notice of the time and place of  the hearing on the application for a preliminary injunction, shall be served  upon the defendant at least five days before the hearing.  If, at the hearing,  the allegations of the petition are sustained by clear and convincing evidence,  a preliminary injunction closing the place against its use for any purpose  complained of in the petition may be issued.  The order shall also continue in  effect the restraining order provided in subsection b., if already issued, or,  if not so issued, may include a restraining order. The owner of any real or  personal property closed or restrained may appear between the filing of the  petition and the hearing on the application for a permanent injunction and may  obtain the release of the property, if the court determines that the owner did  not have any knowledge that the property was being used in maintaining the  nuisance and if the owner agrees to take whatever action is necessary to insure  that the property will not be used to continue the nuisance.  The release of  any property under this subsection shall not affect any judgment, lien, penalty or liability to which that property may be subject.

     L.1983, c. 234, s. 4, eff. June 30, 1983.

2A:54A-3.  Evidence admissible in action
    In an action brought pursuant to section 3 of this amendatory and supplementary act, evidence of the general reputation of the location or an admission or finding of guilt of the person under the criminal laws against prostitution or obscenity is admissible for the purpose of proving the existence of the nuisance.

     L.1983, c. 234, s. 5, eff. June 30, 1983.

2A:54A-4.  Permanent injunction;  entry of order;  forfeiture of property
    If, after final hearing, the court determines that the existence of a nuisance as defined in subsection c. of N.J.S. 2C:33-12 exists, the court may enter a permanent order enjoining the defendant and any other person from further maintaining the nuisance at the location complained of and the defendant from maintaining the nuisance elsewhere.  In addition, the court may proceed with the forfeiture of property used for the purpose of maintaining the  nuisance and the closing of the location for one year, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S. 2C:33-12.1.

     L.1983, c. 234, s. 6, eff. June 30, 1983.

2A:54A-5.  Penalty
    Whenever a permanent injunction is issued pursuant to the provisions of this  amendatory and supplementary act, a penalty of not less than $300.00 nor more  than $1,000.00 shall be imposed upon the person maintaining the nuisance.

     L.1983, c. 234, s. 7, eff. June 30, 1983.

2A:55-1.  Liability of any of joint debtors served;  judgment and execution;   special judgment as against those served by publication
    Where persons are jointly indebted to any other person upon any joint contract, obligation or matter, and in an action thereon by the creditor any of  such joint debtors shall be served with process, those served shall answer to  the plaintiff, and if judgment shall pass for the plaintiff, he shall have his  judgment and execution against those served.  The judgment and execution shall  be as effective, as to the joint debtor or debtors served, as if all of them  had been served and the judgment had been entered against all of them.

    Judgment in the action may be entered, also, against the other joint debtor  or debtors if he or they are named in the process and served by publication or  otherwise, as an absent defendant or defendants, in accordance with the  practice of the superior court in cases in which the action affects specific  property within the jurisdiction of the court;  but if such other debtor or  debtors do not appear in the action, said judgment shall be special as to them,  to be made as to them only of their interest in real and personal property  within the state jointly owned by all such joint debtors.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:55-2.  Representatives of 1 joint debtor chargeable as on joint and several obligations
    The representative of 1 joint debtor dying in the lifetime of the other joint debtor, may be charged with the obligation in the same manner as the representative might have been charged if the joint debtors had been bound severally as well as jointly.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:55-3.  Real sum due considered as the debt;  judgment for penalty; discharge
    When an action is brought or a claim is made in an action on a bond, note or  other contract containing a penalty to secure the payment of money only, the  true sum due and not the penalty, shall be deemed to be the debt due.  In all  such actions or claims wherein the plaintiff or claimant shall succeed, judgment shall be entered only for such amount as the case may require, with interest until paid.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:55-4.  Payment may be pleaded even though not made according to condition
    If, before action is brought on a bond, which has a condition or defeasance  to make void the same on payment of a less sum, at a day or place certain, the  obligor, his heirs, executors or administrators have paid to the obligee, his  executors, administrators or assigns, the principal and interest due by the  condition or defeasance of such bond, though such payment was not made strictly  according to the condition or defeasance, it may be pleaded in bar, and shall  be as effectual a bar to such action as if the money had been paid at the day  and place, according to the condition or defeasance, and had been so pleaded.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:55-5.  Defendant may bring money into court with costs, pending action; judgment of discharge
    If the defendant shall, at any time pending an action on any bond of the kind mentioned in section 2A:55-4 of this title, with a penalty, bring into the  court where the action shall be pending, all the principal money and interest  due on such bond, and all such costs as expended in an action upon such bond,  the money so brought in shall be deemed and taken to be in full payment and  satisfaction of such bond;  and the court shall give judgment to discharge the  defendant from the same accordingly.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:55-6.  Compromise of joint indebtedness
    Joint debtors may individually compromise with their creditors for their joint indebtedness in the same manner and with like effect as partners on the dissolution of the partnership may compromise with their creditors as provided by sections 42:5-1 to 42:5-5 of the title Partnerships and Partnership Associations, of the Revised Statutes.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:55-7.  Settlement or compromise of claims against directors or sureties
    In any case where several trustees, managers or directors of any insolvent corporation are liable to an action for unlawfully making any dividend or dividing, withdrawing or reducing capital, or for any default, negligence or malfeasance in the discharge of their duties, and in any case where several sureties on any bond for the performance of any duty or employment are liable to an action for any default, negligence or malfeasance of their principal, the  receiver or trustees, or such person, corporation or officer that may bring  such action, may settle and compromise with, release and discharge any one or  more of the parties so liable, but no compromise or settlement shall be made  without the approval first had and obtained from the court by which such  receiver or trustee was appointed.

    Such settlement, compromise, release or discharge shall not affect or constitute any defense to any such action or right of action against the other parties so liable, but in such case the recovery against those not so settled with and discharged, or any of them, shall not exceed the proportion to which they or he would have been bound according to the rules of equity if no such settlement and discharge had been made.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:55-8.  Settlement pending action
    When any such settlement shall be made in a pending action, it shall be made  in writing and the original or a signed copy filed with the court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:55-9.  Several acts in condition in bond, bill, or contract
    When the condition of a bond, bill or contract provides for the performance  of more than a single act, an action brought thereon with respect to a breach  or breaches occurring prior to the commencement of the action shall not bar the  bringing of other actions for any breach or breaches occurring thereafter.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-1.   "Cotenant" ;  executor or administrator with will annexed; definition and construction
    As used in this chapter:

     "Court"  means the superior court.

      "Cotenant"  means and includes a tenant in common, joint tenant or coparcener, but not a tenant by the entirety.

     An executor or administrator with the will annexed, having, by the terms of  the testator's will, power to sell any real estate or any undivided interest in  any real estate of which his testator died seized, shall have the same power to  bring an action to effect a partition of such real estate as such testator  might have brought if living, and cotenant as used in this chapter shall  include such an executor or administrator so far as may be requisite for such  purposes.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-2.  Partition through sale
    The superior court may, in an action for the partition of real estate, direct the sale thereof if it appears that a partition thereof cannot be made without great prejudice to the owners, or persons interested therein.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-3.  Division of part of real estate and sale of residue
    In any action for partition in the superior court, part of the real estate included in the application may be divided and the remainder sold when it appears by the report of the commissioner or commissioners, which shall designate the lands to be divided and those to be sold, and by other satisfactory evidence that the whole of the real estate cannot be divided among  the owners and proprietors without great prejudice to their interest.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-4.  Set-off of undivided shares without partition between shareholders  to be held in common
    Where 2 or more parties to an action for the partition of real estate make it appear to the court that they desire to enjoy their respective shares of the  whole or any part of such real estate in common, the court may direct partition  to be made so as to set off to such parties their shares of the real estate  partitioned, without partition as between themselves, to be held by them in  common.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-5.  Set-off of undivided shares without partition between minor and others consenting to be held in common
    Where any party to an action for the partition of real estate is under the age of 21 years, the court may, if it shall appear to be for the benefit of such minor, direct partition to be made so as to set off to such minor, and to any other party or parties to such action who may consent thereto, their respective shares in the real estate partitioned, without partition as between themselves, to be held by them in common.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-6.  Title of some parties disputed;  partition or sale as to undisputed parts not delayed
    When all defendants in any action in the superior court for partition of real estate fail to answer, or, by answer, admit or fail to deny the title of the plaintiff or of any co-defendant or co-defendants as alleged in the complaint, and do not contest the plaintiff's right to an actual partition of the real estate or to a sale thereof if actual partition is found to be impractical, but one or more of such defendants raises an issue of title as against a co-defendant or co-defendants, the plaintiff and each defendant whose  title is not denied by any other defendant shall be entitled to a judgment,  that the interest of the plaintiff and of each such defendant whose title is  not questioned be set off by actual partition, if an actual partition be  practicable, and if not, that the real estate be sold and the plaintiff and  each defendant whose title is not questioned be paid his share of the net  proceeds of sale, without waiting for the determination of the question of  title as between the various defendants.  The remainder of the real estate  shall await, or the remainder of the proceeds shall be paid into court to  await, the determination of the question of title before being partitioned or  distributed, as the case may be, to or among the remaining defendants.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-7.  Conclusive effect of proceedings and sale in partition
    When real estate is partitioned in an action in the superior court, and process has been served or notice given as required by the practice of the court, or when the real estate is sold by virtue of an order made upon such partition proceedings, the partition or sale shall, unless reversed or set aside on appeal or other proceedings for review, be binding and conclusive upon  all the cotenants and all persons claiming or to claim an interest in a share,  in reversion or remainder notwithstanding any error or illegality in the  proceedings for partition or sale.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-8.  Conveyance to be recorded;  effect
    A conveyance executed pursuant to sale under an action in partition in the superior court, shall be recorded in the county where the premises are situate,  and shall be a bar, both in law and equity, against all persons interested in  the real estate in any way, who shall have been parties in the action, and  against all other parties claiming by, from or under such parties or any of  them.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-9.  Rights by paramount title saved
    Nothing in this chapter contained shall be so construed as to injure, prejudice, defeat or destroy the estate, right or title of a person claiming the tract of real estate, or any part thereof, or anything therein, by title under any other person or by title paramount or superior to the title of the cotenants among whom partition is to be made.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-10.  General proprietors not affected
    Nothing in this chapter contained shall extend to the partitioning of the real estate held in common by the general proprietors of the eastern or western  divisions of this state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-11.  Proceeds of sale;  disposition
    The money arising from a sale pursuant to this chapter shall be paid to the  parties interested in the real estate sold, their guardians or legal representatives, in proportion to their respective rights therein, deducting from their respective shares the costs and charges which may be allowed and ordered to be retained.  If any party is absent from the state, without such legal representative in this state the proportion of the money due him shall be  invested under the direction and control of the court, for the benefit of such  absent person.

    The court shall require the guardian of any person under the age of 21 years  entitled to a proportion of the moneys arising from a sale pursuant to this  chapter, to give such security by bond to the superior court as the court may  deem sufficient, for the benefit of the minor, conditioned for the faithful  discharge of the trust committed to the guardian.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-12.  Trusts or limitations created by foreign will;  disposition of proceeds of partition sale
    When real estate situate in this state, or an estate therein, devised upon a  trust or subject to a limitation over by way of expectancy or otherwise, by a  person residing in another state at his death, is sold in a partition proceeding, the superior court shall, upon application and notwithstanding the estate of the devisee, trustee as aforesaid, created or passed by the will is subject to a limitation over or is less than an estate in fee simple, direct the proceeds of sale to be paid to such devisee, being trustee as aforesaid, as  by the provisions of the will, under the trust, is entitled to have and hold  the real estate, and to be held, accounted for and disposed of by him in all  respects as directed by the provisions of the will, and not otherwise.

    Nothing herein contained shall relieve the devisee, trustee as aforesaid, from the duty of giving security, in the state of which the testator was a resident at his death, for the faithful execution of such trust in respect to the proceeds of sale, when required so to do by the provisions of the will or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction in that state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-13.  Receipts and discharges;  record by surrogate;  evidence
    When a commissioner or commissioners shall make sale of real estate pursuant  to this chapter and distribute the net proceeds to the persons thereto entitled  by law, the commissioner or commissioners may produce the receipts and  discharges therefor to the surrogate of the county wherein the real estate, or  the more valuable part thereof, is situate.

    The surrogate shall, if the receipts and discharges are proved and acknowledged in the manner in which conveyances of real estate are required to be proved or acknowledged, immediately record the receipts and discharges and such proof or acknowledgment in the book of receipts and discharges in his office.

    The surrogate shall indorse on each receipt and discharge the book and page  where and the time when it was recorded and he shall sign his name thereto.

    Such record, or a certified copy thereof under the hand and seal of the surrogate shall, if it is made to appear that the original receipt and discharge has been lost or that it is not in the power of the party offering the evidence to produce the same, be received in evidence in any court of record in this state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-14.  Fees and costs
    In proceedings pursuant to this chapter clerks and surrogates shall receive  for their services in filing, recording and making copies of the various papers  therein the fees allowed for similar services by the title Fees and Costs, of  the Revised Statutes.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-15.  Lienor not necessary party;  effect of partition on lienor
    A person having a lien, by judgment, decree, mortgage or otherwise, on real  estate, or any part thereof, whereof partition is sought in such an action in  the superior court, shall not, in the first instance, be a necessary party to  the proceedings, and, except as provided in section 2A:56-16 of this title, his  lien shall not be altered, affected or impaired by partition of the real  estate.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-16.  Effect of partition on lienor on undivided interest
    Where a lien mentioned in section 2A:56-15 of this title is on the undivided  interest or estate of a party, the lien, if partition of the real estate is  made, shall thereafter be a charge only on the share assigned to such party,  but such share shall be charged first with its just proportion of the costs of  the proceedings in partition, in preference to any such lien.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-17.  Lienors may be made parties
    The plaintiff in such an action in partition may, at his election, make parties thereto every person having a lien, by mortgage, judgment, decree, devise or otherwise, on the undivided interest or estate of any of the parties.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-18.  Lienors on undivided interests made parties when sale ordered
    Where lienors have not been made parties, the court may, before ordering sale of the premises, on motion of any party, admit as a party a person having a lien, by mortgage, judgment, decree, or otherwise, on the undivided interest,  share or estate of any of the parties, and may thereupon ascertain and  determine whether the shares or interests of the parties to the action, or any  of them, are subject to a lien or encumbrance by mortgage, devise, judgment or  decree or otherwise, and if so, to what liens or encumbrances, and by whom they  are held.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-19.  Proceeds of sale of share subject to liens paid into court
    If it appears by proceedings in such action or if the court shall determine,  that there are any existing liens or encumbrances on the estate, share or  interest of any party named in the proceedings, the court shall, if sale is  ordered, in the order or judgment for sale direct the officer or commissioners,  as the case may be, to bring into court and pay to the clerk thereof the  portion of the moneys arising from the sale of the estate, share or interest of  such party, after first deducting therefrom the portion of the costs, charges  and expenses to which it shall be liable.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-20.  Proceedings to obtain moneys deposited pursuant to section 2A:56-19
    When money is deposited in the court pursuant to section 2A:56-19 of this title, the court may in a summary action brought by a party in interest, either  owner or encumbrancer, direct payment to him of so much thereof as he shall  claim.  Notice of the action shall be served upon each owner of an encumbrance  and, if the plaintiff is an encumbrancer, upon the owner of the share.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-21.  Discharge of encumbrances
    The clerk or other officer of the court by whom an encumbrance is paid off shall procure satisfaction thereof to be acknowledged in the form required by law, and cause the encumbrance to be duly satisfied or canceled of record, and shall defray the expenses thereof out of the portion of the moneys in court belonging to the party by whom the encumbrance was payable, if there be enough for the purpose, but if not, then out of the money due the encumbrancer.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-22.  Parties having unencumbered shares not affected by proceedings
    The proceedings to ascertain and settle the amount of encumbrances as herein  provided shall not affect any other party in the action for partition nor delay  the paying over or investing of moneys to or for the benefit of any party  except the one upon whose share in the premises the encumbrances exist.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-23.  Payment of judgments out of proceeds of sale;  order
    When sale of real estate is ordered pursuant to partition proceedings, and a  creditor has, at any time prior to the distribution of the proceeds of sale,  obtained a judgment against a distributee thereof or his legal representatives,  the court wherein the partition proceeding is pending, may, upon application  thereto by the judgment creditor, order and direct the judgment to be paid out  of the proceeds of the sale of the share against which it would be a lien had  such share been owned by the debtor in severalty.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-24.  Sale free of unpaid debts of ancestor;  disposition of proceeds
    The court ordering a sale of real estate pursuant to partition proceedings may, if it appears that the personal estate of the ancestor from whom such real  estate descended is insufficient to pay his just debts, direct the real estate  to be sold free and clear of the lien or claim of the debts, and make such  order touching the disposition of the proceeds as may be necessary for the  ascertainment and payment of the debts, or the deficiency thereof, from the  proceeds prior to distribution.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-25.  Sale free from dower or curtesy;  order of court;  deed to purchaser
    When real estate is ordered sold in partition proceedings and a person is entitled to a right or estate of dower or curtesy in the premises, or any part or share thereof, the court may, at the time of making the order for the sale of such premises, considering all the circumstances of the case, and having regard to the interests of all persons concerned, determine whether such right or estate shall be excepted from the sale of the premises or sold therewith, and order or enter judgment accordingly.

    If the sale of the premises including such right or estate is ordered, the estate and interest of every such person shall pass thereby, and the purchaser,  his heirs and assigns shall hold the premises free and discharged from all  claims by virtue thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-26.  Compensation to dower or curtesy holder by lump sum or investment
    When a right or estate of dower or curtesy is sold pursuant to section 2A:56-25 of this title, the court shall direct the payment of a gross sum out of the proceeds of the sale of the real estate to the person entitled to such right or estate if he or she shall consent in writing to accept such gross sum.   If no such consent is given, the court shall calculate an amount to be invested for the benefit of the person entitled to such right or estate.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-27.  Real estate subject to inchoate dower or curtesy;  sale; compensation
    In an action for partition of real estate, if a sale is ordered, all inchoate rights of dower or curtesy in the real estate may be sold by order of the court and when so sold such rights shall be forever barred.

    If the person entitled to the right of dower or curtesy signifies her or his  consent thereto in writing, acknowledged as deeds of real estate are required  to be acknowledged, the proceeds of the sale of any share subject to such right  shall be paid over as though no such right existed.  If the tenant in fee and  his wife or her husband, as the case may be, entitled to the inchoate rights,  shall execute a full release and discharge duly acknowledged, the court may  direct payment to them of the portion of the proceeds that would otherwise be  invested in the manner hereinafter provided. However, where the share or  interest of the tenant in fee has been sold by judgment or otherwise or become  subject to a valid lien a payment shall not be so made unless all such parties  in interest join in the release and discharge.

    If no such consent is executed, the court shall direct that one-half of the  net proceeds of the sale of each share subject to such right, or such other  proportion in accordance with the law existing at the time the right of dower  or curtesy became vested, be invested and the income thereof be paid during the  lifetime of the tenant in fee of each such share, to such tenant or to any  persons having liens thereon, and upon the death of the tenant in fee, to the  person entitled to dower or curtesy therein during her or his lifetime.  Upon  the death of the dower or curtesy holder such court shall direct that the  principal of the fund be paid to the heirs at law of the tenant in fee or to  the parties holding liens upon such share or shares at the time of the sale  thereof and remaining unsatisfied at the death of the dower or curtesy holder,  or to such other persons, as equity may require.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-28.  Death of commissioner after sale;  deeds by survivors
    When any of the commissioners die after making a sale pursuant to this chapter, whether before or after the confirmation thereof, the surviving commissioner or commissioners, if any, may make report of the sale and, if the sale is confirmed, execute the proper deeds to the purchasers of the real estate.  A conveyance so made shall be as valid and effectual as if made and executed by all the commissioners.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-29.  Death of commissioner after sale but before deed executed; appointment of administrator to execute and deliver deed
    If, after a sale of real estate by a commissioner or commissioners pursuant  to an order of any court, such commissioner or all such commissioners shall  die, and the sale shall have been approved by the court and the purchase price  paid by the purchaser and a deed shall have been ordered by the court to be  executed to the purchaser, the court may, upon the application of and  satisfactory proofs by any person interested in such real estate, appoint an  administrator, substitutionary or otherwise, to make, execute and deliver the  deed to such purchaser.

    The court shall, before granting such order, take of the administrator a bond with sufficient sureties and such conditions as the court shall think proper.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-30.  Death of purchaser;  deed to successors in interest
    When a purchaser of real estate at a sale thereof by a commissioner or commissioners dies (a) after the sale has been made and the conditions thereof subscribed and agreed to but before it has been confirmed by the court, or (b) after the sale has been confirmed and the deed either has not been delivered to  him prior to his death or having been delivered has been lost or mislaid and is  not of record in the office of the county clerk or register of deeds and  mortgages of the county wherein the real estate is situate, such commissioner  or commissioners shall, the sale being confirmed by the court, execute and  deliver to the heirs or devisees or assigns of the purchaser or the then  present equitable owner of the real estate so sold a deed therefor, subject to  any conditions, restrictions or reservations contained in the order of the  court, if any there be, directing the making of such deed.

    No deed shall be delivered by such commissioner or commissioners until the conditions of sale shall have been fully complied with.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-31.  Effect of deed made pursuant to section 2A:56-30
    A deed made pursuant to section 2A:56-30 of this title when delivered as provided in said section shall have the same force and effect with respect to title as if the purchaser had received a duly executed deed in his lifetime or,  having received it, it had not been lost, as the case may be.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-32.  Existing rights, liens or encumbrances not affected by deed made  pursuant to section 2A:56-30
    No deed authorized to be made by section 2A:56-30 of this title shall be to  the prejudice of any rights in, privileges to, liens or encumbrances upon or  affecting such real estate or any part thereof, if any such exist, at or before  the time of the delivery thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-33.  Absentee cotenant;  right of cotenants to partition
    When real estate is held by cotenants, any of whom shall be presumed to be dead under authority of chapter 40 of Title 3A, Administration of Estates--Decedents and Others (s. 3A:40-1 et seq.), and it is not known whether such owner is living, or whether, if dead, he has devised his interest in the real estate, or who are his heirs at law, the other cotenants, or any of them, may institute an action for partition in the superior court in the same manner as if all the owners of the real estate were known.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-34.  Order;  deed
    The superior court may, in an action pursuant to section 2A:56-33 of this title, make such order or enter such judgment against the owner presumed to be dead and his known heirs and devisees, and also against his unknown heirs, devisees, and personal representatives and his, their or any of their, successors in right, title and interest as if they were known to the court and as if the respective interests in the real estate of all of them were determined.  Any deed to the real estate made pursuant to the judgment and order of the superior court shall convey all the right, title and interest of all the owners thereof, ascertained and unascertained, as completely and effectually as if all the owners were by name made parties to the action and as  such were brought into court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-35.  Disposition of proceeds where person is unknown or absent; refunding bond
    When real estate is sold by virtue of any proceedings in partition in this state, and the residence of a person interested for life or otherwise in the proceeds thereof is not known, or it is not known whether or not a person, who would, if living, be interested for life or otherwise in the proceeds thereof, is living, or when a person interested for life or otherwise in such proceeds, whether or not a resident of this state, is presumed dead by reason of his absence for 7 years, the court having power to distribute such proceeds may, by  its order or judgment:

    a.  Order the share or interest of any such person to be deposited with the  court and invested as provided by law with respect to other funds so deposited;   or it may direct the same to be invested in other securities; or it may  direct and control the custody of the securities which may be taken, from time  to time, for any investment ordered;  and

    b.  Order, at such time as the court may determine, either before or after an investment is ordered, or at any time after the proceeds or any part thereof  has been deposited in court, a distribution of the share or interest, which any  such person would, if living, be entitled to, to or among such person or  persons interested in such share of the proceeds as are known to be living, in  proportion to their respective interests therein, or to and among the person or  persons thereto entitled by law if any such person is dead or is presumed to be  dead and fix the time when it shall be determined or deemed any such person  died;  and

    c.  Order refunding bonds to be given, by or on behalf of any of the persons  to whom any part of any such share shall be distributed, to the clerk of the  court and his successors in office, in such sum and with such condition, with  or without security, as the court may direct.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-36.  Action on refunding bond;  disposition of proceeds
    The custody of the refunding bonds mentioned in section 2A:56-35 of this title shall be in the control of the court.  The court may, on application of a  person who makes it appear to the satisfaction of the court that he is entitled  to the money secured by 1 or more of the refunding bonds, or any part thereof,  order that the money secured thereby be collected for the benefit of such  person, by and in the name of the clerk of the court, who is hereby authorized  to bring action thereon.  The court may by order or judgment dispose of the  money so collected as it may deem just and right and may at any time order and  enter judgment directing the payment out of such share or interest such costs  and expenses as it may deem necessary and expedient.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-37.  Partition of real estate limited over
    The court may order partition through actual division, or, pursuant to section 2A:56-2 of this title, through sale of real estate, in any case where the share of a cotenant therein may be for a less estate than a fee, or may be limited over after an estate for life, or any estate therein, provided the particular tenant or tenants apply for or agree to the partition.  Any person to whom the remainder, reversion or expectancy is limited over shall, whether or not he agrees to the partition, be bound thereby and shall thereafter be entitled only to the part of the real estate set off in severalty upon which his further right is limited or to an interest in a part of the proceeds of the  sale, as the court may direct.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-38.  Sale of share without recourse to sale of tract
    When it appears, by satisfactory proof in a proceeding for partition, that the interest of the owner of a share is such that his share, if actually set apart, might be sold under proceedings for the sale of real estate limited over, such share may, after being actually set apart, be sold by order or judgment in the proceedings for partition rather than in proceedings for the sale of real estate limited over.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-39.  Partition or sale of remainders and reversions;  consent of particular tenant required
    Where there is an estate for life or lives, or other less estate, in real estate situate in this state, and the reversion or remainder in fee is owned by  several persons as cotenants, the court may, upon consent of the particular  tenant or tenants thereto, partition the real estate among the several  cotenants, and the particular tenant or tenants shall thereafter have the same  estate or estates in the respective parts set off in severalty as he or they  had in the whole real estate before it was partitioned.

    If partition of the real estate, or any part thereof, cannot be made without  great prejudice to the cotenants and a sale thereof is ordered instead, the  whole estate, in possession as well as in expectancy, in the real estate or  part thereof that cannot be divided, shall be sold.  Such portion of the  proceeds of the sale shall be paid to the particular tenant or tenants as the  court ordering the partition or sale shall, according to the quantity of his or  their estate or interest therein, ascertain to be just and reasonable.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-40.  Deed to purchaser
    The deed to the purchaser, given pursuant to a sale made under authority of  section 2A:56-37, section 2A:56-38 or section 2A:56-39 of this title, shall  convey the title to the real estate of all the tenants, whether in possession,  remainder, reversion or expectancy.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-41.  Proceeds of sale;  payment or investment;  how invested; income
    When a sale is made pursuant to section 2A:56-37 or 2A:56-38 of this title,  the net proceeds of a share limited over or not held in fee simple shall, under  the order and direction of the superior court be paid either to the tenant of  said life or other estate, during his or her life or otherwise, or be invested  and kept invested, in the name of the superior court of the state of New  Jersey, for the use of the person owning such share, either upon bond secured  by mortgage to the said superior court, upon the property so sold, or any part  thereof, or as otherwise provided by law as to moneys deposited with said  court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-42.  Payments on principal of mortgage;  disposition;  discharge
    When the principal sum, or a part thereof, secured as provided in section 2A:56-41 of this title, is collected, it shall be paid into the superior court,  by payment to the clerk thereof, there to remain until paid out under the order  and direction of the superior court or reinvested, and the clerk and his  sureties shall be responsible therefor.  No other payment shall discharge the  bond and mortgage or authorize a county clerk or register to discharge the  registry on record thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-43.  Final disposition of proceeds
    At such time as the share of real estate so sold would have become vested in  fee simple absolute and the particular estate or estates therein would be determined, as aforesaid, if no such sale thereof had been made, the principal sum or mortgage representing such share in the real estate shall, under order and direction of the superior court, be paid or assigned to the persons, their heirs or assigns, who would have been entitled to the fee simple absolute in such share of real estate, unless said share shall have been theretofore already disposed of and paid by the order of the superior court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-44.  Disposition of proceeds of sale of real estate held in trust
    When sale of real estate limited over is ordered in any partition proceedings in the superior court, and an executor, trustee or administrator with the will annexed, appointed by will or by order of any court, has authority, by the terms of the will, to collect and receive the rents, issues and profits of all or any part of such real estate during the life or lives of any person or persons named in the will, but has no power to sell the real estate or an interest therein, the superior court may, upon such fiduciary furnishing bond to the superior court and filing it in the office of the clerk of the court wherein the will was probated or wherein he received his appointment and in the same manner in which bond is required to be filed upon grant of letters of administration, order that the proceeds of sale representing the real estate, or interest therein, whereof the fiduciary was entitled to collect and receive the rents, issues and profits, be paid over to such fiduciary to be by him held and invested according to law concerning other  trust funds and the income thereof to be by him paid and applied to the persons  entitled to the rents and profits of the real estate represented thereby;  and  upon the death of the persons so entitled to the income, the principal sum  shall be paid to the persons entitled thereto under the provisions of the  will.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:56-45  Short title.
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Uniform Partition of Heirs Property Act."
 
L.2025, c.88, s.1.

2A:56-46  Definitions.
	2.	As used in this act:
 
	"Ascendant" means an individual who precedes another individual in lineage, in the direct line of ascent from the other individual.
 
	"Collateral" means an individual who is related to another individual under the law of intestate succession of this State, but who is not the other individual's ascendant or descendant.
 
	"Descendant" means an individual who follows another individual in lineage in the direct line of descent from the other individual.
 
	"Determination of value" means a court order determining the fair market value of heirs property under section 6 or 10 of this act or adopting the valuation of the property agreed to by all cotenants.
 
	"Heirs property" means real property held in tenancy in common which satisfies all of the following requirements as of the filing of a partition action: (1) there is no agreement in a record binding all the cotenants which governs the partition of the property; (2) one or more of the cotenants acquired title from a relative, whether living or deceased; and (3) any of the following applies: (a) 20 percent or more of the interests are held by cotenants who are relatives; (b) 20 percent or more of the interests are held by an individual who acquired title from a relative, whether living or deceased; or (c) 20 percent or more of the cotenants are relatives.
 
	"Partition by sale" means a court-ordered sale of the entire heirs property, whether by auction, sealed bids, or open-market sale conducted under section 10 of this act.
 
	"Partition in kind" means the division of heirs property into physically distinct and separately titled parcels.
 
	"Record" means information that is inscribed on a tangible medium or that is stored in an electronic or other medium and is retrievable in perceivable form.
 
	"Relative" means an ascendant, descendant, or collateral or an individual otherwise related to another individual by blood, marriage, adoption, or law of this State other than this act.
 
L.2025, c.88, s.2.

2A:56-47  Court determination of heirs property, partition of real property.
	3. a. In an action to partition real property under N.J.S.2A:56-1 et seq., the court shall determine whether the property is heirs property.  In making this determination, the court shall rely on information contained in the pleadings or any other information provided to the court pursuant to the Rules of Court.  If the court determines that the property is heirs property, pursuant to the Rules of Court, the court shall appoint a special master and may, when appropriate, appoint a commissioner or commissioners to partition the property under the partition process set forth in this act unless all of the cotenants otherwise agree in writing.
 
	b.	This act is a supplement to N.J.S.2A:56-1 et seq. and if a partition action is governed by this act, it preempts the provisions of N.J.S.2A:56-1 et seq. that are inconsistent with this act.
 
L.2025, c.88, s.3.

2A:56-48  Plaintiff seeking order of notice by publication, heirs property, conspicuous notice.
	4.	If the plaintiff in a partition action seeks an order of notice by publication and the court determines that the property may be heirs property, the court shall order the plaintiff to post and maintain while the action is pending a conspicuous notice on the property that is the subject of the action in accordance with the Rules of Court. The notice shall state that a partition action has commenced and identify the name and address of the court and the common designation by which the property is known.  The court may require the plaintiff to publish on the notice the name of the plaintiff and the known defendants.
 
L.2025, c.88, s.4.

2A:56-49  Commissioners appointed, impartiality, partition action.
	5.	If the court appoints a commissioner or commissioners pursuant to N.J.S.2A:56-1 et seq. and the Rules of Court, each commissioner shall be disinterested, impartial, and not a party to or a participant in the partition action.
 
L.2025, c.88, s.5.

2A:56-50  Heirs property in partition action, fair market value determination.
	6. a. (1) Except as otherwise provided in subsection b. of this section, if the court determines that the property involved in a partition action is heirs property, the special master shall direct a determination of the property's fair market value, assuming sole ownership of the fee simple estate, be made by a disinterested real estate appraiser licensed in this State.  On completion of the appraisal, the appraiser shall distribute the appraisal to the parties and file a sworn or verified appraisal with the special master.
 
	(2)	Within 30 days after an appraisal is filed, the parties may file objections with the special master.
 
	(3)	Following notice in accordance with the Rules of Court, the special master may conduct an appraisal hearing to determine the fair market value of the property.  In addition to the appraisal, the special master may consider any other evidence offered by a party.  
 
	b.	If all cotenants have agreed to the value of the property or to another method of valuation, the special master may accept that value or the value produced by the agreed method of valuation.
 
L.2025, c.88, s.6.

2A:56-51  Partition by sale, written notice sent to parties, special master.
	7. a. If any cotenant requests partition by sale, after the determination of value under section 6 of this act, the party filing the partition action shall send written notice to the parties and the special master within 30 days that any cotenant, except a cotenant that requested partition by sale, may buy all of the interests of the cotenants that requested partition by sale.
 
	b.	Not later than 45 days after the written notice is sent under subsection a. of this section, any cotenant except a cotenant that requested partition by sale may give written notice to the parties and the special master that it elects to buy all of the interests of the cotenants that requested partition by sale.
 
	c.	The purchase price for each of the interests of a cotenant that requested partition by sale is the value of the entire parcel determined under section 6 of this act multiplied by the cotenant's fractional ownership of the entire parcel.
 
	d.	After expiration of the buyout notice period set in subsection b. of this section, the following shall apply:
 
	(1)	If only one cotenant elects to buy all the interests of the cotenants that requested partition by sale, the cotenant shall notify all the parties and the special master in writing of that fact.
 
	(2)	If more than one cotenant elects to buy all the interests of the cotenants that requested partition by sale, the special master shall allocate the right to buy those interests among the electing cotenants based on each electing cotenant's existing fractional ownership of the entire parcel divided by the total existing fractional ownership of all cotenants electing to buy and send written notice to all the parties of that fact and of the price to be paid by each electing cotenant.
 
	(3)	If no cotenant elects to buy all the interests of the cotenants that requested partition by sale, the special master with notice to the parties shall report in writing to the court.  The court shall resolve the partition action, by order, in accordance with subsections a. and b. of section 8 of this act.
 
	e.	If the parties under paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection d. of this section elect to buy all the interests, the cotenants shall be required to pay their apportioned price within 60 days to the Superior Court Trust Fund, in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Rules of Court. After this date, the following shall apply:
 
	(1)	If all electing cotenants timely pay their apportioned price, the special master shall issue an order reallocating all the interests of the cotenants and authorizing the disbursement of the amounts held by the Superior Court Trust Fund, in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Rules of Court, to the persons entitled to them.
 
	(2)	If no electing cotenant timely pays its apportioned price, the special master shall report to the court in writing with written notice to the parties.  The court shall resolve the partition action, by order, under subsections a. and b. of section 8 of this act as if the interests of the cotenants that requested partition by sale were not purchased.
 
	(3)	If one or more but not all of the electing cotenants fail to pay their apportioned price on time, the electing cotenants that paid their apportioned price of the interest may file a motion with the special master to determine the remaining interests and prices. 
 
	f.	Within 45 days following any order of the special master entered pursuant to paragraph (3) of subsection e. of this section, any cotenant that paid may elect to purchase all of the remaining interest by paying the entire price with notice to the special master.  After this date, the following shall apply:
 
	(1)	If only one cotenant pays the entire price for the remaining interests, the special master shall issue an order reallocating the remaining interest to that cotenant and requiring refund of any excess payments.
 
	(2)	If no cotenant pays the entire price for the remaining interests, the special master shall report to the court in writing with written notice to the parties.  The court shall resolve the partition action under subsection a. and b. of section 8 of this act as if the interests of the cotenants that requested partition by sale were not purchased.
 
	(3)	If more than one cotenant pays the entire price for the remaining interests, the special master shall reapportion the remaining interests among those paying cotenants, based on each paying cotenant's original fractional ownership of the entire parcel divided by the total original fractional ownership of all cotenants that paid the entire price for the remaining interests.  The special master shall report to the court in writing with written notice to the parties. The court shall issue an order reallocating all of the cotenants' interests and requiring refund of any excess payments.
 
	g.	Not later than 30 days after notices have been sent pursuant to subsection a. of this section, any cotenant entitled to buy an interest under this section may request the special master to authorize the sale as part of the pending action of the interests of cotenants named as defendants and served with the complaint, but that did not appear in the action.
 
	h.	If the special master receives a timely request under subsection g. of this section, the special master, after a hearing, may deny the request or authorize the requested additional sale on terms as the special master determines are fair and reasonable, subject to the following limitations:
 
	(1)	A sale authorized under this subsection may occur only after the purchase prices for all interests subject to sale under subsections a. through f. of this section have been paid into the Superior Court Trust Fund and those interests have been reallocated among the cotenants as provided in those subsections. Any funds deposited into the Trust Fund pursuant to this section shall be distributed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Rules of Court; and 
 
	(2)	The purchase price for the interest of a non-appearing cotenant is based on the special master's determination of value under section 6 of this act.
 
L.2025, c.88, s.7.

2A:56-52  Partition in kind recommended, certain circumstances, special master report.
	8. a. If all the interests of all cotenants that requested partition by sale are not purchased by other cotenants pursuant to section 7 of this act, or if after conclusion of the buyout period under that section, a cotenant remains that has requested partition in kind, the special master shall report to the court recommending partition in kind. The court shall order partition in kind, unless the court, after consideration of the factors listed in section 9 of this act, finds that partition in kind will result in great prejudice to the cotenants as a group.  In considering whether to order partition in kind, the court shall approve a request by two or more parties to have their individual interests aggregated.
 
	b.	If the court does not order partition in kind under subsection a. of this section, the court shall order partition by sale pursuant to section 10 of this act or, if no cotenant requested partition by sale, the court shall dismiss the action.
 
	c.	If the court orders partition in kind pursuant to subsection a. of this section, the court may require that one or more cotenants pay one or more other cotenants amounts so that the payments, taken together with the value of the in-kind distributions to the cotenants, make the partition in kind just and proportionate in value to the fractional interests held.
 
	d.	If the court orders partition in kind pursuant to subsection a. of this section, the court shall allocate to the cotenants that are unknown, un-locatable, or the subject of a default judgment, if their interests were not bought out pursuant to section 7 of this act, a part of the property representing the combined interests of these cotenants as determined by the court.
 
L.2025, c.88, s.8.

2A:56-53  Factors in determining great prejudice, cotenants, partition in kind,
	9. a. In determining under subsection a. of section 8 of this act whether partition in kind would result in great prejudice to the cotenants as a group, the court shall consider the following:
 
	(1)	Whether the heirs property practicably can be divided among the cotenants;
 
	(2)	Whether partition in kind would apportion the property in a way that the aggregate fair market value of the parcels resulting from the division would be materially less than the value of the property if it were sold as a whole, taking into account the condition under which a court-ordered sale likely would occur;
 
	(3)	Evidence of the collective duration of ownership or possession of the property by a cotenant and one or more predecessors in title or predecessors in possession to the cotenant who are or were relatives of the cotenant or each other;
 
	(4)	A cotenant's sentimental attachment to the property, including any attachment arising because the property has ancestral or other unique or special value to the cotenant;
 
	(5)	The lawful use being made of the property by a cotenant and the degree to which the cotenant would be harmed if the cotenant could not continue the same use of the property;
 
	(6)	The degree to which the cotenants have contributed their pro rata share of the property taxes, insurance, and other expenses associated with maintaining ownership of the property or have contributed to the physical improvement, maintenance, or upkeep of the property; and
 
	(7)	any other relevant factor as determined by the court.
 
	b.	The court may not consider any one factor in subsection a. of this section to be dispositive without weighing the totality of all relevant factors and circumstances.
 
L.2025, c.88, s.9.

2A:56-54  Sale of heirs property, circumstances, methods.
	10. a. If the court orders a sale of heirs property, the sale shall be an open-market sale unless the court finds that a sale by sealed bids or an auction would be more economically advantageous and in the best interest of the cotenants as a group.
 
	b.	If the court orders an open-market sale and the parties, not later than 10 days after the entry of the order, agree on a real estate broker licensed in this State to offer the property for sale, the court shall appoint the broker and establish a reasonable commission.  If the parties do not agree on a broker, the court shall appoint a disinterested real estate broker licensed in this State to offer the property for sale and shall establish a reasonable commission.  The broker shall offer the property for sale in a commercially reasonable manner at a price no lower than its determination of value pursuant to section 6 of this act and on the terms and conditions established by the court.
 
	c.	If the broker appointed under subsection b. of this section obtains, within a reasonable time, an offer to purchase the property for at least the determination of value: 
 
	(1)	The broker shall comply with the reporting requirements in section 11 of this act; and
 
	(2)	The sale may be completed in accordance with State law other than this act.
 
	d.	If the broker appointed under subsection b. of this section does not obtain, within a reasonable time, an offer to purchase the property for at least the determination of value, the court, after hearing, may:
 
	(1)	Approve the highest outstanding offer, if any;
 
	(2)	Re-determine the value of the property and order that the property continue to be offered for an additional time; or 
 
	(3)	Order that the property be sold by sealed bids or at an auction.
 
	e.	If the court orders a sale by sealed bids or an auction, the court shall set terms and conditions of the sale.  
 
	f.	If a purchaser is entitled to a share of the proceeds of the sale, the purchaser is entitled to a credit against the price in an amount equal to the purchaser's share of the proceeds.
 
L.2025, c.88, s.10.

2A:56-55  Appointed broker, sale of heirs property, open-market sale.
	11. a. Unless otherwise required to do so within a shorter time, a broker appointed under subsection b. of section 10 of this act to offer heirs property by open-market sale shall file a report with the court not later than seven days after receiving an offer to purchase the property for at least the value determined under section 6 or 10 of this act.
 
	b.	The report required by subsection a. of this section shall contain the following information:
 
	(1)	A description of the property to be sold to each buyer;
 
	(2)	The name of each buyer;
 
	(3)	The proposed purchase price;
 
	(4)	The terms and conditions of the proposed sale, including the terms of any owner financing;
 
	(5)	The amounts to be paid to lienholders;
 
	(6)	A statement of contractual or other arrangements or conditions of the broker's commission; and
 
	(7)	Any other material facts relevant to the sale.
 
L.2025, c.88, s.11.

2A:56-56  Relation to "Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act."
	12.	This act modifies, limits, and supersedes the federal "Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act," 15 U.S.C. section 7001 et seq., but does not modify, limit, or supersede section 101(c) of that act, 15 U.S.C. section 7001(c), or authorize electronic delivery of any of the notices described in section 103(b) of that act, 15 U.S.C. section 7003(b).
 
L.2025, c.88, s.12.

2A:57-1.  Relief in superior court where center line does not correspond with division line
    Whenever it shall appear that the center line of any partition wall, heretofore or hereafter erected by the owners of adjoining lands upon the division line of their properties, does not correspond exactly with the division line of the land of such adjoining owners, but that more than half of such partition wall is erected upon the land of 1 of such adjoining owners, neither an action for possession of land nor an action sounding in tort shall be commenced by the owner of the premises upon whose land more than half of such partition wall is erected in reference to such partition wall as long as the same shall stand.  However, the present owner of either of such adjoining lands may institute an action in the superior court for adjudication of the rights of such adjoining owners in such partition wall. The superior court shall hear such action, and shall determine what is a fair sum in gross to be paid by the owner of the premises enjoying the use of more than half of such partition wall to the owner of the land upon which more than half of such partition wall has been erected.  The court shall render a judgment that, upon the payment of such sum in gross to the owner upon whose land such partition wall overlaps, or to any mortgagee or judgment creditor having a lien thereon, as provided by section 2A:57-2 of this title, such partition wall shall stand as erected, as long and in the same manner, as if the center line thereof had been erected upon the center of the division line between such adjoining premises, and the rights of such adjoining owners in such partition wall shall,  in all respects, be the same as if the center of such partition wall had been  erected upon the center of the division line between such lands.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:57-2.  Mortgagee or lien holder as party;  determination and payment of claims
    Any mortgagee or any judgment creditor having a lien upon the land upon which more than one-half of a partition wall is erected may be made party to a proceeding brought pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

    If any such persons, having been made parties to the proceeding, shall fail  to appear, answer and prove their claims, they shall be bound by any judgment  made in the proceeding.  If, however, they shall appear, answer and prove their  claims and demand payment thereof from the gross sum awarded under authority of  section 2A:57-1 of this title, the same shall be paid to them in the order of  their priority, and the amounts so paid shall be deducted from their respective  claims.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:57-3.  Payment of award into court;  effect
    If any person, to whom a gross sum is awarded as provided by section 2A:57-1  or section 2A:57-2 of this title, shall refuse to accept the same when  tendered, together with such costs as may be awarded to him, and to execute and  acknowledge a proper receipt therefor in such form as to make it recordable,  the gross sum and the costs awarded may be paid into court to the clerk  thereof.  Such payment shall have the same effect as if made to and accepted by  the person to whom it was awarded.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:57-4.  Effect of payment of award
    The payment of any gross sum pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not result in any transfer of any title to the land upon which the partition wall is erected, nor shall the continued existence of the wall be the  basis of any title to the land by adverse possession, but the division line  between the lands of the adjoining owners shall remain the same as before any  proceeding was instituted.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:58-10.  Recording of final administrative order on judgment docket
	1.  a.  If an administrative agency of the State has assessed a fixed amount of money as a civil penalty or award after the person against whom the penalty or award was ordered was afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), at the request of the agency the Clerk of the Superior Court or the Clerk of the Superior Court, Law Division, Special Civil Part shall record the final order assessing the penalty or award on the judgment docket of the court.

	b.	The final order of the agency recorded on the judgment docket of the court thereafter shall have the same effect as a judgment of the court.

	L.1999,c.274,s.1.

2A:58-11.  Action to impose penalty, proceedings
	2.  a.  If a statute or ordinance allows a court action to impose a civil penalty or a penalty has been imposed that may not be enforced pursuant to section 1 of this act, an action to impose a penalty shall be brought as provided by this section.

	b.	The action may be brought in the Superior Court.  If the statute that establishes the civil penalty provides that the action may be brought in a municipal court, the action may be brought in any municipal court that has territorial jurisdiction over the action or in the Superior Court.

	c.	The court shall decide the case in a summary manner without a jury unless otherwise provided in the statute imposing the penalty.  The court shall hear testimony on any factual issues, and if it finds that the violation occurred, shall impose a penalty as provided by the statute.  The defendant shall not be precluded from contesting the amount of the penalty.

	d.	Unless precluded by the statute imposing the penalty, informal disposition may be made of any case by stipulation, agreed settlement, or consent order.  Payment of a penalty pursuant to an informal disposition shall be considered a prior violation for the purpose of determining subsequent offender status.

	e.	An action in Superior Court to impose a civil penalty may be joined with an action brought to restrain related violations.

	f.	If a judgment for a civil penalty is rendered against a defendant, payment shall be made to the court and shall be remitted to the State Treasurer of New Jersey, unless other disposition is provided for in the statute imposing the penalty.

	L.1999,c.274,s.2.

2A:58-12.  "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999"
	3.	This chapter shall be known as the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999."  References to the "penalty enforcement law" which this law replaces shall be treated as references to this law.

	L.1999,c.274,s.3.

2A:58A-1.  Short title
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the  "Uniform Transboundary  Pollution Reciprocal Access Law."

     L.1983, c. 570, s. 1, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

2A:58A-2.  Definitions
    As used in this chapter:

    a.   "Reciprocating jurisdiction"  means a state of the United States of America, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, a territory  or possession of the United States of America, which has enacted this law or  provides substantially equivalent access to its courts and administrative  agencies;

    b.   "Person"  means an individual person, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, joint venture, government in its private or public capacity, governmental subdivision or agency, or any other legal entity.

     L.1983, c. 570, s. 1, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

2A:58A-3.  Forum
    An action or other proceeding for injury or threatened injury to property or  person in a reciprocating jurisdiction caused by pollution originating, or that  may originate, in this jurisdiction may be brought in this jurisdiction.

     L.1983, c. 570, s. 1, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

2A:58A-4.  Right to relief
    A person who suffers, or is threatened with, injury to his person or property in a reciprocating jurisdiction caused by pollution originating, or that may originate, in this jurisdiction has the same rights to relief with respect to the injury or threatened injury, and may enforce those rights in this jurisdiction as if the injury or threatened injury occurred in this jurisdiction.

     L.1983, c. 570, s. 1, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

2A:58A-5.  Applicable law
    The law to be applied in an action or other proceeding brought pursuant to this chapter, including what constitutes  "pollution,"  is the law of this jurisdiction excluding choice of law rules.

     L.1983, c. 570, s. 1, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

2A:58A-6.  Equality of rights
    This chapter does not accord a person injured or threatened with injury in another jurisdiction any rights superior to those that the person would have if  injured or threatened with injury in this jurisdiction.

     L.1983, c. 570, s. 1, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

2A:58A-7.  Right additional to other rights
    The right provided in this chapter is in addition to and not in derogation of any other rights.

     L.1983, c. 570, s. 1, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

2A:58A-8.  Uniformity of application and construction
    This chapter shall be applied and construed to carry out its general purpose to make uniform the law with respect to the subject of this chapter among the jurisdictions enacting it.

     L.1983, c. 570, s. 1, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

2A:58B-1.    Definitions 
    Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 

   a.   "Contract modification" means alterations, deviations, additions to, or omissions from the provisions of a contract, or requiring the performance of extra work by a contractor, consultant or others, which, while not included in the original contract, is deemed proper for the completion of the whole work contemplated by the State. 

   b.   "Construction" or "constructing" means, in addition to the usual meanings thereof, acts of construction, reconstruction, replacement, extension, improvement and betterment. 

   c.   "Discharge" means the intentional releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping of hazardous substances into the waters or onto the lands of the State or into waters outside the jurisdiction of the State in accordance with procedures established pursuant to State or federal laws, rules or regulations or a plan approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 

   d.   "Hazardous substances" means such elements and compounds, including petroleum products, which are defined as such by the Department of Environmental Protection, after public hearing, and which shall be consistent to the maximum extent possible with, and which shall include, the list of hazardous substances adopted by the federal Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (Pub.L. 92-500, 33 U.S.C. s. 1251 et seq.) and the list of toxic pollutants designated by Congress or the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to Section 307 of that act; provided, however that sewage and sewage sludge shall not be considered as hazardous substances for purposes of this act. 

   e.   "Person" means public or private corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms, partnerships, joint stock companies, individuals, the United States, the State of New Jersey and any of its political subdivisions or agents. 

   f.   "Petroleum" or "petroleum products" means oil or petroleum of any kind and in any form including, but not limited to, oil, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil, oil sludge, oil refuse, oil mixed with other wastes, crude oils, and substances or additives to be utilized in the refining or blending of crude petroleum or petroleum stock in this State; however, any compound designated by specific chemical name to the list of hazardous substances adopted by the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the "Spill Compensation and Control Act," P.L. 1976, c. 141 (C. 58:10-23.11 et seq.) shall not be considered petroleum or a petroleum product for the purposes of this act, unless such compound is to be utilized in the refining or blending of crude petroleum or petroleum stock in this State. 

   g.   "Services" means work performed by a design or other expert consultant and the services of non-experts who perform work or technical functions on a project for public works, buildings or improvements, including work preliminary to the construction under a contract and work which results in or from a contract modification. 

   h.   "State" means the State and any office, department, division, bureau, board, commission, or agency of the State, but shall not, with the exception of New Jersey Transit Corporation, include any such entity which is statutorily authorized to sue and be sued. 

   i.   "Waters" means the ocean and its estuaries to the seaward limit of the State's jurisdiction, all springs, streams and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries of this State. 

   L. 1987, c. 77, s. 1. 

2A:58B-2.    Limitation on liability 
    The provisions of any other law, rule or regulation to the contrary notwithstanding, the liability of any person constructing public works, buildings or improvements or offering services in connection with the construction of public works, buildings or improvements for the State, which work includes in whole or in part the removal or cleanup of hazardous substances, the discharge of hazardous substances, or the containment of hazardous substances at or near the construction sites, for any injury to a person or property caused by or related to such construction or services, shall be limited to acts or omissions of the person during the course of performing such construction or services which can be shown, based on a preponderance of the evidence, to have been negligent.  For purposes of this act, the demonstration that the acts or omissions of a person performing such construction or services were in accordance with a plan which has been reviewed and approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or the United States Environmental Protection Agency and pursuant to State or federal laws, rules or regulations, and in accordance with generally accepted practices and state-of-the-art scientific knowledge and utilization of the best technology reasonably available at the time of the removal, cleanup, containment or discharge of such hazardous substances shall create a rebuttable presumption that the acts or omissions were not negligent.  This limitation on liability shall be limited to that element of the work which involves the development of a plan for the handling of hazardous substances and the handling of hazardous substances.  This limitation on liability shall also apply to construction and services undertaken in the development of such a plan for approval. 

   L. 1987, c. 77, s. 2. 

2A:58B-3.      Definitions  
  1.  a.  As used in this act:

  

 "Public entity" means this State or any department, public authority, public agency, public commission or any instrumentality of this State authorized by law to make contracts for the making of any public work, but shall not include any county, municipality or instrumentality thereof.  

 "Contractor" means a person, his assignees or legal representatives, with whom a contract with a public entity is made.  

 b.     A covenant, promise, agreement or understanding in, or in connection with or collateral to a contract, agreement or purchase order, to which a public entity is a party, relative to the construction, alteration, repair, maintenance, servicing or security of a building, structure, highway, roadway, railroad, appurtenance and appliance, including moving, demolition, excavating, grading, clearing, site preparation or development of real property connected therewith, purporting to limit a contractor's remedy for delayed performance caused by the public entity's negligence, bad faith, active interference, or other tortious conduct to an extension of time for performance under the contract, is against public policy and is void and unenforceable.  

 c.     Nothing in this section shall be deemed  to void any provisions in a contract, agreement or purchase order which limits a contractor's remedy for delayed performance caused by reasons contemplated by the parties nor shall the negligence of others be imputed to the State.  

 d.     Nothing in this section shall be deemed to void any provision in a contract, agreement or purchase order which requires notice of delays, provides for arbitration or other procedures for settlement or provides for liquidated damages.  

 L.1994,c.80.  

2A:58C-1.    Findings; definitions 
    a.   The Legislature finds that there is an urgent need for remedial legislation to establish clear rules with respect to certain matters relating to actions for damages for harm caused by products, including certain principles under which liability is imposed and the standards and procedures for the award of punitive damages.  This act is not intended to codify all issues relating to product liability, but only to deal with matters that require clarification.  The Legislature further finds that such sponsors' or committee statements that may be adopted or included in the legislative history of this act shall be consulted in the interpretation and construction of this act. 

   b.   As used in this act: 

   (1)  "Claimant" means any person who brings a product liability action, and if such an action is brought through or on behalf of an estate, the term includes the person's decedent, or if an action is brought through or on behalf of a minor, the term includes the person's parent or guardian. 

   (2)  "Harm" means (a) physical damage to property, other than to the product itself; (b) personal physical illness, injury or death; (c) pain and suffering, mental anguish or emotional harm; and (d) any loss of consortium or services or other loss deriving from any type of harm described in subparagraphs (a) through (c) of this paragraph. 

   (3)  "Product liability action" means any claim or action brought by a claimant for harm caused by a product, irrespective of the theory underlying the claim, except actions for harm caused by breach of an express warranty. 

   (4)  "Environmental tort action" means a civil action seeking damages for harm where the cause of the harm is exposure to toxic chemicals or substances, but does not mean actions involving drugs or products intended for personal consumption or use. 

   L. 1987, c. 197, s. 1. 

2A:58C-2.    Liability of manufacturer or seller in product liability action 
    A manufacturer or seller of a product shall be liable in a product liability action only if the claimant proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the product causing the harm was not reasonably fit, suitable or safe for its intended purpose because it:  a. deviated from the design specifications, formulae, or performance standards of the manufacturer or from otherwise identical units manufactured to the same manufacturing specifications or formulae, or b. failed to contain adequate warnings or instructions, or c. was designed in a defective manner. 

   L. 1987, c. 197, s. 2. 

2A:58C-3.    Exemptions from liability 
    a.   In any product liability action against a manufacturer or seller for harm allegedly caused by a product that was designed in a defective manner, the manufacturer or seller shall not be liable if: 

   (1)  At the time the product left the control of the manufacturer, there was not a practical and technically feasible alternative design that would have prevented the harm without substantially impairing the reasonably anticipated or intended function of the product; or 

   (2)  The characteristics of the product are known to the ordinary consumer or user, and the harm was caused by an unsafe aspect of the product that is an inherent characteristic of the product and that would be recognized by the ordinary person who uses or consumes the product with the ordinary knowledge common to the class of persons for whom the product is intended, except that this paragraph shall not apply to industrial machinery or other equipment used in the workplace and it is not intended to apply to dangers posed by products such as machinery or equipment that can feasibly be eliminated without impairing the usefulness of the product; or 

   (3)  The harm was caused by an unavoidably unsafe aspect of the product and the product was accompanied by an adequate warning or instruction as defined in section 4 of this act. 

   b.   The provisions of paragraph (1) of subsection a. of this section shall not apply if the court, on the basis of clear and convincing evidence, makes all of the following determinations: 

   (1)  The product is egregiously unsafe or ultra-hazardous; 

   (2)  The ordinary user or consumer of the product cannot reasonably be expected to have knowledge of the product's risks, or the product poses a risk of serious injury to persons other than the user or consumer; and 

   (3)  The product has little or no usefulness. 

   c.   No provision of subsection a. of this section is intended to establish any rule, or alter any existing rule, with respect to the burden of proof. 

   L. 1987, c. 197, s. 3. 

2A:58C-4.    No liability if warning provided 
    In any product liability action the manufacturer or seller shall not be liable for harm caused by a failure to warn if the product contains an adequate warning or instruction or, in the case of dangers a manufacturer or seller discovers or reasonably should discover after the product leaves its control, if the manufacturer or seller provides an adequate warning or instruction.  An adequate product warning or instruction is one that a reasonably prudent person in the same or similar circumstances would have provided with respect to the danger and that communicates adequate information on the dangers and safe use of the product, taking into account the characteristics of, and the ordinary knowledge common to, the persons by whom the product is intended to be used, or in the case of prescription drugs, taking into account the characteristics of, and the ordinary knowledge common to, the prescribing physician.  If the warning or instruction given in connection with a drug or device or food or food additive has been approved or prescribed by the federal Food and Drug Administration under the "Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act," 52 Stat. 1040, 21 U.S.C. s. 301 et seq. or the "Public Health Service Act," 58 Stat. 682, 42 U.S.C. s. 201 et seq., a rebuttable presumption shall arise that the warning or instruction is adequate.  For purposes of this section, the terms "drug", "device", "food", and "food additive" have the meanings defined in the "Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act." 

   L. 1987, c. 197, s. 4. 

2A:58C-5.    Punitive damages under food and drug product liability, limitation  
    5.  a. (Deleted by amendment, P.L.1995, c.142.)

   b.   (Deleted by amendment, P.L.1995, c.142.)

   c.   Punitive damages shall not be awarded if a drug or device or food or food additive which caused the claimant's harm was subject to premarket approval or licensure by the federal Food and Drug Administration under the "Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act," 52 Stat.1040, 21 U.S.C. s.301 et seq. or the "Public Health Service Act," 58 Stat.682, 42 U.S.C. s.201 et seq. and was approved or licensed; or is generally recognized as safe and effective pursuant to conditions established by the federal Food and Drug Administration and applicable regulations, including packaging and labeling regulations. However, where the product manufacturer knowingly withheld or misrepresented information required to be submitted under the agency's regulations, which information was material and relevant to the harm in question, punitive damages may be awarded. For purposes of this subsection, the terms "drug," "device," "food," and "food additive" have the meanings defined in the "Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act."  

   d.   (Deleted by amendment, P.L.1995, c.142.)

     L.1987,c.197,s.5; amended 1995,c.142,s.8.  

2A:58C-6.    Nonapplicability to environmental tort action 
    The provisions of this act shall not apply to any environmental tort action. 

   L. 1987, c. 197, s. 6. 

2A:58C-7.    Burden of proof rules unaltered 
    Except as otherwise expressly provided in this act, no provision of this act is intended to establish any rule, or alter any existing rule, with respect to the burden of proof in a product liability action. 

   L. 1987, c. 197, s. 7. 

2A:58C-8.    Definitions relative to actions against product sellers  
    1.   As used in this act:

  

   "Manufacturer" means (1) any person who designs, formulates, produces, creates, makes, packages, labels or constructs any product or component of a product; (2) a product seller with respect to a given product to the extent the product seller designs, formulates, produces, creates, makes, packages, labels or constructs the product before its sale; (3) any product seller not described in paragraph (2) which holds itself out as a manufacturer to the user of the product; or (4) a United States domestic sales subsidiary of a foreign manufacturer if the foreign manufacturer has a controlling interest in the domestic sales subsidiary.  

   "Product liability action" means any claim or action brought by a claimant for harm caused by a product, irrespective of the theory underlying the claim, except actions for harm caused by breach of an express warranty.  

   "Product seller" means any person who, in the course of a business conducted for that purpose:  sells; distributes; leases; installs; prepares or assembles a manufacturer's product according to the manufacturer's plan, intention, design, specifications or formulations; blends; packages; labels; markets; repairs; maintains or otherwise is involved in placing a product in the line of commerce.  The term "product seller" does not include:  

   (1)  A seller of real property; or 

  

   (2)  A provider of professional services in any case in which the sale or use of a product is incidental to the transaction and the essence of the transaction is the furnishing of judgment, skill or services; or  

   (3)  Any person who acts in only a financial capacity with respect to the sale of a product.  

   L.1995,c.141,s.1.  

2A:58C-9.    Affidavit by seller indentifying manufacturer; product seller liability  
    2.  a.  In any product liability action against a product seller, the product seller may file an affidavit certifying the correct identity of the manufacturer of the product which allegedly caused the injury, death or damage.  

   b.   Upon filing the affidavit pursuant to subsection a. of this section, the product seller shall be relieved of all strict liability claims, subject to the provisions set forth in subsection d. of this section.  Due diligence shall be exercised in providing the plaintiff with the correct identity of the manufacturer or manufacturers.  

   c.   The product seller shall be subject to strict liability if:

  

   (1)  The identity of the manufacturer given to the plaintiff by the product seller was incorrect.  Once the correct identity of the manufacturer has been provided, the product seller shall again be relieved of all strict liability claims, subject to subsection d. of this section; or  

   (2)  The manufacturer has no known agents, facility, or other presence within the United States; or  

   (3)  The manufacturer has no attachable assets or has been adjudicated bankrupt and a judgment is not otherwise recoverable from the assets of the bankruptcy estate.  

   d.   A product seller shall be liable if:

  

   (1)  The product seller has exercised some significant control over the design, manufacture, packaging or labeling of the product relative to the alleged defect in the product which caused the injury, death or damage; or  

   (2)  The product seller knew or should have known of the defect in the product which caused the injury, death or damage or the plaintiff can affirmatively demonstrate that the product seller was in possession of facts from which a reasonable person would conclude that the product seller had or should have had knowledge of the alleged defect in the product which caused the injury, death or damage; or  

   (3)  The product seller created the defect in the product which caused the injury, death or damage.  

   e.   The commencement of a product liability action based in whole or in part on the doctrine of strict liability against a product seller shall toll the applicable statute of limitations with respect to manufacturers who have been identified pursuant to the provisions of subsection a. of this section.  

   L.1995,c.141,s.2.  

2A:58C-10.   Definitions relative to health care providers  
    1.   As used in this act:

  

   "Health care provider" or "provider" means a provider of health care services and includes, but is not limited to, health care professionals, hospitals, nursing homes and other health care facilities.  

   "Health care service" means a service or product sold by a health care provider and includes, but is not limited to, hospital, medical, surgical, dental, hearing and vision services or products.  

   "Medical device" or "device" means a "device" as defined in subsection (h) of section 201 of the "Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act," 52 Stat. 1040, (21 U.S.C. s.321).  

   L.1995,c.143,s.1.  

2A:58C-11.   Liability of health care providers for medical devices  
    2.   In any product liability action against a health care provider for harm allegedly caused by a medical device that was manufactured or designed in a defective manner, or for harm caused by a failure to warn of a danger related to the use of a medical device, the provider shall not be liable unless:  (1)  the provider has exercised some significant control over the design, manufacture, packaging or labeling of the medical device relative to the alleged defect in the device which caused the injury, death or damage; or (2)  the provider knew or should have known of the defect in the medical device which caused the injury, death or damage, or the plaintiff can affirmatively demonstrate that the provider was in possession of facts from which a reasonable person would conclude that the provider had or should have had knowledge of the alleged defect in the medical device which caused the injury, death or damage; or (3)  the provider created the defect in the medical device which caused the injury, death or damage.  

   L.1995,c.143,s.2.  

2A:58D-1  Invasion of privacy, liability, civil action; damages, costs.
	2. a. An actor who, in violation of section 1 of P.L.2003, c.206 (C.2C:14-9), photographs, films, videotapes, records, or otherwise reproduces in any manner, the image of another person who is engaged in an act of sexual penetration or sexual contact, the exposed intimate parts of another person, or the undergarment-clad intimate parts of another person shall be liable to that person, who may bring a civil action in the Superior Court.
 
	b.	An actor who, in violation of section 1 of P.L.2003, c.206 (C.2C:14-9), discloses any photograph, film, videotape, recording or any other reproduction of the image of another person who is engaged in an act of sexual penetration or sexual contact, the exposed intimate parts of another person, or the undergarment-clad intimate parts of another person shall be liable to that person, who may bring a civil action in the Superior Court.  For purposes of this section: (1) "disclose" means sell, manufacture, give, provide, lend, trade, mail, deliver, transfer, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit, advertise, offer, share, or make available via the Internet or by any other means, whether for pecuniary gain or not; and (2) "intimate parts" has the meaning ascribed to it in N.J.S.2C:14-1.
 
	c.	The court may award:
 
	(1)	actual damages, but not less than liquidated damages computed at the rate of $1,000 for each violation of this act;
 
	(2)	punitive damages upon proof of willful or reckless disregard of the law;
 
	(3)	reasonable attorney's fees and other litigation costs reasonably incurred; and
 
	(4)	such other preliminary and equitable relief as the court determines to be appropriate.
 
A conviction of a violation of section 1 of P.L.2003, c.206 (C.2C:14-9) shall not be a prerequisite for a civil action brought pursuant to this section.
 
	L.2003, c.206, s.2; amended 2016, c.2, s.2.

2A:58D-2  Definitions relative to invasion of privacy relative to first responders; violations, penalties.
 
 	1. a. As used in this section:

	"Disclose" means to sell, manufacture, give, provide, lend, trade, mail, deliver, transfer, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit, advertise, or offer.
 
	"First responder" means a law enforcement officer, paid or volunteer firefighter, paid or volunteer member of a duly incorporated first aid, emergency, ambulance, or rescue squad association, or any other individual who, in the course of his employment, is dispatched to the scene of a motor vehicle accident or other emergency situation for the purpose of providing medical care or other assistance.
 
	b.	A first responder who is dispatched to or is otherwise present at the scene of a motor vehicle accident or other emergency situation, for the purpose of providing medical care or other assistance, shall not photograph, film, videotape, record, or otherwise reproduce in any manner, the image of a person being provided medical care or other assistance, except in accordance with applicable rules, regulations, or operating procedures of the agency employing the first responder.
 
	c.	A first responder shall not disclose any photograph, film, videotape, record, or other reproduction of the image of a person being provided medical care or other assistance at the scene of a motor vehicle accident or other emergency situation without the prior written consent of the person, or the person's next-of-kin if the person cannot provide consent, unless that disclosure was for a legitimate law enforcement, public safety, health care, or insurance purpose or pursuant to a court order.
 
	d.	A person who knowingly violates the provisions of subsection c. of this section shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense.
 
	e.	In addition to any other right of action or recovery otherwise available under the laws of this State, a first responder who knowingly violates the provisions of subsection b. or c. of this section shall be liable to the person whose image was taken or disclosed, who may bring a civil action in the Superior Court. 
 
	The court may award:
 
	(1)	actual damages, but not less than liquidated damages computed at the rate of $1,000 for each violation of this act;
 
	(2)	punitive damages upon proof of willful or reckless disregard of the law;
 
	(3)	reasonable attorney's fees and other litigation costs reasonably incurred; and
 
	(4)	such other preliminary and equitable relief as the court determines to be appropriate.
 
	L.2012, c.28, s.1.

2A:58D-3  Findings, declarations relative to disclosure of certain personal identifying information.
 	1.	The Legislature finds and declares:

	a.	There is a longstanding tradition in the United States and New Jersey of providing the public with access to information pertaining to the operations of the criminal justice system, including information about those arrested, accused, charged, prosecuted, and convicted of criminal offenses.
 
	b.	The public has a right to information concerning the functioning of the criminal justice system and those who have committed, or are accused of committing, criminal offenses.  Because there is an important public interest in promoting transparency in our criminal justice system, an individual's right to privacy may yield to this interest.  However, it is necessary to be sensitive to the interests in avoiding undue humiliation of innocent defendants and in promoting rehabilitation of convicted offenders.  These latter considerations are heightened in light of the potentially unlimited duration and worldwide dissemination of such information once published on the Internet.
 
	c.	Some unscrupulous profiteers have sought to take advantage of the availability of criminal justice system information with the potential to harm or embarrass those arrested for, accused of, or prosecuted for a criminal offense.  These private entities engage in an extortionate practice of publishing, or threatening to publish, on an Internet website information such as mug shots or rap sheets, unless the subject agrees to pay a fee to remove or prevent Internet publication of the potentially embarrassing picture or information.  While the law authorizes public access to this type of information, such companies obtain these governmental records with the true intent of coercing subjects to pay the website operator to remove the information in order to avoid embarrassment, adverse employment or social consequences, and other repercussions.  These companies do not obtain this information for any purpose related to the public's right to know or maintaining the integrity of the criminal justice system.
 
	d.	This practice differs materially from the conduct of private companies that obtain or review publicly-available criminal history background information provided through governmental databases, for purposes of conducting criminal background checks to determine if an individual is suitable for employment, volunteer work, or for similar purposes. Companies performing legitimate criminal background checks do not attempt to extort payment from the subjects of the search to refrain from disclosing to the inquiring party true and accurate criminal history background information.  It is the element of extortionate profiteering that makes this noxious practice objectionable and contrary to the public policy of this State.
 
	e.	It is not the Legislature's intent to limit public access to this type of information or its publication, or to impinge on the interests of free speech or transparency.  Public access and disclosure are not the problem that demands redress, but rather the conduct of seeking to profit by threatening exposure of such information.
 
	f.	Accordingly, it is altogether fitting and proper to protect the citizens of New Jersey from this form of exploitation by establishing a civil cause of action  and civil penalty to discourage the solicitation of pecuniary benefit by threatening to disclose criminal justice system information which identifies or presents such information in a context that identifies the person as having been arrested, charged, prosecuted, or convicted of a criminal offense.
 
	L.2017, c.123, s.1.

2A:58D-4  Violations, penalties.
 	2. a.	 (1)	A person shall not solicit or accept any pecuniary benefit in consideration for refraining from the disclosure of personal identifying information of any person which identifies, or is presented in a context which identifies, the person as having been arrested, charged, prosecuted, or convicted of any criminal offense including, but not limited to, criminal history record background information and any photograph of the person taken at the time of arrest.
 
	(2)	A person who commits a violation of paragraph (1) of this subsection shall not disclose or cause to be disclosed personal identifying information of any person which identifies, or is presented in a context which identifies, the person as having been arrested, charged, prosecuted, or convicted of any criminal offense including, but not limited to, criminal history record background information and any photograph of the person taken at the time of arrest.
 
	b.	For purposes of this section:
 
	"Disclosure" means publication, distribution, circulation, dissemination, presentation, exhibition, advertisement, or offering by any means including, but not limited to, the Internet. 
 
	"Pecuniary benefit" means a benefit in the form of money, property, commercial interests, or anything else the primary significance of which is economic gain.
 
	"Personal identifying information" means any name, address, or other information that may be used, alone or in conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific individual, and any photographic image, reproduction, or other depiction of a person.
 
	c.	In addition to any other right of action or recovery otherwise available under the laws of this State, a person who knowingly violates the provisions of subsection a. of this section shall be liable to the person whose personal identifying information was the subject of the violation, who may bring a civil action in the Superior Court.
 
	The court may award:
 
	(1)	actual damages, but not less than liquidated damages computed at the rate of $1,000 for each violation of paragraph (1) of subsection a. of this section and $10,000 for each violation of paragraph (2) of subsection a. of this section;
 
	(2)	punitive damages upon proof of willful or reckless disregard of the law;
 
	(3)	reasonable attorney's fees and other litigation costs reasonably incurred; and
 
	(4)	any other preliminary and equitable relief the court determines to be appropriate.
 
	d.	In addition to the liability provided under subsection c. of this section and any other right of action or recovery otherwise available under the laws of this State, a person violating the provisions of subsection a. of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $500 for each act in violation of paragraph (1) of subsection a. of this section and a civil penalty of not less than $1,000 for each act in violation of paragraph (2) of subsection a. of this section.  The penalty prescribed by this section shall be collected and enforced by summary proceedings under the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	L.2017, c.123, s.2.

2A:60-1.  Rights and remedies of reversioner or remainderman as against tenant in dower, by curtesy or for life
    Sections 1 and 2 of an act entitled  "An act granting relief, in certain cases, against collusive judgments and wrongful alienation of lands," passed March 2, 1798 [Rev. 1877, p. 1407, s.s. 1, 2 (C. S. p. 1524, s.s. 1, 2) ] saved from repeal.  [These sections save rights of certain tenants from effect of certain collusive judgments.]

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:60-2.  Appeal by reversioner or remainderman from judgment against tenant  in dower or by curtesy or for life;  restoration of estate affected
    Section 12 of an act entitled  "An act granting relief, in certain cases, against collusive judgments and wrongful alienations of lands" , passed March 2, 1798 [Rev. 1877, p. 1409, s. 12 (C. S. p. 1526, s. 12) ] saved from repeal. [This section permits certain persons to appeal from certain collusive judgments.]

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:61-1.  Advertisements of sales;  publication in newspapers;  fees
    When any sheriff, coroner, master, executor, administrator, guardian, commissioner, auditor or other officer or person is authorized or required by any public statute or the direction of any court of competent jurisdiction in this State to make sales of real estate, he shall, unless otherwise specially directed or authorized by law, before making the sale, give notice of the time and place of the sale by public advertisement, signed by himself, and set up in  the office of the sheriff of the county or counties where the real estate is  located and at the premises to be sold, at least 3 weeks before the time appointed for the sale.  The notice need not be set up at any other place. The  notice of sale shall include either a diagram of the premises or a concise  statement indicating the municipality, the tax lot and block and where  appropriate, the street and street number, and the dimensions of the premises,  as well as the number of feet to the nearest cross street.  The notice of sale  shall state that the diagram or concise description does not constitute a full  legal description of the premises, and shall state where the full legal  description can be found.

    Such officer or person shall also cause the notice to be published 4 times,  at least once a week, during 4 consecutive weeks, in two newspapers, to be by  him designated,

    (a) both printed and published in the county where the real estate to be sold is located, one of which shall be either a newspaper published at the county seat of the county or a newspaper published in the municipality in the county having the largest population according to the latest census, or

    (b) one printed and published in the county and one circulating in the county, if only one daily newspaper is printed and published in the county, or

    (c) one published at the county seat and one circulating in the county, if no daily newspaper is published in the county, or

    (d) both circulating in the county, if no newspapers are printed and published in the county.

    The first publication shall be at least 21 days prior and the last publication not more than 8 days prior to the time appointed for the sale of the real estate.

    Whenever, in the opinion of any such officer or person, the ends of justice  shall require it, or the sale being conducted by him will be benefited thereby,  the notice of sale may be published in three newspapers instead of two as  required by the second paragraph of this section, if there be that number  printed and published in the county where the real estate to be sold is  located.

    The officer or person so advertising in the newspapers shall be entitled therefor, in addition to his other fees, to the sum of $1.50, except where it is otherwise specifically provided.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1953, c. 209, p. 1565, s. 1;  L.1957, c. 198, p. 703, s. 1, eff.  Dec. 18, 1957;  L.1968, c. 42, s. 1, eff. May 14, 1968;  L.1979, c. 364, s. 1.

2A:61-2.  Publication in foreign language newspaper
    The officer or other person mentioned in section 2A:61-1 of this title having charge of any sale of real estate may, whenever the sale, in his opinion, will be promoted by publication in such a newspaper, in addition to the publications required by section 2A:61-1, select a newspaper printed in a foreign language, circulating in the neighborhood of the property to be sold. The same fees shall be allowed and paid for publication in a newspaper printed and published in a foreign language as in other cases.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:61-3.  Judgment or order founded upon equitable cause of action; public or private sale
    When a sale of real estate is ordered by the superior court in any action, wherein the order or judgment under which such sale is ordered, is founded upon  a cause of action of an equitable nature, except mortgage foreclosure sales,  the officer or person authorized or directed to make the sale may, in his  discretion, make the same at public or private sale and on such terms as he may  deem to be most advantageous to the parties concerned therein.  A private sale  shall not be valid until it is confirmed by the court upon a report of the  terms thereof by the officer or person making the sale.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:61-4.  Times and places of sale;  announcement of description of real estate to be sold
    Any officer or person mentioned in section 2A:61-1 of this title, making a sale of real estate governed by this chapter, shall, at the time and place appointed therefor, between the hours of 12 and 5 in the afternoon, if requested by any person interested in the sale of the real estate to be sold, read the description of the real estate to be sold by metes and bounds, or, in the absence of such a request, the officer or person making the sale shall announce the street and number, or streets and numbers, of the real estate to be sold, or the block and lot number or numbers by which such real estate is designated on the taxing maps of the municipality or municipalities in which the same is situate, if the same is not identified by a street and number or streets and numbers on such taxing maps, and where there is no street number or  lot and block number, the officer or person making the sale may announce such  description or designation as to him may be deemed sufficient, and sell such  real estate at public vendue to the highest bidder.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:61-5.  Adjournments of sales
    Any officer or person mentioned in section 2A:61-1 of this title making a sale of real estate governed by this chapter may, subject only to such limitations or restrictions upon the exercise of such power as may be specially  provided by law, adjourn the same from time to time.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:61-6.  Publication of notices of adjournments;  fee
    If a sale of real estate governed by this chapter is adjourned for more than  1 week, notice thereof shall be published once within 1 week after the date of  the adjournment in the newspapers in which the original notice of the sale was  published unless the original advertisement of the sale specifically reserved  the right to adjourn the sale, in which case no further notice need be  published.  The adjournment notice need only consist of a statement of the parties to the cause and the time and place to which the sale is adjourned. In  publishing any adjournment it shall not be necessary to continue the publication of the original advertisement of the sale.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:61-7.  Lien of debts of ancestor, sale free from;  order touching disposition of proceeds
    In all actions in the superior court, in the nature of a proceeding in equity, for the sale of real estate, the court may, when the personal estate of  the ancestor from whom the real estate descended is insufficient to pay his  just debts, direct such real estate to be sold free from the lien of such debts, and to make such order touching the disposition of the proceeds of the sale as may be necessary for the ascertainment and payment of such deficiency thereout before the distribution of the fund.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:61-8.  Sales confirmed notwithstanding defects or irregularities in publication of advertisements
    All sales of real estate made by virtue of any order or judgment of any court of record of this state may, notwithstanding any defect or irregularity in the publication of the advertisement of the sale, be confirmed by the court,  if the officer making the sale certifies, under oath, that the sale was  otherwise regular and that, in his judgment, the real estate was sold for a  fair price, and the court is satisfied by the affidavit that the defect or irregularity in the publication was not injurious to the parties in interest.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:61-9.  Affidavit of selling officer indorsed on or added to conveyances
    When a sheriff or other officer shall make a sale of real estate pursuant to  a judgment, execution or order of any court, he shall make and sign an affidavit indorsed on or added to the conveyance of the real estate sold, to the following effect:

     "I, A. B., sheriff, et cetera, do solemnly swear that the real estate described in this deed made to C. D., was sold by me by virtue of an execution (or as the case may be) as is therein recited, that the money ordered to be paid has not been paid, to my knowledge or belief, that the time and place of the sale of said real estate were duly advertised as required by law, and that the same was sold to a bona fide purchaser for the best price that could be obtained.

     A. B., Sheriff.

     Sworn before me, one of the, et cetera, on this          day of ,  19 A. D., and I having examined the deed above mentioned do approve the  same and order it to be recorded as a good and sufficient conveyance of the  real estate therein described."

    The affidavit shall be taken before a judge of the superior court or an attorney-at-law of this state, for which taking the attorney before whom the affidavit is taken shall be entitled to a fee of $1.

    If there has been a new sheriff elected and qualified, or where the sheriff  may have been incapacitated by death, resignation or otherwise, after a sale  made by the former or incapacitated sheriff, the affidavit required by this  section may be made by such former or incapacitated sheriff or by the deputy of  such former or incapacitated sheriff.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:61-10.  Record of conveyance with affidavit indorsed or added; effect
    Any conveyance mentioned in section 2A:61-9 of this title, with the affidavit required by said section 2A:61-9 indorsed thereon or added thereto, may, when approved by a judge of the superior court or an attorney-at-law of this state, be recorded as if duly acknowledged;  and such conveyance or the record thereof, or a certified copy of such record, shall be evidence of a good  and valid sale and conveyance of the real estate conveyed thereby, as if the  same had been reported to and approved by the court in pursuance of whose judgment, execution or order the same was made.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:61-11.  Defects or imperfections in affidavits of selling officer
    All affidavits indorsed on or added to deeds as required by law by any sheriff, or other officer or person, shall, notwithstanding any errors or imperfections in such affidavits, be taken and held to be good and sufficient in law, but only if such deeds shall have been recorded for a period of at least 6 years.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:61-12.  Effect of recitals in conveyances by selling officer
    The conveyance of any real estate sold by a sheriff, or other officer or person, in pursuance of a decree, judgment, execution or order of a court, heretofore or hereafter made and duly acknowledged or approved, and the record thereof, or a certified copy of such record, shall be good and sufficient prima  facie evidence of the truth of the recitals in such deed or conveyance contained.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:61-13.  Conveyances by public or municipal authority;  collateral attack
    The provisions of section 2A:61-12 of this title shall apply to all deeds, declarations of sale and conveyance, duly acknowledged or proved, heretofore or  hereafter made by or under the authority of any public or municipal authority,  authorized or empowered by any law of this state to make and execute or to  direct the making and execution of any deed, declaration of sale or conveyance;   and the proceedings upon which such deeds, declarations of sale and  conveyances are founded shall not be subject to be questioned collaterally, but  may be, at any time, reviewed by a proceeding in lieu of prerogative writ or  other proper proceedings.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:61-14.  Confirmatory deeds on loss of originals
    Whenever a deed or conveyance, given by an officer or other person mentioned  in section 2A:61-1 of this title pursuant to a sale made by him, is lost before  the recording thereof, the person entitled to the deed or conveyance may apply  to the court under whose direction the sale was made and the deed or conveyance  made and delivered for a confirmatory deed or conveyance.  The court shall,  upon being satisfied that the original deed or conveyance has been so lost,  order the officer who made the same to make a confirmatory deed or conveyance  to the grantee named in the lost deed or conveyance for the real estate sold.   The confirmatory deed or conveyance shall recite the fact of the loss of the  original deed or conveyance and the order for the confirmatory deed or  conveyance and shall, in other respects, be in the same form as the original  deed or conveyance, and shall be as good and valid and have the same force and  effect as the original deed or conveyance.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:61-15.  Fees for confirmatory deed
    The officer making the confirmatory deed or conveyance shall be entitled to  the same fee therefor as he was entitled to for making the original deed or  conveyance.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:61-16.  Relief to bidder at sale on showing defect in title or lien or encumbrance on property sold
    Any purchaser of real estate at any public sale, held by any officer or person mentioned in section 2A:61-1 of this title, except at sales under general execution and actual levy thereunder, or for unpaid taxes or municipal liens, shall be entitled to be relieved from his bid if, before delivery of the  deed, he shall satisfy the court by whose authority such sale was made of the  existence of any substantial defect in or cloud upon the title of the real  estate sold, which would render such title unmarketable, or of the existence of  any lien or encumbrance thereon, unless a reasonable description of the estate  or interest to be sold, and of the defects in title and liens or encumbrances  thereon, with the approximate amount of such liens and encumbrances, if any, be  inserted in the notices and advertisements required by law, and in the  conditions of sale;  but, if the court shall direct any lien or encumbrance not described, and which is due and payable, to be paid out of the proceeds of sale, the purchaser shall not then be relieved by reason of such lien or encumbrance.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:61-17.  Bona fide purchasers protected after 7 years
    When a conveyance of any real estate sold by a sheriff, or other officer or  other person mentioned in section 2A:61-1 of this title, pursuant to a judgment, execution or order of any court, shall hereafter be duly made and acknowledged, or approved as provided for in this chapter, or shall have been heretofore duly made and acknowledged more than 7 years before the same shall be offered in evidence, no evidence shall be received or be of any force or avail against any bona fide purchaser holding under such conveyance, or his heirs or assigns, that the execution had not been duly recorded before it was delivered to the sheriff, or that the sale of such real estate had not been duly advertised, or that the money recovered or ordered to be made by the judgment, or execution, had been paid before the sale, unless the payment or satisfaction of such judgment, or execution shall have been entered of record before such sale.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:61-18.  Recorded deeds by sheriff or other officer valid notwithstanding  defects in writ;  record as evidence
    Any deed or deeds of conveyance heretofore or hereafter made and delivered by any sheriff, former sheriff, or other officer of the court, of any real estate, which shall have stood unchallenged on record for a period of 1 year from the date of record thereof, shall be deemed a valid deed for the conveyance of the property therein described, notwithstanding any informality or imperfection in the writ pursuant to the terms of which such sale was made or variance between the date of said deed and the date of acknowledgment or proof of said deed, provided such sale shall have been duly confirmed by the court pursuant to whose writ such sale shall have been made.

    Any such deed, or the record thereof, or a certified copy of such record, shall be admissible in evidence in all cases and in all courts of this state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:61-19.  Distribution of proceeds of sales of or compensation for real estate paid into court
    Whenever any real estate shall be sold or taken upon compensation, pursuant  to any competent judicial authority, or any law of this state, and the proceeds  of such sale or the compensation for such taking, shall be paid into any court  of this state, pursuant to such authority or law, such court shall order and  direct such payment or payments, in gross, to be made out of such proceeds, as  compensation to such person or persons as shall be entitled to any vested,  certain and absolute estate or interest, less than the fee simple, of, in, and  to such real estate, or any part thereof, as such court shall deem a just and  reasonable satisfaction for such estate or interest, and as the person so  entitled shall consent, in writing, to accept in lieu thereof;  but in case any  such person shall fail to give such consent, before the making of the order for  the distribution of such proceeds or compensation, then such court shall  ascertain and determine what proportion of such proceeds or compensation will  be just and reasonable to be reserved for the benefit of such person, and shall  order the same to be put out at interest on sufficient security of real estate, or invested in legal securities or to be paid into court, under the direction  and control of such court, for the benefit of such person.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:61-20.  Payment of proceeds of sales of or for real estate into superior  court;  effect
    Whenever any real estate has heretofore been or shall hereafter be sold or taken upon compensation pursuant to any competent judicial authority or any law  of this state, and the proceeds of such sale or the compensation for such taking have been or shall be paid into any court of this state other than the superior court, pursuant to such authority or law, and it shall appear to the court wherein the same have been or shall be paid that the interests of any person or persons entitled thereto, or any part thereof, require or will be substantially promoted by the payment into the superior court of so much or such proportion of such proceeds or compensation as the court wherein such money is paid may determine belong to or should be reserved for the benefit of such person, it shall be lawful for such court to order the same paid into the superior court, to be thence disposed of as ordered and directed by the superior court.

    Upon filing such order in the superior court and payment of such money thereunder, such person or persons shall, so far as relates to such property or  money and its income, be considered a ward of the superior court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:61-21.  Surplus from sale of real estate deposited in court;  use to pay  judgments
    Whenever there shall be a surplus from the sale of real estate sold by virtue of any order or judgment, and such surplus shall be deposited in the court ordering the sale or in which the judgment was entered, and any person shall hold a judgment in any of the courts of this state against the owner of such real estate or any other person who shall be entitled to such surplus, or any part thereof, the court shall, upon affidavit filed by or in behalf of such  judgment creditor, and notice given as required under the practice and procedure of the superior court, and upon proof made to the satisfaction of the  court that the residence of the person entitled to such surplus is unknown and  cannot be ascertained, order and direct such surplus to be applied upon such  judgment, although such creditor was not made defendant in such action, in  which case it shall not be necessary that the judgment creditor be admitted as  a party defendant in such cause, but such affidavit shall be entitled in the  action out of which such surplus was realized.  The proof required by this  section may be made by affidavit, or otherwise, as the court shall direct.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:61A-1  Definitions.
 
	1.	As used in this act:

	a.	"Commission" means compensation accruing to a sales representative for payment by a principal, earned through the last day on which services were performed by the sales representative, the rate of which is expressed as a percentage of the dollar amount of orders or sales or as a specified amount per order or per sale.
 
	b.	"Principal" means a person, including a person who does not have a permanent or fixed place of business in this State, who manufactures, produces, imports or distributes a product or offers a service; contracts with an independent sales company or other person to solicit orders for the product or service; and compensates those companies or other persons who solicit orders, in whole or in part, by commission.
 
	c.	"Sales representative" means an independent sales company or other person, other than an employee, who contracts with a principal to solicit orders and who is compensated, in whole or in part, by commission but shall not include one who places orders or purchases exclusively for his own account for resale.
 
	d.	"Day" means a calendar day including Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays.
 
	e.	"Termination" means the end of services performed by the sales representative for the principal by any means.
 
	f.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2007, c.289.)
 
	L.1990, c.93, s.1; mended 2007, c.289, s.1.

2A:61A-2  Payment to sales representative after termination of contract.
 
	2.	When a contract between a principal and a sales representative to solicit orders is terminated, the commissions and other compensation earned as a result of the representative relationship and unpaid shall become due and payable within 30 days of the date the contract is terminated or within 30 days of the date commissions are due, whichever is later. 
 
	A sales representative shall receive commissions on goods ordered up to and including the last day of the contract even if accepted by the principal, delivered, and paid for after the end of the agreement.  The commissions shall become due and payable within 30 days after payment would have been due under the contract if the contract had not been terminated.
 
	L.1990, c.93, s.2; amended 2007, c.289, s.2.

2A:61A-3  Liability to sales representative for violation; liability for frivolous court action.
  
	3. a. A principal who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of section 2 of this act shall be liable to the sales representative for all amounts due the sales representative, exemplary damages in an amount of three times the amount of commissions owed to the sales representative and all attorney's fees actually and reasonably incurred by the sales representative in the action and court costs.
 
	b.	Where the court determines that an action brought by a sales representative against a principal pursuant to this section is frivolous, pursuant to P.L.1988, c.46 (C.2A:15-59.1), the sales representative shall be liable to the principal for attorney's fees actually and reasonably incurred by the principal in defending the action and court costs.
 
	L.1990, c.93, s.3; amended 2007, c.289, s.3.

2A:61A-4.    Payment as of postmark date  
     The commissions and other compensation shall be paid at the usual place of payment unless the sales representative requests that the commissions and other compensation be sent through first class mail.  If, in accordance with a request by the sales representative, the sales representative's commissions and other compensation are sent through the mail, the commissions and compensation shall be deemed to have been paid as of the date of their registered postmark.  

    L.1990,c.93,s.4.  

2A:61A-5.    Jurisdiction over nonresident principals  
     A principal who is not a resident of this State who contracts with a sales representative to solicit orders in this State is declared to be doing business in this State for purposes of the exercise of personal jurisdiction. 

    L.1990.c.93,s.5.  

2A:61A-6.    Waiving provisions of this act prohibited  
     A provision in any contract between a sales representative and a principal purporting to waive any provision of this act, whether by express waiver or by a provision stipulating that the contract is subject to the laws of another state, shall be void.  

    L.1990,c.93,s.6.  

2A:61A-7.    Construction  
     Nothing in this act shall invalidate or restrict any other or additional right or remedy available to a sales representative or principal, or preclude a sales representative from seeking to recover in one action on all claims against a principal, or preclude a principal from seeking to recover in one action on all claims against a sales representative.  

    L.1990,c.93,s.7.  

2A:61A-8  Inapplicability of C.2A:61A-1 et seq.
 
	4.	The provisions of P.L.1990, c.93 (C.2A:61A-1 et seq.) shall not apply to:

	a.	any real estate sales person licensed or regulated pursuant to chapter 15 of Title 45 of the Revised Statutes;
 
	b.	any person licensed or regulated pursuant to subtitle 3 of Title 17 of the Revised Statutes, Title 17B of the New Jersey Statutes or P.L.1973, c.337 (C.26:2J-1 et seq.); or
 
	c.	any person registered or regulated by the New Jersey Bureau of Securities pursuant to the "Uniform Securities Law (1997)," P.L.1967, c.93 (C.49:3-47 et seq.), or registered or regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission pursuant to the provisions of the Securities Act of 1933, 15 U.S.C. s.77a et seq., the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 15 U.S.C. s.78a et seq., the Investment Company Act of 1940, 15 U.S.C. s.80a-1 et seq., or the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, 15 U.S.C. s.80b-1 et seq.
 
	L.2007, c.289, s.4.

2A:61B-1  Definitions; accrual of actions; proceedings.
 	1. a. As used in this act:

	(1)	"Sexual abuse" means an act of sexual contact or sexual penetration between a child under the age of 18 years and an adult.  A parent, resource family parent, guardian or other person standing in loco parentis who knowingly permits or acquiesces in sexual abuse by any other person also commits sexual abuse, except that it is an affirmative defense if the parent, resource family parent, guardian or other person standing in loco parentis was subjected to, or placed in, reasonable fear of physical or sexual abuse by the other person so as to undermine the person's ability to protect the child.
 
	(2)	"Sexual contact" means an intentional touching by the victim or actor, either directly or through clothing, of the victim's or actor's intimate parts for the purpose of sexually arousing or sexually gratifying the actor.  Sexual contact of the adult with himself must be in view of the victim whom the adult knows to be present.
 
	(3)	"Sexual penetration" means vaginal intercourse, cunnilingus, fellatio or anal intercourse between persons or insertion of the hand, finger or object into the anus or vagina either by the adult or upon the adult's instruction.
 
	(4)	"Intimate parts" means the following body parts: sexual organs, genital area, anal area, inner thigh, groin, buttock or breast of a person.
 
	(5)	"Injury or illness" includes psychological injury or illness, whether or not accompanied by physical injury or illness.
 
	b.	In any civil action for injury or illness based on sexual abuse, the cause of action shall accrue at the time of reasonable discovery of the injury and its causal relationship to the act of sexual abuse.  Any such action shall be subject to the statute of limitations set forth in section 2 of P.L.2019, c.120 (C.2A:14-2a).
 
	c.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2019, c.120)
 
	d. (1) Evidence of the victim's previous sexual conduct shall not be admitted nor reference made to it in the presence of a jury except as provided in this subsection.  When the defendant seeks to admit such evidence for any purpose, the defendant must apply for an order of the court before the trial or preliminary hearing, except that the court may allow the motion to be made during trial if the court determines that the evidence is newly discovered and could not have been obtained earlier through the exercise of due diligence. After the application is made, the court shall conduct a hearing in camera to determine the admissibility of the evidence.  If the court finds that evidence offered by the defendant regarding the sexual conduct of the victim is relevant and that the probative value of the evidence offered is not outweighed by its collateral nature or by the probability that its admission will create undue prejudice, confusion of the issues, or unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the victim, the court shall enter an order setting forth with specificity what evidence may be introduced and the nature of the questions which shall be permitted, and the reasons why the court finds that such evidence satisfies the standards contained in this section.  The defendant may then offer evidence under the order of the court.
 
	(2)	In the absence of clear and convincing proof to the contrary, evidence of the victim's sexual conduct occurring more than one year before the date of the offense charged is presumed to be inadmissible under this section.
 
	(3)	Evidence of the victim's previous sexual conduct shall not be considered relevant unless it is material to proving that the source of semen, pregnancy or disease is a person other than the defendant.  For the purposes of this subsection, "sexual conduct" shall mean any conduct or behavior relating to sexual activities of the victim, including but not limited to previous or subsequent experience of sexual penetration or sexual contact, use of contraceptives, living arrangement and life style.
 
	e. (1) The court may, on motion and after conducting a hearing in camera, order the taking of the testimony of a victim on closed circuit television at the trial, out of the view of the jury, defendant, or spectators upon making findings as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection.
 
	(2)	An order under this section may be made only if the court finds that the victim is 16 years of age or younger and that there is a substantial likelihood that the victim would suffer severe emotional or mental distress if required to testify in open court. The order shall be specific as to whether the victim will testify outside the presence of spectators, the defendant, the jury, or all of them and shall be based on specific findings relating to the impact of the presence of each.
 
	(3)	A motion seeking closed circuit testimony under paragraph (1) of this subsection may be filed by:
 
	(a)	The victim or the victim's attorney, parent or legal guardian;
 
	(b)	The defendant or the defendant's counsel; or
 
	(c)	The trial judge on the judge's own motion.
 
	(4)	The defendant's counsel shall be present at the taking of testimony in camera.  If the defendant is not present, he and his attorney shall be able to confer privately with each other during the testimony by a separate audio system.
 
	(5)	If testimony is taken on closed circuit television pursuant to the provisions of this act, a stenographic recording of that testimony shall also be required.  A typewritten transcript of that testimony shall be included in the record on appeal.  The closed circuit testimony itself shall not constitute part of the record on appeal except on motion for good cause shown.
 
	f. (1) The name, address, and identity of a victim or a defendant shall not appear on the complaint or any other public record as defined in P.L.1963, c.73 (C.47:1A-1 et seq.).  In their place initials or a fictitious name shall appear.
 
	(2)	Any report, statement, photograph, court document, complaint or any other public record which states the name, address and identity of a victim shall be confidential and unavailable to the public.
 
	(3)	The information described in this subsection shall remain confidential and unavailable to the public unless the victim consents to the disclosure or if the court, after a hearing, determines that good cause exists for the disclosure.  The hearing shall be held after notice has been made to the victim and to the defendant and the defendant's counsel.
 
	(4)	Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the court from imposing further restrictions with regard to the disclosure of the name, address, and identity of the victim when it deems it necessary to prevent trauma or stigma to the victim.
 
	g.	In accordance with R.5:3-2 of the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey, the court may, on its own or a party's motion, direct that any proceeding or portion of a proceeding involving a victim sixteen years of age or younger be conducted in camera.
 
	h.	A plaintiff who prevails in a civil action pursuant to this act shall be awarded damages in the amount of $10,000, plus reasonable attorney's fees, or actual damages, whichever is greater.  Actual damages shall consist of compensatory and punitive damages and costs of suit, including reasonable attorney's fees.  Compensatory damages may include, but are not limited to, damages for pain and suffering, medical expenses, emotional trauma, diminished childhood, diminished enjoyment of life, costs of counseling, and lost wages.
 
	L.1992, c.109, s.1; amended 1999, c.393; 2004, c.130, s.10; 2019, c.120, s.4.

2A:61C-1  Shoplifting, retail thefts, civil action; provided.

	1.  a.  A person who commits the offense of shoplifting as defined in N.J.S.2C:20-11 or a person who commits the offense of theft as defined in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes by stealing food or drink from an eating establishment shall be liable for any criminal penalties imposed by law and shall be liable to the merchant in a civil action in an amount equal to the following:  

	(1)	The value of the merchandise as damages, not to exceed $500, if the merchandise cannot be restored to the merchant in its original condition; 

	(2)	Additional damages, if any, arising from the incident, not to include any loss of time or wages incurred by the merchant in connection with the apprehension of the defendant; and  

	(3)	A civil penalty payable to the merchant in an amount of up to $150.

	b.	A parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of a minor who commits the offense of shoplifting  or the offense of theft of food or drink from an eating establishment shall be liable to the merchant for the damages specified in subsection a. of this section.  This subsection shall not apply to a parent whose parental custody and control of such minor has been removed by court order, decree, judgment, military service, or marriage of such infant, or to a resource family parent of such minor.  

	c.	If a merchant institutes a civil action pursuant to the provisions of this section, the prevailing party in that action shall be entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees and reasonable court costs.

	d.	Limitations on civil action:

	(1)	Before a civil action may be commenced, the merchant shall send a notice to the defendant's last known address giving the defendant 20 days to respond.  It is not a condition precedent to maintaining an action under this act that the defendant has been convicted of shoplifting or theft.  

	(2)	No civil action under this act may be maintained if the defendant has paid the merchant a penalty equal to the retail value of the merchandise where the merchandise was not recovered in its original condition, plus a sum of up to $150.  

	(3)	The provisions of this act do not apply in any case where the value of the merchandise exceeds $500.

	e.	If the person to whom a written demand is made complies with such demand within 20 days following the receipt of the demand, that person shall be given a written release from further civil liability with respect to the specific act of shoplifting or theft.  

	L.1993, c.214; amended 2004, c.130, s.11.

2A:62-1.  By person in peaceable possession
    Any person in the peaceable possession of lands in this state and claiming ownership thereof, may, when his title thereto, or any part thereof, is denied or disputed, or any other person claims or is claimed to own the same, or any part thereof or interest therein, or to hold a lien or encumbrance thereon, and  when no action is pending to enforce or test the validity of such title, claim  or encumbrance, maintain an action in the superior court to settle the title to  such lands and to clear up all doubts and disputes concerning the same.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-2.  Presumption of peaceable possession
    If the lands are not, by reason of their extent or because they are wild, wood, waste, uninclosed or unimproved, in the actual peaceable possession of the owner or person claiming ownership, the owner or person claiming ownership in fee under a deed or other instrument, duly recorded in this state, who has paid taxes thereon and to whom or to whose grantors the taxes thereon have been  assessed for 5 consecutive years immediately prior to the commencement of the  action authorized by section 2A:62-1 of this title, shall, if no other person  is in actual possession thereof, be presumed to be in peaceable possession  thereof, and shall have all the rights and benefits of and be subject to all  the provisions of this article and articles 2 and 4 of this chapter.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-3.  By grantor of mapped and sold lots
    If any person, while in peaceable possession of lands and claiming ownership  thereof, has made and filed or makes and files a map thereof according to law,  dividing such lands into lots and laying out and dedicating streets upon such  lands and has sold and conveyed or sells and conveys any of the lots designated  on the map, he may, for the purpose of avoiding a multiplicity of actions, in  his own name and notwithstanding any sale and conveyance made by him, maintain  the action authorized by section 2A:62-1 of this title, which shall not be  dismissed because the plaintiff has sold and conveyed any of the lots before  the action is instituted.  For the purposes of such action the title and  possession of his grantees shall be the title and possession of the plaintiff.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-4.  Jury trial;  issues;  place of trial
    Upon the application of either party, a jury trial shall be directed to try  the validity of a claim made to the affected lands, or to settle the facts, or  any specified portion of the facts upon which the same depends. The trial may  be held in and before a jury of a county other than that in which the lands  involved are situate, whenever it is so ordered by the order directing such  trial or by any other order made by the court in the cause.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-5.  Determination of claims by court
    When no jury trial is requested pursuant to section 2A:62-4 of this title, or as to the facts for which the same is not requested, the court shall proceed  to inquire into and determine such claims, interest and estate.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-6.  Scope of adjudication by court
    The court shall, upon the verdict of the jury taken pursuant to section 2A:62-4 of this title, or upon its own inquiry and determination as provided by  section 2A:62-5 of this title, finally settle and adjudge whether a defendant  to the suit has an estate, interest or right in or lien or encumbrance upon the  affected lands, or any part thereof, and what the same is and in or upon what  part of the affected lands it exists.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-7.  Effect of final adjudication
    The final determination and judgment shall fix and settle the rights of the  parties in the affected land and shall, except as provided by sections 2A:62-8  to 2A:62-10 of this title, be binding and conclusive upon all the parties to  the action.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-8  Persons under disability; relief from judgment.
  
	2A:62-8. If a defendant was, either at the time of the entry of a default against the defendant or at the time of the entry of the judgment, a minor or an incapacitated person, the defendant, or the defendant's heirs, may, unless the defendant was represented in the action by a guardian or a guardian ad litem, at any time within two years after the termination of the defendant's disability, appear in the action and apply for relief from the judgment.
 
	amended 2013, c.103, s.8.

2A:62-9.  Opening judgment on application for relief
    Upon an application for relief from the judgment as provided by section 2A:62-8 of this title the judgment shall be opened as to the applicant, and the  cause may then proceed as if no judgment had been made against him.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-10  Effect of opening or vacating judgment.
  
	2A:62-10. If the title to the lands which is the subject of the judgment sought to be opened pursuant to N.J.S.2A:62-8 and N.J.S.2A:62-9, has, by the judgment or in consequence thereof, been conveyed to a purchaser for value or mortgaged to a mortgagee for value, the title shall not be affected by either the opening or vacation of the judgment.  The vacation of the judgment shall operate only against the plaintiff named in the judgment, the plaintiff's heirs, executors, and administrators, to compel compensation to the minor, or incapacitated person to the extent of the value of the plaintiff's interest in the affected real property at the time the property was so conveyed or mortgaged.
 
	amended 2013, c.103, s.9.

2A:62-11.  By person in peaceable possession;  action in the superior court
    Any person in the peaceable possession of lands in this state, and claiming  ownership thereof, may, if it is alleged or claimed or it is reputed that his  title is defective, in that some other person may, at some time, claim to own  the same or a part thereof, or some interest therein, or to hold a lien or  encumbrance thereon, and the person so in possession is unable to ascertain the  name or identity of such other person from a search of the title of such lands,  extending back 60 years from the time of the commencement of the suit herein  authorized, maintain an action, in the superior court, to settle the title to  such lands and clear up all doubts concerning the same.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-12.  Sections 2A:62-1 to 2A:62-10 applicable
    The provisions of article 1 of this chapter (s. 2A:62-1 et seq.) shall so far  as the same are consistent with the provisions of this article, extend to all  cases in which the provisions of this article authorize an action to settle the  title to lands in this state and clear up all doubts concerning the same.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-13.  Persons not bound by judgment
    No judgment entered pursuant to the provisions of this article shall affect  the right of any other person claiming to own the lands involved, or a part  thereof, or interest therein, or holding a lien or encumbrance thereon, whose  title, claim or encumbrance would be disclosed by a search of the title of such  lands for a period of 60 years immediately prior to the commencement of the  action, who is not made a party defendant.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-14.  Persons not bound by judgments and orders
    All orders made and judgments entered in an action authorized by section 2A:62-11 of this title shall be binding upon all persons included in the classification  "unknown claimants"  and their heirs, devisees and personal representatives, and their or any of their successors in right, title and interest.  The classification  "unknown claimants"  shall include all persons who may, as alleged or claimed or reputed in the complaint filed in a suit authorized by section 2A:62-11 of this title, at some time claim to own the affected lands, or a part thereof, or an interest therein or to hold a lien or encumbrance thereon, whose title, claim, lien or encumbrance cannot be ascertained by a search of the title of such lands for a period of sixty years immediately prior to the commencement of suit.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1952, c. 203, p. 714, s. 1.

2A:62-15.  Construction of article
    This article shall be liberally construed to effect its purpose, which is to  create a procedure by which it may be established that certain named persons  have a marketable title to all of the estate in fee simple of lands defined by  a judgment entered in such an action, so that there shall be no occasion for  lands in this state being kept out of the market because of uncertainty as to  who the owner of every interest therein may be.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-16.  Sections 2A:62-1 to 2A:62-10 not affected
    This article shall not, by implication or otherwise, be construed to affect  any of the provisions of article 1 of this chapter (s. 2A:62-1 et seq.).

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-17.  Persons entitled to maintain action
    When a person claims to be entitled to a vested estate in remainder in lands  in this state or to a remainder interest in personalty and his title thereto,  or any part thereof, is denied or disputed, or another person claims or is  claimed to own the same, or any part thereof or interest therein, or to hold a  lien or encumbrance thereon, and no action to which he is a party is pending to  enforce or test the validity of any alleged title, interest, claim, lien, or  encumbrance, the person claiming to be entitled to the estate or in interest  may maintain an action in the superior court to settle the title to the estate  or interest and to clear up all doubts and disputes concerning the same.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-18.  Jury trial;  issues;  adjudication by court
    Upon the application of either party, a jury trial shall be directed to try  the validity of the claims made to the estate or interest, or to settle the  facts, or any specified portion of the facts upon which the same depends.

    When such jury trial is not requested, or as to the facts for which the same  is not requested, the court shall proceed to inquire into and determine such  claims, interest and estate, and shall, upon the verdict, or upon such inquiry  and determination, finally settle and adjudge whether the defendant has any  estate, interest or right in or encumbrance upon said estate in remainder in  said lands or remainder interest in said personalty, or any part thereof, and  what the same is and in or upon what part of said lands or personalty the same  exists.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-19  Judgment; conclusiveness; opening judgment as to persons under disability.
 
	2A:62-19. 	The final determination and judgment in an action authorized by N.J.S.2A:62-17 shall fix and settle the rights of all the parties in the estate in remainder in the lands or in the remainder interest in the personalty, and shall be binding and conclusive on all the parties to the action; but if any defendant to the suit is either at the time of the entry of a default or of judgment against the defendant, a minor or an incapacitated person, the defendant, the defendant's heirs or assigns may, unless the defendant was represented in the action by a guardian or a guardian ad litem, at any time within two years after the termination of the disability, appear in the action and apply for relief from the judgment.
 
	amended 2013, c.103, s.10.

2A:62-20.  Persons entitled to maintain action
    A person in the peaceable possession of lands in this state, claiming ownership thereof in fee simple under a deed therefor, or by or under descent or devise from the grantee thereof, which deed contains no covenants, conditions or agreements for the forfeiture and payment of money or penalties on breach thereof, or restrictions therein, may, when it is claimed or asserted  by anyone that such lands are subject to covenants, conditions or agreements  for the forfeiture and payment of money or penalties on breach thereof, or  restrictions, contained in earlier deeds in the chain of title, and no action  is pending to enforce or test the existence or validity of such covenants,  conditions, agreements or restrictions, maintain an action in the superior  court to settle the existence and validity thereof, and to clear up all doubts  and disputes concerning the same.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-21.  Jury trial;  adjudication by court
    Upon the application of either party, a jury trial shall be directed to try  the validity of any claim specified in section 2A:62-20 of this title, or any  specified portion of the facts upon which the same depends.

    When such jury trial is not requested, or as to the facts for which the same  is not requested, the court shall proceed to inquire into and determine the  validity and existence of the covenants, conditions, agreements and restrictions, and shall, upon the verdict, or upon such inquiry and determination, finally settle and adjudge whether the defendant has any right, title or interest in, under and to such covenants, conditions, agreements and restrictions, and determine the validity and existence thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-22.  Effect of final adjudication
    The final determination and judgment of the court in an action brought pursuant to section 2A:62-20 of this title shall fix and settle the rights of the parties with respect to the existence and validity of the covenants, conditions, agreements or restrictions in dispute, which shall be binding and conclusive upon all the parties to the action.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-23.  Action by attorney general
    When a grant or conveyance in fee of riparian lands or lands under water, or  both, has been or shall be made by the state, the riparian commission, the board of commerce and navigation, the division of navigation, in the department  of conservation or the division of planning and development in the department  of conservation and economic development to any person, who, or whose lessee or  grantee under an unexpired lease or an estate for years not terminated is in  possession of the lands, or any part thereof, and the state denies the validity  of the grant or conveyance of the fee and desires to contest it, the attorney  general may maintain an action in the superior court on behalf of the state to  determine and settle the title to the affected lands and to clear up all doubts  concerning the same.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-24.  Jury trial;  adjudication by court
    Upon application of either party, a jury trial shall be directed to try the  validity of any claim to the affected lands mentioned in section 2A:62-23 of  this title, or to settle the facts or any specified portion of the facts upon  which the same depends.

    When such jury trial is not required, or as to the facts for which the same  is not requested, the court shall proceed to inquire into and determine such  claims, interests or estates;  and shall, upon the verdict, or upon such inquiry and determination, finally settle and adjudge whether such defendant has any estate, or right in such lands, or any part thereof, by virtue of such grant or conveyance in fee, and what such interest, estate or right is, and upon what part of such lands the same exists.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-25.  Effect of final adjudication
    The final determination and judgment of the court in an action authorized by  section 2A:62-23 of this title shall fix and settle the rights of the parties  in the affected lands, which shall be binding upon all the parties to the  action.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62-26.  Tender or payment into court not required;  terms upon which grant or conveyance set aside
    The attorney general need not, on behalf of the state, make or offer to make  any tender or payment into court, either on or before filing the complaint.  If  the judgment of the court is in favor of the state, the court shall determine  upon what equitable terms the grant or conveyance in fee shall be set aside and  declared of no effect.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:62A-1.    Civil immunity for emergency care 
    Any individual, including a person licensed to practice any method of treatment of human ailments, disease, pain, injury, deformity, mental or physical condition, or licensed to render services ancillary thereto, or any person who is a volunteer member of a duly incorporated first aid and emergency or volunteer ambulance or rescue squad association, who in good faith renders emergency care at the scene of an accident or emergency to the victim or victims thereof, or while transporting the victim or victims thereof to a hospital or other facility where treatment or care is to be rendered, shall not be liable for any civil damages as a result of any acts or omissions by such person in rendering the emergency care. 

   L. 1963, c. 140, s. 1; amended by L.1968, c.254, s.1; L. 1987, c. 296, s. 1. 

2A:62A-1.1.	Immunity from civil damages for certain law enforcement officers at accident scenes

	5.  A municipal, county or State law enforcement officer is not liable for any civil damages as a result of any acts or omissions undertaken in good faith in rendering care at the scene of an accident or emergency to any victim thereof, or in transporting any such victim to a hospital or other facility where treatment or care is to be rendered; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall exonerate a law enforcement officer for gross negligence.

	L.1996,c.115,s.5.

2A:62A-1.2  Immunity from civil damages for firefighters at accident scenes.

	1. 	A municipal, county or State firefighter, whether volunteer or paid, shall not be liable for any civil damages as a result of any acts or omissions undertaken in good faith in rendering care at the scene of an accident or emergency to any victim thereof, or in transporting any such victim to a hospital or other facility where treatment or care is to be rendered; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall exonerate a firefighter for gross negligence.

	L.1998, c.101, s.1.

2A:62A-1.3  Immunity from civil liability for certain health care professionals, certain situations.
 
	10. a. If an individual's actual health care facility duty, including on-call duty, does not require a response to a patient emergency situation, a health care professional who, in good faith, responds to a life-threatening emergency or responds to a request for emergency assistance in a life-threatening emergency within a hospital or other health care facility, is not liable for civil damages as a result of an act or omission in the rendering of emergency care.  The immunity granted pursuant to this section shall not apply to acts or omissions constituting gross negligence, recklessness, or willful misconduct.
 
	b.	The provisions of subsection a. of this section shall not apply to a health care professional if a provider-patient relationship existed before the emergency, or if consideration in any form is provided to the health care professional for the service rendered. 
 
	c.	The provisions of subsection a. of this section do not diminish a general hospital's responsibility to comply with all Department of Health licensure requirements concerning medical staff availability at the hospital.
 
	d.	A health care professional shall not be liable for civil damages for injury or death caused in an emergency situation occurring in the health care professional's private practice or in a health care facility on account of a failure to inform a patient of the possible consequences of a medical procedure when the failure to inform is caused by any of the following:
 
	(1)	the patient was unconscious;
 
	(2)	the medical procedure was undertaken without the consent of the patient because the health care professional reasonably believed that the medical procedure should be undertaken immediately and that there was insufficient time to fully inform the patient; or
 
	(3)	the medical procedure was performed on a person legally incapable of giving informed consent, and the health care professional reasonably believed that the medical procedure should be undertaken immediately and that there was insufficient time to obtain the informed consent of the person authorized to give such consent for the patient.
 
	The provisions of this subsection shall apply only to actions for damages for an injury or death arising as a result of a health care professional's failure to inform, and not to actions for damages arising as a result of a health care professional's negligence in rendering or failing to render treatment.
 
	e.	As used in this section:
 
	(1)	"Health care professional" means a physician, dentist, nurse, or other health care professional whose professional practice is regulated pursuant to Title 45 of the Revised Statutes and an emergency medical technician or mobile intensive care paramedic certified by the Commissioner of Health  pursuant to Title 26 of the Revised Statutes; and
 
	(2)	"Health care facility" means a health care facility licensed by the Department of Health  pursuant to P.L.1971, c.136 (C.26:2H-1 et seq.) and a psychiatric hospital operated by the Department of Human Services and listed in R.S.30:1-7.
 
	L.2004, c.17, s.10; amended 2012, c.17, s.1.

2A:62A-2.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the  "Good Samaritan Act."

     L.1963, c. 140, s. 2.

2A:62A-3.  Treatment by medical personnel for dependency upon or illegal use  of controlled dangerous substances or use of intoxicating vapor releasing chemical;  immunity from liability
    Any fully licensed doctor of medicine or doctor of osteopathy, or registered  nurse, and any resident or intern on the staff of a hospital, whether or not  fully licensed, who in good faith treats or renders care to a person in an  attempt to cure such person's dependency upon controlled dangerous substances  as defined in P.L.1970, chapter 226, section 2 (C. 24:24-2) or to curtail such  person's illegal use of controlled dangerous substances, or any chemical or  chemical compound which releases vapor or fumes causing a condition of  intoxication, inebriation, excitement, stupefication, or dulling of the brain  or nervous system, including but not limited to glue containing a solvent  having the property of releasing toxic vapors or fumes, as defined in P.L.1965  chapter 41, section 1 (C. 2A:170-25.9) shall not be liable for any civil  damages as a result of any of his acts or omissions in rendering such care,  provided the skill and care given is that ordinarily required and exercised by  others in the profession. The grant of immunity provided for herein shall also  extend to the administrative personnel including all members of the medical  staff and board of directors of hospitals and clinics treating such persons.

     L.1971, c. 414, s. 1, eff. Jan. 20, 1972.

2A:62A-4.    School personnel not liable for civil damages under certain circumstances  
     2.   Any teacher, guidance counselor, psychologist, registered nurse or other educational or noneducational personnel employed by or in any of the public or private schools of this State who in good faith reports a person to the principal or his designee or to the medical inspector or school physician or school nurse in an attempt to help such person cure his dependency upon or illegal use of controlled dangerous substances as defined in P.L.1970, chapter 226, section 2 (C.24:21-2), or such chemical or chemical compound as defined in P.L.1965, chapter 41, section 1 (C.2A:170-25.9), shall not be liable in civil damages as a result of making any such report.  

    L.1971,c.414,s.2; amended 1992,c.158,s.3.  

2A:62A-5.  Persons providing assistance in a liquefied petroleum gas or liquefied natural gas accident or emergency;  immunity from liability
    Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, no person who provides assistance, free of charge except for reimbursement of expenses, upon request of any police agency, fire company, first aid, rescue or emergency squad or other agency or unit of government in the event of an accident or other emergency situation involving the use, handling, transportation, transmission or storage of liquefied petroleum gas or liquefied natural gas shall be liable in any civil action for damages as a result of his acts of commission or omission arising out of and in the course of his rendering assistance in good faith.  Nothing herein shall be deemed to grant immunity to any person causing such accidents or emergency situations or any damage resulting therefrom in the course of his business activities or to persons who by a willful, wanton or grossly negligent act of commission or omission cause damage in responding to such accidents and emergency situations.

    As used in this act,  "person"  means an individual, firm or corporation with knowledge and training in the storage, handling, transportation, operation  and utilization of liquefied petroleum gas or liquefied natural gas.

     L.1983, c. 57, s. 1, eff. Feb. 7, 1983.

2A:62A-6.    Athletic officials' immunity 
     a.   Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, no person who provides services or assistance free of charge, except for reimbursement of expenses, as an athletic coach, manager, or official, other than a sports official accredited by a voluntary association as provided by P.L.1979, c.172 (C.18A:11-3) and exempted from liability pursuant to P.L.1987, c.239 (C.2A:62A-6.1), for a sports team which is organized or performing pursuant to a nonprofit or similar charter or which is a member team in a league organized by or affiliated with a county or municipal recreation department, shall be liable in any civil action for damages to a player, participant or spectator as a result of his acts of commission or omission arising out of and in the course of his rendering that service or assistance. 

    b.   The provisions of subsection a. of this section shall apply not only to organized sports competitions, but shall also apply to practice and instruction in that sport. 

    c. (1) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to grant immunity to any person causing damage by his willful, wanton, or grossly negligent act of commission or omission, nor to any coach, manager, or official who has not participated in a safety orientation and training skills program which program shall include but not be limited to injury prevention and first aid procedures and general coaching concepts. 

    (2)  A coach, manager, or official shall be deemed to have satisfied the requirements of this subsection if the safety orientation and skills training program attended by the person has met the minimum standards established by the Governor's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports in consultation with the Bureau of Recreation within the Department of Community Affairs, in accordance with rules and regulations adopted pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.). 

    d.   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to grant immunity to any person causing damage as the result of his negligent operation of a motor vehicle.

   

    e.   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to grant immunity to any person for any damage caused by that person permitting a sports competition or practice to be conducted without supervision.

   

    f.   Nothing in this act shall apply to an athletic coach, manager, or official who provides services or assistance as part of a public or private educational institution's athletic program.

   

    L.1986,c.13,s.1; 1988,c.87,s.1. 

2A:62A-6.1.  Exemption from liability 
    Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, a person who is accredited as a sports official by a voluntary association as provided by P.L. 1979, c. 172 (C. 18A:11-3) and who serves that association, a conference under the jurisdiction of the association, or a public entity as defined in Title 59 of the New Jersey Statutes in the capacity of a sports official, whether or not compensated for his services, shall not be liable in any action for damages as a result of his acts of commission or omission arising out of and in the course of his rendering the services.  Nothing in this act shall be deemed to grant immunity to any person causing damage by his willful, wanton, or grossly negligent act of commission or omission, nor to any person causing damage as the result of his negligent operation of a motor vehicle. 

   L. 1987, c. 239, s. 1. 

2A:62A-6.2.  Sponsors of sports teams 
     Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, no person who provides goods, services, or other assistance as the sponsor of a sports team which is organized or performing pursuant to a nonprofit or similar charter, or which is a member team in a league organized by or affiliated with a county or municipal recreation department, shall be liable in any civil action for damages to a player or participant as a result of his acts of commission or omission arising out of and in the course of his rendering those goods or services or that assistance. 

    The provisions of this section shall apply not only to organized sports competitions, but shall also apply to practice and instruction in that sport. 

    Nothing in this section shall be deemed to grant immunity to any person causing damage by his willful, wanton, or grossly negligent act of commission or omission, nor to any person causing damage as the result of his negligent operation of a motor vehicle. 

    L. 1988, c. 87, s. 3. 

2A:62A-7.    Third party immunity 
    a.   Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, no individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other entity shall be liable for civil damages as a result of acts taken or omitted in anticipation of, in preparation for, or in the course of rendering care, assistance, or advice with respect to an incident creating a danger to persons, property, or the environment as a result of an imminent, potential, or actual hazardous discharge.  This limitation on potential liability shall not be construed to cover the action of the person responsible for the hazardous discharge, but is applicable only to third parties rendering assistance to mitigate the effects of a hazardous discharge. 

   b.   For the purposes of this act, hazardous discharge means a discharge of a hazardous substance required to be reported to the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to P.L. 1976, c. 141 (C. 58:10-23.11 et seq.) and any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 

   L. 1986, c. 30, s. 1, eff. June 23, 1986. 

2A:62A-8.    Limitations 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 1 of this act to the contrary, this act shall not apply to the rendering of care or assistance, if rendered for remuneration in excess of reimbursement for out of pocket expenses incurred in rendering the care or assistance, or with the expectation of remuneration from the recipients of the care or assistance or from another person on their behalf; or to acts or omissions concerning the operation of a motor vehicle while traveling to and from the scene of a hazardous discharge to render care, assistance, or advice.  This act shall not apply to actions taken against the advice or direction of the Department of Environmental Protection, or police, fire, or other emergency response personnel. 

   L. 1986, c. 30, s. 2, eff. June 23, 1986. 

2A:62A-9.    Gross negligency, intentional misconduct 
    Section 1 of this act shall not preclude liability for civil damages as the result of gross negligence or intentional misconduct.  Reckless, willful, or wanton misconduct constitutes gross negligence for the purposes of this act. 

   L. 1986, c. 30, s. 3, eff. June 23, 1986. 

2A:62A-10.   Civil, criminal immunity for obtaining specimens  
    1.  a.  When acting in response to a request of a law enforcement officer, any physician, nurse or medical technician who withdraws or otherwise obtains, in a medically accepted manner, a specimen of breath, blood, urine or other bodily substance and delivers it to a law enforcement officer, shall be immune from civil or criminal liability for so acting, provided the skill and care exercised is that ordinarily required and exercised by others in the profession.  

   b.   Any physician, nurse or medical technician who, for an accepted medical purpose, withdraws or otherwise obtains, in a medically accepted manner, a specimen of breath, blood, urine or other bodily substance and subsequently delivers it to a law enforcement officer either voluntarily or upon court order, shall be immune from civil or criminal liability for so acting, provided the skill and care exercised in obtaining the specimen is that ordinarily required and exercised by others in the profession.  

   c.   The immunity from civil or criminal liability provided in subsections a. and b. of this section shall extend to the hospital or other medical facility on whose premises or under whose auspices the specimens are obtained, provided the skill, care and facilities provided are those ordinarily so provided by similar medical facilities.  

   d.   For the purposes of this section, the term "law enforcement officer" includes a State, county or municipal police officer, a county prosecutor or his assistant, the Attorney General or his deputy or a State or county medical examiner.  

   L.1986,c.189,s.1; amended 1992,c.196,s.2.  

2A:62A-11.   Certificate 
    Any person taking a specimen pursuant to section 1 of this act shall, upon request, furnish to any law enforcement agency a certificate stating that the specimen was taken pursuant to section 1 of this act and in a medically acceptable manner.  The certificate shall be signed under oath before a notary public or other person empowered to take oaths and shall be admissible in any proceeding as evidence of the statements contained therein. 

   L. 1986, c. 189, s. 2, eff. Dec. 17, 1986. 

2A:62A-12.   Definitions 
     As used in this act: 

    a.   "Association" means the entity responsible for the administration of a common interest community in which 75% or more units have been conveyed to unit owners other than the developer pursuant to subsection a. of section 2 of P.L. 1979, c. 157 (C. 46:8B-12.1), which association may be incorporated or unincorporated. 

    b.   "Bylaws" mean the governing regulations adopted by a common interest community for the administration and management of the property. 

    c.   "Common interest community" means real estate with respect to which a person, by virtue of his ownership of a unit, is obligated to pay for real estate taxes, insurance premiums, maintenance or improvement of other real estate described in the declaration.  Ownership of a unit does not include holding a leasehold interest of less than 20 years in a unit, including renewal options.  Common interest communities shall include, but not be limited to, condominiums and cooperatives. 

    d.   "Declaration" means any instrument, however denominated, which creates a common interest community, including any amendment to that instrument. 

    e.   "Bodily injury" means death or bodily injury to a person. 

    f.   "Qualified common interest community" means a common interest community which is (1) residential and (2) contains at least four units. 

    g.   "Unit" means a physical part of a common interest community designated for separate ownership or occupancy. 

    h.   "Unit owner" means the person owning a unit or that person's spouse.

    L. 1989, c. 9, s. 1. 

2A:62A-13.   Limited immunity for association 
     a.   Where the bylaws of a qualified common interest community specifically so provide, the association shall not be liable in any civil action brought by or on behalf of a unit owner to respond in damages as a result of bodily injury to the unit owner occurring on the premises of the qualified common interest community. 

    b.   Nothing in this act shall be deemed to grant immunity to any association causing bodily injury to the unit owner on the premises of the qualified common interest community by its willful, wanton or grossly negligent act of commission or omission. 

    L. 1989, c. 9, s. 2. 

2A:62A-14.   Amendment of bylaws 
     a.   No bylaws shall be amended in accordance with section 2 of this act unless the amendment is approved by the owners of at least two-thirds of the units held by unit owners other than the developer in the qualified common interest community. 

    b.   Bylaws adopted in accordance with section 2 of this act shall apply to actions for injuries sustained on or after the operative date of the bylaws. 

    L. 1989, c. 9, s. 3. 

2A:62A-15.   Immunity to local emergency planning committee members  
     Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person serving as a member of a local emergency planning committee organized pursuant to the "Super Fund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986," Pub.L.99-499 (42 U.S.C. s. 9601 et seq.) and Executive Order No. 161 of 1986 shall be liable:  

    a.   For damages resulting from the exercise of judgment or discretion unless the actions evidence a reckless disregard for the duties imposed by the position; or

  

    b.   For damages resulting from acts of commission or omission arising out of and in the course of rendering volunteer service or assistance; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to grant immunity to any person causing damage by his willful, wanton or grossly negligent act of commission or omission, nor for any damage caused to any person as the result of the negligent operation of a motor vehicle.  

    L.1989,c.351,s.1.  

2A:62A-16  Health care professionals, immunity from civil liability; duty to warn and protect.
	1. a. Any person who is licensed in the State of New Jersey to practice psychology, psychiatry, medicine, nursing, clinical social work, or marriage and family therapy, whether or not compensation is received or expected, is immune from any civil liability for a patient's violent act against another person or against himself unless the practitioner has incurred a duty to warn and protect the potential victim as set forth in subsection b. of this section and fails to discharge that duty as set forth in subsection c. of this section. 
 
	 b.	A duty to warn and protect is incurred when the following conditions exist: 
 
	(1)	The patient has communicated to that practitioner a threat of imminent, serious physical violence against a readily identifiable individual or against himself and the circumstances are such that a reasonable professional in the practitioner's area of expertise would believe the patient intended to carry out the threat; or 
 
	(2)	The circumstances are such that a reasonable professional in the practitioner's area of expertise would believe the patient intended to carry out an act of imminent, serious physical violence against a readily identifiable individual or against himself. 
 
	A duty to warn and protect shall not be incurred when a qualified terminally ill patient requests medication that the patient may choose to self-administer in accordance with the provisions of P.L.2019, c.59 (C.26:16-1 et al.).
 
	 c.	A licensed practitioner of psychology, psychiatry, medicine, nursing, clinical social work, or marriage and family therapy shall discharge the duty to warn and protect as set forth in subsection b. of this section by doing one or more of the following: 
 
	(1)	Arranging for the patient to be admitted voluntarily to a psychiatric unit of a general hospital, a short-term care facility, a special psychiatric hospital, or a psychiatric facility, under the provisions of P.L.1987, c.116 (C.30:4-27.1 et seq.); 
 
	(2)	Initiating procedures for involuntary commitment to treatment of the patient to an outpatient treatment provider, a short-term care facility, a special psychiatric hospital, or a psychiatric facility, under the provisions of P.L.1987, c.116 (C.30:4-27.1 et seq.); 
 
	(3)	Advising a local law enforcement authority of the patient's threat and the identity of the intended victim;
 
	(4)	Warning the intended victim of the threat, or, in the case of an intended victim who is under the age of 18, warning the parent or guardian of the intended victim; or
 
	(5)	If the patient is under the age of 18 and threatens to commit suicide or bodily injury upon himself, warning the parent or guardian of the patient.
 
	d.	A practitioner who is licensed in the State of New Jersey to practice psychology, psychiatry, medicine, nursing, clinical social work, or marriage and family therapy who, in complying with subsection c. of this section, discloses a privileged communication, is immune from civil liability in regard to that disclosure.
 
	e.	In addition to complying with subsection c. of this section, a licensed practitioner shall notify the chief law enforcement officer of the municipality in which the patient resides or the Superintendent of State Police if the patient resides in a municipality that does not have a full-time police department that a duty to warn and protect has been incurred with respect to the patient and shall provide to the chief law enforcement officer or superintendent, as appropriate, the patient's name and other non-clinical identifying information. The chief law enforcement officer or superintendent, as appropriate, shall use that information to ascertain whether the patient has been issued a firearms purchaser identification card, permit to purchase a handgun, or any other permit or license authorizing possession of a firearm. 
 
	If the patient has been issued a firearms purchaser identification card, permit to purchase a handgun, or any other permit or license authorizing possession of a firearm, or if there is information indicating that the patient otherwise may have access to a firearm, the information provided may be used in determining whether the patient has become subject to any of the disabilities set forth in subsection c. of N.J.S.2C:58-3.  If the chief law enforcement officer or superintendent, as appropriate, determines that the patient has become subject to any of the disabilities set forth in subsection c. of N.J.S.2C:58-3, any identification card or permit issued to the patient shall be void and subject to revocation by the Superior Court in accordance with the procedure established in subsection f. of N.J.S.2C:58-3. 
 
	If the court determines that the patient is subject to any of the disabilities set forth in subsection c. of N.J.S.2C:58-3 and revokes the patient's firearms purchaser identification card in accordance with the procedure established in subsection f. of N.J.S.2C:58-3, the court may order the patient to surrender to the county prosecutor any firearm owned by or accessible to the patient and order the prosecutor to dispose of the firearms.  When the court orders the county prosecutor to dispose of the firearms, the prosecutor shall dispose of the firearms as provided in N.J.S.2C:64-6.  
 
	If the court, upon motion of the prosecutor, finds probable cause that the patient has failed to surrender any firearm, card, or permit, the court may order a search for and removal of these items at any location where the judge has reasonable cause to believe these items are located.  The judge shall state with specificity the reasons and the scope of the search and seizure authorized by the order.  
 
	A firearm surrendered or seized pursuant to this subsection which is not legally owned by the patient shall be immediately returned to the legal owner of the firearm if the legal owner submits a written request to the prosecutor attesting that the patient does not have access to the firearm.  
 
	A law enforcement officer or agency shall not be held liable in any civil action brought by any person for failing to learn of, locate, or seize a firearm pursuant to this subsection.
 
	A patient who is determined to be subject to any of the disabilities established in paragraph (3) of subsection c. of N.J.S.2C:58-3 and submits a certificate of a medical doctor or psychiatrist licensed in New Jersey, or other satisfactory proof in accordance with that paragraph shall be entitled to the reinstatement of any firearms purchaser identification cards, permits to purchase a handgun, and any other permit or license authorizing possession of a firearm seized pursuant to this subsection.
 
	L.1991, c.270, s.1; amended 2009, c.112, s.21; 2018, c.34, s.1; 2019, c.59, s.27.

2A:62A-17  Court order required for certain disclosures.
 	2.	When a duty to warn and protect arises from the receipt of a privileged communication from a patient in a drug or alcohol abuse program governed by federal law, a licensed practitioner of psychology, psychiatry, medicine, nursing, clinical social work or marriage and family therapy may be required to obtain a court order authorizing disclosure prior to disclosure of information about the patient including the patient's threat of violence, in accordance with 42 U.S.C. s. 290dd-3 and 42 U.S.C. s. 290ee-3 and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
 
	L.1991, c.270, s.2; amended 2018, c.34, s.2.

2A:62A-18.     Reports of suspected arson related burn injuries, immunity  
   2.     A person acting in accordance with the requirements of this act in making a report required by subsection b. of N.J.S.2C:58-8 shall be immune from any civil liability that might otherwise be incurred or imposed.  The person shall also be immune from civil liability for testimony given in any judicial proceeding resulting from or concerning such a report.  

  L.1991,c.433,s.2.  

2A:62A-19.   Civil immunity for emergency medical technician instructors  
    1.  a.  Notwithstanding any other provision of  law to the contrary, no emergency medical technician who, without compensation, trains or instructs other persons in basic life support services shall be liable in any action for damages as a result of his acts of commission or omission arising out of and in the course of that training or instruction.  

   b.  (1)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to grant immunity to any person causing damage by his willful or wanton act of commission or omission. 

   (2)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to grant immunity to any person causing damage as the result of the person's operation of a motor vehicle.  

   c.   As used in this section:  

   (1)  "Basic life support services" shall include but not be limited to: patient stabilization, airway clearance, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, hemorrhage control, initial wound care and fracture stabilization.  

   (2)  "Emergency medical technician" means a person who is trained in basic life support services and who is certified by the Department of Health to perform these services.  

   L.1992,c.196,s.1.  

2A:62A-20.   Immunity from civil liability for use of chemical substance for self-defense  
    1.  Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, a person who possesses a chemical substance for the purpose of personal self-defense in accordance with subsection i. of N.J.S.2C:39-6 and who releases or discharges that chemical substance upon or toward another person shall not be liable in any civil action for damages resulting from that release or discharge when the actor reasonably believes that the releasing or discharging of that chemical substance is immediately necessary for the purpose of personal self-defense. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to grant immunity to any person causing any damage by his willful, wanton or grossly negligent unlawful releasing or discharging of such a chemical substance upon or toward another person.  

   L.1993,c.211.  

2A:62A-21.   Additional right of action, recovery  
    1.   In addition to any other right of action or recovery otherwise available under law, whenever any law enforcement officer, firefighter, or member of a duly incorporated first aid, emergency, ambulance or rescue squad association suffers any injury, disease or death while in the lawful discharge of his official duties and that injury, disease or death is directly or indirectly the result of the neglect, willful omission, or willful or culpable conduct of any person or entity, other than that law enforcement officer, firefighter or first aid, emergency, ambulance or rescue squad member's employer or co-employee, the law enforcement officer, firefighter, or first aid, emergency, ambulance or rescue squad member suffering that injury or disease, or, in the case of death, a representative of that law enforcement officer, firefighter or first aid, emergency, ambulance or rescue squad member's estate, may seek recovery and damages from the person or entity whose neglect, willful omission, or willful or culpable conduct resulted in that injury, disease or death.  

   L.1993,c.366,s.1.  

2A:62A-22.   Rights, remedies, limitations declared additional, cumulative
    2.   The rights, remedies and limitations accorded by the provisions of this act are hereby declared to be in addition to and cumulative of the rights, remedies and limitations accorded under law and nothing herein shall be construed to deny, abrogate or impair any such statutory right, remedy or prohibition.  

   L.1993,c.366,s.2.  

2A:62A-23  Legislative findings relative to acquisition, deployment, use of automated external defibrillators; immunity from civil liability.
 
 	1.	The Legislature finds that:

	a.	More than 350,000 Americans die annually from out-of-hospital sudden cardiac arrest.  Many die needlessly because life saving defibrillators are not immediately available.  The American Heart Association estimates that almost 100,000 deaths could be prevented each year if defibrillators were more widely available;
 
	b.	Due to technological advances, automated external defibrillators may be used by lay persons without any training to provide defibrillation within the first minutes of cardiac arrest to victims, thereby increasing the victims' chances of survival; and 
 
	c.	It is the intent of the Legislature to encourage greater acquisition, deployment, and use of automated external defibrillators throughout this State by expanding immunity from civil liability of persons who acquire automated external defibrillators and by granting immunity from civil liability to lay persons who use them in good faith in emergency situations.
 
	L.1999, c.34, s.1; amended 2012, c.6, s.1.

2A:62A-24.  Definitions relative to acquisition, deployment, use of automated external defibrillators
	2.	As used in this act:

	"Automated external defibrillator" or "defibrillator" means a medical device heart monitor and defibrillator that:

	a.	Has received approval of its pre-market notification filed pursuant to 21 U.S.C. s.360 (k) from the United States Food and Drug Administration;

	b.	Is capable of recognizing the presence or absence of ventricular fibrillation or rapid ventricular tachycardia, and is capable of determining, without intervention by an operator, whether defibrillation should be performed; and

	c.	Upon determining that defibrillation should be performed, automatically charges and requests delivery of an electrical impulse to an individual's heart.

	L.1999,c.34,s.2.

2A:62A-25  Responsibilities of person, entity acquiring automated external defibrillator.
 
	3.	A person or entity that acquires an automated external defibrillator shall:

	a.	Ensure that any person, who is anticipated by the person or entity that acquires the defibrillator to be in a position to render emergency care or treatment by the use of a defibrillator in the performance of that person's duties of employment or volunteer service, shall, prior to using that defibrillator, have successfully completed and hold a current certification from the American Red Cross, American Heart Association, or other training program recognized by the Department of Health and Senior Services in cardio-pulmonary resuscitation and use of a defibrillator; however, a person or entity that acquires a defibrillator shall not be liable for any act or omission of any lay person who uses the defibrillator in the rendering of emergency care;
 
	b.	Ensure that the defibrillator is maintained and tested according to the manufacturer's operational guidelines; 
 
	c.	Notify the appropriate first aid, ambulance, or rescue squad, or other appropriate emergency medical services provider that the person or entity has acquired the defibrillator, the type acquired, and its location; and
 
	d.	Prior to purchasing the automated external defibrillator, provide the prescribing licensed physician with documentation that the person or entity purchasing the defibrillator has a protocol in place to comply with the requirements of subsections a., b., and c. of this section.
 
	L.1999, c.34, s.3; amended 2012, c.6, s.2.

2A:62A-26  Requirements for user of defibrillator.
 
	4. a. (Deleted by amendment, P.L.2012, c.6)

	b.	Any person who uses a defibrillator shall request emergency medical assistance from the appropriate first aid, ambulance, or rescue squad as soon as practicable; however, a lay person who, in good faith, fails to request emergency medical assistance pursuant to this subsection shall be immune from civil liability for any personal injury that results from that failure.
 
	L.1999, c.34, s.4; amended 2012, c.6, s.3.

2A:62A-27  Immunity from civil liability for user of defibrillator; exceptions.
 
 	5. a. (1) Any person or entity who, in good faith, acquires or provides a defibrillator, renders emergency care or treatment by the use of a defibrillator, assists in or supervises the emergency care or treatment by the use of a defibrillator, or attempts to use a defibrillator for the purpose of rendering emergency care or treatment, and who has complied with the requirements of this act, shall be immune from civil liability for any personal injury as a result of that care or treatment, or as a result of any acts or omissions by the person or entity in providing, rendering, assisting in, or supervising the emergency care or treatment.
 
	(2)	A person or entity providing or maintaining an automated external defibrillator shall not be liable for any act or omission involving the use of a defibrillator in the rendering of emergency care by a lay person.
 
	b.	The immunity provided in subsection a. of this section shall include the prescribing licensed physician and the person or entity who provided training in cardio-pulmonary resuscitation and use of the defibrillator.
 
	c.	This subsection shall not immunize a person for any act of gross negligence or willful or wanton misconduct.  It shall not be considered gross negligence or willful or wanton misconduct to fail to use a defibrillator in the absence of an otherwise preexisting duty to do so.
 
	L.1999, c.34, s.5; amended 2012, c.6, s.4.

2A:62A-28  Definitions relative to placement of automated external defibrillators in State buildings.

	1.	As used in this act:

	"Automated external defibrillator" means an automated external defibrillator as defined in section 2 of P.L.1999, c.34 (C.2A:62A-24).

	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Health and Senior Services.

	"State building" means a building or portion of a building that is owned, leased or operated by a State agency.

	L.2001,c.375,s.1.

2A:62A-29  Guidelines with respect to placement of automated external defibrillators in State buildings.

	2.  a.  The Commissioner of Health and Senior Services shall establish guidelines, which the commissioner shall recommend for adoption by all State agencies, with respect to the placement of automated external defibrillators in State buildings.  The guidelines shall take into account the need to ensure compliance with the provisions of P.L.1999, c.34 (C.2A:62A-23 et seq.), for the purposes of ensuring immunity from civil liability pursuant thereto, regarding the training of users of automated external defibrillators, the maintenance and testing of these devices, coordination with emergency medical services providers, and the adoption of protocols to effectuate this compliance.

	b.	The commissioner shall issue the guidelines established pursuant to subsection a. of this section to all State agencies no later than the 180th day after the effective date of this act.

	c.	For the purpose of establishing guidelines pursuant to subsection a. of this section, the commissioner shall consult, at a minimum, with:  the New Jersey First Aid Council, Inc.; the American Heart Association; the American Red Cross; the Medical Society of New Jersey; the State Treasurer; the Commissioner of Personnel; the Attorney General; and representatives of organized labor.

	L.2001,c.375,s.2.

2A:62A-30  Findings, declarations relative to use of defibrillators in health clubs.

	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	According to the American Heart Association, when a person suffers sudden cardiac arrest, the person's chance of survival decreases by 7% to 10% for each minute that passes without defibrillation; and with defibrillation given in the first minute after cardiac arrest, the survival rate can be as high as 90%;

	b.	The greatest risk for cardiac arrest is among men over 45 and women over 55 years of age, as well as among persons who smoke, are overweight or have diabetes;

	c.	Studies have shown that while exercise helps the heart in the long run, the risk of physical activity is not zero and the risk for cardiac arrest may increase during the time that the person is engaging in moderate or vigorous exercise, particularly for those who are sporadic exercisers or have underlying cardiovascular disease;

	d.	The number of Americans who exercise regularly at health clubs has increased steadily in recent years, as has the age of persons who exercise at these clubs; as many as 30 million people now visit health and exercise centers in this country, and it is estimated that about 55% percent of these people are over age 35;

	e.	As the age of persons who use health clubs increases, it is reasonable to assume that the number of members with cardiovascular disease is rising as well;

	f.	In recognition of the increasing risk of cardiac arrest at health clubs and the effectiveness of readily accessible automated external defibrillators in saving lives, it is, therefore, in the best interest of the residents of this State to require health clubs to maintain defibrillators on their premises.

	L.2005,c.346,s.1.

2A:62A-31  Requirements of health clubs relative to defibrillators.
  
	2.	No later than one year after the effective date of this act:

	a.	The owner or operator of a health club registered with the Director of the Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Law and Public Safety pursuant to P.L.1987, c.238 (C.56:8-39 et seq.) shall:
 
	(1)	acquire at least one automated external defibrillator as defined in section 2 of P.L.1999, c.34 (C.2A:62A-24), and store it in an accessible location within the health club that is known and available to the employees of the health club for the purposes of this act; and
 
	(2)	ensure that the automated external defibrillator is tested and maintained, and provide notification to the appropriate first aid, ambulance, or rescue squad, or other appropriate emergency medical services provider regarding the defibrillator, the type acquired, and its location, pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1999, c.34 (C.2A:62A-25); and
 
	b.	The owner or operator of a health club that is subject to the provisions of subsection a. of this section shall:
 
	(1)	arrange and pay for training in cardio-pulmonary resuscitation and the use of an automated external defibrillator for the employees of that health club in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (2) of this subsection; 
 
	(2)	ensure that the health club has at least one employee on site during its normal business hours who holds current certification from the American Red Cross, American Heart Association, or other training program recognized by the Department of Health and Senior Services in cardio-pulmonary resuscitation and use of a defibrillator; and
 
	(3)	ensure that an employee who uses a defibrillator requests emergency medical assistance from the appropriate first aid, ambulance, or rescue squad as soon as practicable.
 
	L.2005, c.346, s.2; amended 2012, c.6, s.5.

2A:62A-32  Violations, penalties.

	3.	A person who violates the provisions of section 2 of this act shall be liable to a civil penalty of not less than $250 for the first violation, not less than $500 for the second violation, and not less than $1,000 for the third and each subsequent violation.

	The penalty shall be collected pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.), in a summary proceeding before the municipal court having jurisdiction. An official authorized by statute or ordinance to enforce the State or local health codes or a law enforcement officer having enforcement authority in that municipality may issue a summons for a violation of the provisions of section 2 of this act, and may serve and execute all process with respect to the enforcement of this section consistent with the Rules of Court.

	A penalty recovered under the provisions of this section shall be recovered by and in the name of the State by the local health agency. The penalty shall be paid into the treasury of the municipality in which the violation occurred for the general uses of the municipality.

	L.2005,c.346,s.3.

2A:62A-33  Immunity from civil, criminal liability.

	4.	A health club that is subject to the provisions of this act shall be immune from civil or criminal liability resulting from the malfunctioning of an automated external defibrillator that has been maintained and tested by the health club according to the manufacturer's operational guidelines, pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1999, c.34 (C.2A:62A-25), as required in paragraph (2) of subsection a. of section 2 of this act.

	The immunity provided in this section shall be in addition to the immunity provided pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1999, c.34 (C.2A:62A-27).

	L.2005,c.346,s.4.

2A:62A-34  Rules, regulations.

	5.	The Commissioner of Health and Senior Services, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), and in consultation with the Director of the Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Law and Public Safety, shall adopt rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this act.

	L.2005,c.346,s.5.

2A:62A-35  Immunity from liability for property damages for entering a motor vehicle to remove an unattended, unsupervised child.
	1. a. Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, a person shall not be liable for any property damages arising out of and in the course of forcibly entering a motor vehicle for the purpose of removing a child left unattended and unsupervised in the vehicle. The immunity granted pursuant to this subsection shall not apply to any person causing damage to a motor vehicle as a result of recklessness or willful misconduct.
 
	b.	The provisions of subsection a. of this section shall apply if the person:
 
	(1)	determines that the motor vehicle is locked or there is no reasonable method to remove a child from the vehicle;
 
	(2)	has a reasonable good faith belief that forcible entry into the motor vehicle is necessary because the child is in imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury if not immediately removed from the vehicle;
 
	(3)	contacts the local law enforcement agency, the fire department, emergency medical services personnel, or 9-1-1 emergency telephone service for assistance prior to forcibly entering the motor vehicle for purposes of removing the child;
 
	(4)	places written notification on the motor vehicle's windshield with the person's contact information, reason why entry into the vehicle was made, the location of the child, and that law enforcement, the fire department, emergency medical services personnel, or 9-1-1 emergency telephone service has been contacted; 
 
	(5)	remains with the child in a safe location reasonably close to the motor vehicle until local law enforcement, the fire department, or emergency medical personnel arrives; 
 
	(6)	uses no more force than is necessary to enter and remove the child from the motor vehicle; and
 
	(7)	attempts to render aid to the child in addition to the assistance authorized pursuant to this act.
 
	L.2017, c.373, s.1.

2A:63-1.  What constitutes;  notice;  action;  damages
    Any person who, while carrying a gun, shall trespass on any lands, except fresh meadow lands over which the tide has ebbed and flowed continuously for 20  years or more, after (a) having been forbidden so to trespass by the owner,  occupant, lessee or licensee of such lands or (b) after such owner, occupant,  lessee or licensee has given public notice forbidding such trespass, which  notice has been conspicuously posted adjacent to the highway bounding on such  lands or adjacent to a usual entry way thereto, shall be deemed guilty of  trespass at the suit of such owner, occupant, lessee or licensee, in a civil  action and liable for damages of not less than $10.00.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:64-1.  Organizations which may sue or be sued;  effect of action; abatement
    Any unincorporated organization or association, consisting of 7 or more persons and having a recognized name, may sue or be sued in any court of this state by such name in any civil action affecting its common property, rights and liabilities, with the same force and effect as regards such common property, rights and liabilities as if the action were prosecuted by or against  all the members thereof.  Such an action shall not abate by reason of the  death, resignation, removal or legal incapacity of any officer of the organization or association or by reason of any change in its membership.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:64-2.  Service of process, pleadings and papers
    All process, pleadings and other papers in such action may be served on the  president or other officer for the time being or the agent, manager or person  in charge of the business of the organization or association.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:64-3.  Execution or process
    If a judgment is entered against the organization or association in a civil  action herein authorized, execution or other process may issue thereon in the  same manner as upon a judgment against a corporation.

    The sheriff or other officer in such a case may, by virtue of such execution  or process, levy upon and expose for sale the common property of the  organization or association, whether held in its name or by the directors,  officers, trustees or stockholders thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:64-4.  Bar of unsatisfied judgment
    A judgment obtained against an organization or association in an action herein authorized shall not, after execution or process issued thereon and returned in whole or in part unsatisfied or judgment not fully performed, bar an action to recover the residue thereof against or to enforce compliance therewith by such members of the organization or association as may be personally liable.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:64-5.  Action against members individually liable;  corporate powers not  conferred
    Nothing in this chapter contained shall be construed to prevent any person having a claim against an unincorporated organization or association, for which  the members thereof or any of them are personally liable, from proceeding  against the members so liable;  nor shall this chapter be so construed as to  give any such organization or association any of the powers or to impose any of  the liabilities of a corporation, except as herein set forth.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:64-6.  Organizations excepted
    This chapter, in so far as it relates to actions of an equitable nature against unincorporated organizations or associations, shall not apply to a fraternal, charitable or other organization not organized for pecuniary profit.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:65-1.  Waste by guardian;  accounting to ward;  treble damages
    No guardian shall make or suffer any waste, destruction or wrongful sale of  the inheritance of his ward, or of those things of which he has or may have the  custody as guardian but shall keep safely such inheritance to the use of his  ward and keep, sustain and deliver the same, together with all issues and  profits, to his ward when he comes of full age, in as good order and condition  as they were when the guardian received them.

    If any guardian shall make or suffer any waste, destruction or wrongful sale  of the inheritance or property of his ward, he shall be deprived of his trust  and remain liable to the ward in treble damages.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:65-2.  Waste by tenant without special license
    No tenant in dower or curtesy or for life, years or any term, shall, during  the term, make or suffer any waste, sale or destruction of any property  belonging to the tenements demised, without special license in writing.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:65-3.  Action for waste;  treble damages
    A civil action may be maintained in the superior court against the tenant, and upon a finding that waste has been committed, treble damages shall be assessed or granted, and the defendant shall lose the thing or place wasted.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:65-4.  Waste between parceners, tenants in common or joint tenants; procedure
    When 2 or more persons hold property in common, as tenants in common or joint tenants, and 1 or more of them commit waste, action shall lie against the  person or persons committing the waste.  After judgment in such action, the  defendant may elect either to have the common property partitioned or to give  such security as the court shall deem sufficient, not to commit any further  waste.  If the defendant shall elect to have the property partitioned, the part  assigned to him shall include that portion of the property wasted.  If  defendant does not elect to have the property partitioned or if the waste  exceeds the value of his share of the property, the plaintiff shall recover  damages therefor against such defendant.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:65-5.  Action for waste by heir;  treble damages
    Any heir may maintain a civil action for the waste or destruction of his inheritance, whether such waste occurred in the lifetime of his ancestor or thereafter.  The judgment in such an action shall be for the recovery of the inheritance wasted or its money value if such recovery is impossible, and treble damages.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:65-6.  Tenant's liability for waste committed or suffered by him after leasing or granting his estate to another
    When any tenant for a term, including a life tenant, in property demised to  or held by him, has or shall lease or grant his estate in the property to any  person, and shall thereafter continue to occupy such property, or to take the  profits thereof, and shall commit or suffer waste and destruction thereof, the  owner, remainderman or reversioner of such property may maintain a civil action  against such tenant and recover from him the property wasted or its money value  and treble damages, provided such tenant was liable for waste before he leased  or granted his estate, but not otherwise.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:65-7.  Accidental fires excepted
    No civil action for waste shall be maintained against any person as the result of damage caused by any accidental fire, except as may otherwise be provided by contract.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:65-8.  Demand upon tenant of particular estate to take possession of and  keep estate free from waste or to pay taxes or municipal liens thereon
    Whenever a particular estate exists in any real estate in this state, and there is a remainderman or reversioner or person entitled to ultimate enjoyment  of such real estate, after the expiration of such particular estate, and the  tenant of the particular estate or his assigns shall fail or neglect to take  possession of such real property and keep possession thereof and maintain the  same free from waste, and such real estate shall be depreciating in value by  reason of the failure of such tenant to maintain the same as aforesaid, the  remainderman or reversioner or his assigns or the person entitled to the  ultimate enjoyment of such real property, after the expiration of such  particular estate, may serve upon such tenant of the particular estate a  written demand, requiring such tenant to take and keep possession of the  premises, or to keep possession of such premises, and maintain the same free  from waste.

    Whenever any tenant of any particular estate shall neglect or fail to pay any taxes or municipal liens now or hereafter by law chargeable to such tenant,  which have accrued during the continuance of such particular estate, any  remainderman or reversioner, or other person entitled to the ultimate enjoyment  of such property, may serve a written notice or demand upon such tenant of the  particular estate, requiring such tenant to pay such taxes or municipal liens  now or hereafter by law chargeable to such tenant forthwith.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:65-9.  Service of demand
    Any demand or notice mentioned in section 2A:65-8 of this title may be served upon the tenant of the particular estate either personally or by leaving  the same at his usual place of abode, with some competent member of his family  of the age of 14 years or over then residing therein.  If the tenant of the  particular estate cannot be found in this state or is a nonresident, the demand  may be served by attaching it to some prominent part of the premises, and by  publishing it in a newspaper printed and published in the county in which the  real estate is situate, 4 times, not less than once a week for 4 consecutive  weeks.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:65-10.  Civil action in superior court
    If the tenant of the particular estate neglects or fails to take and keep possession of the real estate and maintain the same free from waste within 2 months from the date of the service of the demand so to do as provided by section 2A:65-8 of this title, or neglects or fails to pay the taxes or municipal liens upon such real estate chargeable by law to him within 3 months from the date of the service of the demand so to do as provided by said section  2A:65-8, the remainderman, reversioner or other person entitled to the ultimate  enjoyment of the real estate may maintain a civil action in the superior court  for relief in the premises.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:65A-1.  Requirement of person to perform;  prohibition
    No person shall be required to perform or assist in the performance of an abortion or sterilization.

     L.1974, c. 111, s. 1, eff. Oct. 2, 1974.

2A:65A-2.  Requirement of hospital or other health care facility to provide  services or procedures;  prohibition
    No hospital or other health care facility shall be required to provide abortion or sterilization services or procedures.

     L.1974, c. 111, s. 2, eff. Oct. 2, 1974.

2A:65A-3.  Refusal to perform or provide services or procedures; nonliability
    The refusal to perform, assist in the performance of, or provide abortion services or sterilization procedures shall not constitute grounds for civil or criminal liability, disciplinary action or discriminatory treatment.

     L.1974, c. 111, s. 3, eff. Oct. 2, 1974.

2A:65A-4.  Severability
    If any part of this act shall be invalid, such holding shall not affect the  validity of the remaining parts of this act.  If a part of this act is invalid  in one or more of its applications, the remaining parts of this act shall  remain in effect in all valid applications that are severable from the invalid  application.

     L.1974, c. 111, s. 4, eff. Oct. 2, 1974.

2A:65A-5  Short title.

	1.  This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act of 1997."

	L.1997,c.262,s.1.

2A:65A-6  Partial-birth abortions prohibited; definitions.


	2.  a.  No physician licensed in this State, other licensed health care professional authorized to perform abortions in this State, or ambulatory care facility licensed in this State shall perform a partial-birth abortion and thereby kill a human fetus.

	b.  The provisions of subsection a. of this section shall not apply to a partial-birth abortion that is necessary to save the life of the mother whose life is endangered by a physical disorder, illness or injury.

	c.  A physician or other health care professional licensed pursuant to Title 45 of the Revised Statutes who knowingly performs a partial-birth abortion in violation of this act shall be subject to immediate revocation of  his professional license by the appropriate licensing board and subject to a penalty of $25,000 for each incident.

	d.  An ambulatory health care facility licensed pursuant to P.L.1971, c.136 (C.26:2H-1 et seq.) in which a partial-birth abortion is performed in violation of this act shall be subject to immediate revocation of its license by the Department of Health and Senior Services.

	e.  As used in this act, "partial-birth abortion" means an abortion in which the person performing the abortion partially vaginally delivers a living human fetus before killing the fetus and completing the delivery.

	f.  As used in subsection e. of this section "vaginally delivers a living human fetus before killing the fetus" means deliberately and intentionally delivering into the vagina a living fetus, or a substantial portion thereof, for the purpose of performing a procedure the physician or other health care professional knows will kill the fetus, and the subsequent killing of the human fetus.

	L.1997,c.262,s.2.

2A:65A-7  Patient immune from liability.

	3.  A woman upon whom a partial-birth abortion is performed shall be immune from civil or criminal liability for a violation of the provisions of this act.

	L.1997,c.262,s.3.

2A:65B-1  Findings, declarations relative to sale of Yo-Yo Waterballs.
 
 	1.	The Legislature hereby finds and declares that:

	a.	Yo-Yo Waterballs, also known as water yo-yos, are inexpensive, easily accessible toys that pose a strangulation hazard and threaten the health of children;
 
	b.	Yo-Yo Waterballs are banned in France, the United Kingdom, Luxembourg, Australia, Brazil, and Canada, and Germany and New Zealand have issued warnings concerning Yo-Yo Waterballs;
 
	c.	The New York State Consumer Protection Board has issued two warnings calling Yo-Yo Waterballs serious hazards to children, and the Massachusetts Office of Consumer Affairs and Business Regulation calls Yo-Yo Waterballs a great risk to children;
 
	d.	"Consumer Reports" magazine rated Yo-Yo Waterballs as "not acceptable" in its December, 2003 issue;
 
	e.	World Against Toys Causing Harm labeled Yo-Yo Waterballs as one of the "Ten Worst Toys of 2003";
 
	f.	On July 2, 2003, a petition from New York's Empire State Consumer Association reported that the fluid inside Yo-Yo Waterballs is toxic and flammable;
 
	g.	A report of the United States Public Interest Research Group dated November, 2004 lists Yo-Yo Waterballs as a strangulation hazard;
 
	h.	The United States Consumer Product Safety Commission has reported that Yo-Yo Waterballs pose a potential risk of strangulation;
 
	i.	In addition, the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission reported that, as of November 15, 2005, Yo-Yo Waterballs were responsible for 405 reported health incidents, 290 of which were coded as causing "suffocation or strangulation";
 
	j.	Of those 290 incidents, at least 52 resulted in serious breathing difficulties that rendered the child unconscious and lifeless after suffering from a lack of oxygen or broken blood vessels;
 
	k.	The United States Consumer Product Safety Commission reported that 24 children reported allergic reactions to the fluid used in Yo-Yo Waterballs, which has caused some to experience trouble breathing; and
 
	l.	In spite of evidence concerning the danger to children caused by Yo-Yo Waterballs, the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission has refused repeated attempts towards banning these dangerous toys.
 
	L.2007, c.224, s.1.

2A:65B-2  Yo-Yo Waterballs prohibited.
  
	2. a. A person shall not sell or offer for sale a Yo-Yo Waterball.

	b.	For the purposes of this act, "Yo-Yo Waterball" means a toy marketed and sold under the name of "Yo-Yo Waterball" and any similar fluid yo-yo toy that contains a rubber ball filled with liquid attached to a rubber cord.
 
	c.	A law enforcement officer may confiscate a Yo-Yo Waterball that is sold or offered for sale in violation of this section. 
 
	L.2007, c.224, s.2.

2A:65B-3  Violations, penalties.
  
	3. a. A person violating the provisions of section 2 of this act shall be liable, in addition to the liability for any civil damages for any injury to a plaintiff resulting from the sale or offering for sale of a Yo-Yo Waterball, for a civil penalty of:
 
	(1)	not more than $10,000, for the first offense; and
 
	(2)	not more than $20,000, for the second and each subsequent offense.
 
	b.	The penalty prescribed by this section shall be collected and enforced by summary proceedings under the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	L.2007, c.224, s.3.

2A:65C-1  Sale of novelty lighter prohibited.
 
	1. a. A person shall not sell, or offer to sell, a novelty lighter.

	b.	For the purposes of this section, "novelty lighter" means a mechanical or electrical device typically used for lighting cigarettes, cigars, or pipes, that is designed to resemble any cartoon character, animal, musical instrument, toy, gun, watch, vehicle, food, or beverage or similar articles, or that plays musical notes, or has flashing lights, or has other entertaining features.
 
	A novelty lighter may operate on any fuel, including butane, isobutene, or liquid fuel.
 
	Nothing in this section shall be construed to include the following in the definition of "novelty lighter":
 
	(1)	any lighter manufactured prior to January 1, 1980; 
 
	(2)	any lighter incapable of being fueled or lacking a device necessary to produce combustion or a flame;
 
	(3)	any mechanical or electrical device primarily used to ignite fuel for fireplaces or for charcoal or gas grills; or
 
	(4)	standard lighters that are printed or decorated with logos, labels, decals, or artwork, or heat shrinkable sleeves.
 
	L.2009, c.163, s.1.

2A:65C-2  Confiscation authorized.
 
	2.	A law enforcement officer or fire official may confiscate a novelty lighter that is sold or offered for sale in violation of section 1 of P.L.2009, c.163 (C.2A:65C-1).
 
	L.2009, c.163, s.2.

2A:65C-3  Civil liability.
 
	3.	A person who violates the provisions of section 1 of P.L.2009, c.163 (C.2A:65C-1) shall, in addition to any other legal or equitable relief, be liable for a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 for the first offense and not more than $2,000 for the second and each subsequent offense.
 
	L.2009, c.163, s.3.

2A:65C-4  Reasonable costs of successful action.
 
	4.	The enforcing agency shall be entitled, if successful in the matter, to the reasonable costs of the action, including, but not limited to, investigative and legal costs, as may be filed with and approved by the court.
 
	L.2009, c.163, s.4.

2A:65C-5  Powers of Attorney General.
 
 	5.	To accomplish the objectives and to carry out the duties prescribed by this act, the Attorney General shall have all of the powers granted to him under:
 
	a.	section 3 of P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-3);
 
	b.	section 4 of P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-4);
 
	c.	section 5 of P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-5);
 
	d.	section 6 of P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-6); and
 
	e.	section 8 of P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-8).
 
	L.2009, c.163, s.5.

2A:65D-1  Definitions relative to certain unsolicited advertising via text messaging.
 
 	1.	As used in this act:

	"Communication device capable of receiving text messaging" means a cellular telephone, a device for paging or message services, a personal digital assistant, or any other wireless telecommunication device or technology for short messaging services which receives text messages.
 
	"Text messaging" means the wireless transmission of text, images or a combination of text and images by means of a cellular telephone, a paging or message service, a personal digital assistant or any other electronic communications device.
 
	"Unsolicited advertisement" means any message sent without the prior permission of the recipient to encourage the purchase or rental of, or investment in, merchandise as that term is defined in subsection (c) of section 1 of P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-1).
 
	L.2015, c.119, s.1.

2A:65D-2 Sending of unsolicited advertising via text message incurring telecommunications charge prohibited.
  
	2.	No person shall send or cause to be sent to a resident of this State an unsolicited advertisement by means of text messaging to a communication device capable of receiving text messaging if the recipient of the message may incur a telecommunications charge or a usage allocation deduction as a result of the message being sent.
 
	L.2015, c.119, s.2.

2A:65D-3  Permission required for sending unsolicited advertisement via text messaging.
 
 	3.	No person may send an unsolicited advertisement by means of text messaging without first receiving permission from the intended recipient.  Permission may be granted only with prior express authorization from the intended recipient that includes the number to which the text message advertisement may be sent. The permission may be revoked at any time with a request that includes the number for which permission is being revoked.
 
	L.2015, c.119, s.3.

2A:65D-4  Option to block certain text message charges.
  
	4.	No telecommunications company shall sell, or offer to sell, text messaging services to customers in this State unless the company offers an option to such customers to block all incoming and outgoing text messages that result in telecommunications charges or usage allocation deductions; provided, however, the telecommunications company may continue to send text messages to customers concerning their existing accounts if the customer will not incur a telecommunications charge or a usage allocation deduction as a result of the message being sent.
 
	L.2015, c.119, s.4.

2A:65D-5  Violations, penalties.
 
 	5. a. A person who violates this act shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $500 for the first violation and $1,000 for each subsequent violation, collectible by the Attorney General in a summary proceeding pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	b.	Nothing set forth in this act shall be construed as creating, establishing or authorizing a private cause of action by an aggrieved person against a person who has violated, or is alleged to have violated, the provisions of this act.
 
	L.2015, c.119, s.5.

2A:65D-6  Sending certain unsolicited checks prohibited.
 
 	1.	No person shall send an unsolicited check to an individual which, upon being cashed or redeemed, automatically obligates the recipient to pay any fee or enrolls that individual in any club, service, plan, or continuing agreement.
 
	For the purposes of this act, an "unsolicited check" means any check mailed or otherwise delivered to a person, other than:
 
	a.	In response to a request or application for a check or account by the person;
 
	b.	As a substitute for a check or account previously issued to the person to whom the check is mailed or otherwise delivered; or
 
	c.	A check related to a consumer credit transaction or consumer loan business issued or provided by an insured depository institution as defined in 12 U.S.C. s.1813, a licensee under the New Jersey Consumer Finance Licensing Act, sections 1 through 49 of P.L.1996, c.157 (C.17:11C-1 et seq.), or other financial institution authorized to do business by the New Jersey Department of Banking and Insurance.
 
	L.2015, c.120, s.1.

2A:65D-7  Violations, penalties.
 
 	2. a. A person who violates P.L.2015, c.120 (C.2A:65D-6 et seq.) shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $500 for the first violation and $1,000 for each subsequent violation, collectible by the Attorney General in a summary proceeding pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	b.	Nothing set forth in P.L.2015, c.120 (C.2A:65D-6 et seq.) shall be construed as creating, establishing or authorizing a private cause of action by an aggrieved person against a person who has violated, or is alleged to have violated, the provisions of P.L.2015, c.120 (C.2A:65D-6 et seq.).
 
	L.2015, c.120, s.2.
 
2A:66-1.  Defective record;  order for new or supplemental certificate
    When a proceeding in lieu of prerogative writ is instituted to review any assessment or other order or proceeding concerning any local or public improvement, founded on any omission or defect in the record of the assessment,  order or proceeding which, in the opinion of the court, may be supplied by a  new or supplemental certificate of the commissioners who made the assessment or  the person who made the record, the court on application of any party or on its  own motion, before such cause shall be finally determined, may order the  commissioners, or other person, to certify to the court concerning such  omission or defect.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:66-2.  Effect of new or supplemental certificate
    If it shall appear by the new or supplemental certificate made pursuant to such order that the action or determination in question was actually had, made or taken, but was accidentally or inadvertently omitted from the record, the new or supplemental certificate made pursuant to such order shall have the same  force and effect as if the facts therein certified had been contained in the  original record, and the record before the court shall be considered as amended  by such new or supplemental certificate.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:66-3.  Assessment of property by court;  lien of assessment; exception
    If, in a proceeding in lieu of prerogative writ to review an assessment for  a local or public improvement, the assessment is set aside or reversed only as  to the plaintiff in such proceeding, and the property in which such assessment  was assessed is in fact liable to assessment in respect to the purpose for  which such assessment was made, the superior court shall, upon application for  that purpose, determine for what sum such property is liable to be assessed,  and by its judgment fix the amount of such assessment.  The assessment so fixed  shall be and remain a first lien upon such property and collectible in the same  manner as the balance of the original assessment.

    This section shall not apply to any assessment set aside or reversed more than three years prior to the making of the application.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:66-5.  Burden of proof on attorney general
    In any proceeding in lieu of prerogative writ instituted by the attorney general, by virtue of his office, to ascertain by what right a person holds any  public office, he shall, at the trial, prove affirmatively all the facts alleged in the complaint and not admitted in the answer.  The defendant shall not be required to offer evidence until such facts are proven, and then only to  controvert the same.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:66-6.  Who may institute
    A proceeding in lieu of prerogative writ may also be instituted as of right  against any person for usurping, intruding into or unlawfully holding or  executing any office or franchise in this state, by any person who, under the  former practice, would have the requisite interest to exhibit an information in  the nature of a quo warranto with the leave of court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:66-7.  Judgment
    If, in a proceeding instituted pursuant to section 2A:66-6 of this title, the defendant shall be found guilty of usurping or intruding into or unlawfully  holding or executing any such office or franchise, the court may give judgment  of ouster against him and fine him.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:66-8.  Who may institute
    A proceeding in lieu of prerogative writ may be instituted as of right against any person for usurping, intruding into or unlawfully holding or executing any municipal office or franchise in this state, by any person who believes himself lawfully entitled to such office or franchise.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:66-9.  Bond of plaintiff
    Upon filing the complaint, the plaintiff shall execute a bond to the defendant in the amount of $200 and with such surety or sureties as the court may require, conditioned to prosecute such action diligently and to pay costs to the defendant if he shall be entitled thereto.  The bond shall be approved by a superior court judge and filed.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:66-10.  Time to answer;  extension
    If the bond mentioned in section 2A:80-9 of this title has not been filed at  the time the defendant is served, the defendant's time to answer shall not begin to run until such bond is filed.  For good cause the court may, in any case, grant the defendant further time to answer, which shall not, without the consent of the plaintiff, exceed 10 days where there has been personal service.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:66-11.  Affidavit annexed to answer
    The answer of each defendant shall have annexed to it his affidavit stating  that the allegations in the answer are true to the best of his knowledge,  information and belief, and that the answer is not filed for the purpose of  delay.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:66-12.  Determination of title;  judgment and enforcement thereof
    The title of plaintiff to the office or franchise in question shall be determined in the proceedings.  If it is determined that the plaintiff has title thereto, he shall have judgment establishing his title and ousting the defendant, and upon the entry of such judgment he shall be entitled at once to enter, possess and enjoy such office or franchise.  Upon the entry of such judgment, the court may order the defendant to surrender immediately such office or franchise, with all the books, papers and insignia thereof, to the plaintiff.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:66-13.  Appeal not to affect entry of plaintiff;  bond
    No appeal or other proceeding shall affect the right of the plaintiff to immediate entry into such office or franchise in accordance with the judgment of the court or order entered in conformity therewith, provided the plaintiff, upon his entry, shall give bond to the defendant in such sum and with such surety as the court may approve, conditioned to repay to the defendant so much of the emoluments of the office or franchise during the plaintiff's incumbency therein to which the defendant may be adjudged to be entitled, as well as the costs of the defendant, in the event of the reversal of the judgment of ouster of the defendant.  Such bond shall be approved by a superior court judge and filed.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:66-14.  Certificate on recount of votes;  prima facie evidence of right to office
    If there shall have been a recount of the votes cast at the election at which the plaintiff and defendant claim to have been elected, the certificate given by a judge of the superior court of the result of such recount pursuant to statute shall be prima facie evidence of the right of the person holding the  same to the office and to a judgment accordingly.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-1.  Construction of chapter
    This chapter shall be liberally construed so as to secure, as far as possible, the liberty of the citizen.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-2.  Chapter not generally applicable to habeas corpus ad testificandum
    No provision of this chapter shall apply to the writ of habeas corpus when used to bring a prisoner before a court as a witness, unless it is expressly made applicable thereto.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-3.  Issuance of writ without application
    When the superior court shall have evidence from any judicial proceeding had  before it that a person within this state is illegally confined or restrained  of his liberty, such court shall issue a writ of habeas corpus for his relief,  although no application be made for such writ.  If the writ is granted by the  court on its own motion, no fee shall be allowed.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-4.  Prisoner not to be removed except in certain cases
	2A:67-4.	No person committed to a prison or in the custody of an officer or other person for a criminal or supposed criminal matter shall be removed from such prison or custody into the custody of any other officer or person, except:
 
	a.	By habeas corpus or other legal writ or process; or
 
	b.	Where he is delivered to another officer in accordance with law; or
 
	c.	Where he is sent by order of a court, judge or magistrate to a workhouse or house of correction; or
 
	d.	Where he is removed to another place, within the county, for his trial or discharge in due course of law; or
 
	e.	In case of sudden fire or infection or other necessity.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 2023, c.250, s.7.

2A:67-5.  Penalty for signing and executing warrant for removal contrary to  chapter
    If, after such commitment mentioned in section 2A:67-4 of this title, a person shall make out, sign or countersign a warrant for the removal of any person, so committed, contrary to this chapter, he and the officer or person obeying or executing the same shall, for every such offense, forfeit to the person aggrieved the sum of $500 to be recovered in a civil action.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-6.     Sending citizen as prisoner out of State for offense committed within State; action for damages; punishment; disqualification; exceptions  
     2A:67-6. For preventing illegal imprisonment of citizens of this State in prisons out of this State, no citizen of this State who is an inhabitant or resident thereof, shall be sent as a prisoner to any place whatsoever out of this State, for any crime or offense committed within this State, and every such imprisonment is hereby declared to be illegal unless such transfer of such person to a place of confinement outside the State is accomplished pursuant to the provisions of any interstate compact approved by the Legislature for such purpose and to which the State is signatory.  

    If any such citizen shall be so imprisoned, except as provided for herein by compact, he may, for every such imprisonment, maintain, by virtue of this chapter, an action at law in the Superior Court for the damages sustained thereby, against the person by whom he shall be so committed, detained, imprisoned, sent prisoner or transported contrary to the true intent and meaning of this chapter, and against any person who shall frame, contrive, write, seal, sign, or countersign any warrant or writing for such commitment, detainer, imprisonment or transportation, or who shall advise, aid or assist in the same or any of them. In such action the plaintiff may recover penal as well as compensatory damages but in any case the damages shall not be less than $1,500.00.  

    Any person who shall knowingly frame, contrive, write, seal, sign or countersign any warrant for such commitment, detainer, or transportation, or shall so commit, detain, imprison or transport any person contrary to this chapter, or advise, aid or assist therein, shall be fined or imprisoned at hard labor, or both, at the discretion of the court before which the conviction shall be had and shall in addition thereto, from thenceforth be disqualified from holding any office or trust or profit under this State.  

    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the sending of a citizen of this State or person at any time resident therein, who has committed any treason, felony or misdemeanor in another state of the United States or in any foreign country, to such other state or foreign country having jurisdiction of such offense, for the purpose of being tried therefor.  

	 L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1973,c.16; 1991,c.91,s.111.  

2A:67-7.  Discharge on criminal charge not extended to discharge on civil process.
    Nothing in this chapter shall extend to discharge out of prison any person in custody by virtue of a judgment, order or process in any civil cause unless by virtue of the proceedings had for that purpose under authority of this chapter.  A discharge, under this chapter, from imprisonment under a criminal charge shall not have the effect of discharging from prison a person imprisoned  by virtue of any civil judgment, order or process but the person so discharged  shall be kept in custody in such civil cause until discharged by proceedings  had for that purpose.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-8.  Warrant in lieu of writ;  arrest of person having custody of person detained.
	2A:67-8.	A judge of the superior court may, when it shall appear by satisfactory proof that anyone is held in illegal confinement or custody and there is good reason to believe that he will be taken out of the state or suffer some irreparable injury before he can be relieved by the issuance of a habeas corpus, issue a warrant under his hand and seal reciting the facts and directed to any sheriff or other person, commanding him to take the prisoner and forthwith bring him before the court to be dealt with according to law.
 
	If the proof shall also be sufficient to justify an arrest of the person having the prisoner in his custody, as for a criminal offense committed in the taking or detaining of the prisoner, the warrant may also contain an order for the arrest of such person for such offense.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 2023, c.250, s.8.

2A:67-9.  Service of warrant;  return.
    Any officer or person to whom the warrant mentioned in section 2A:67-8 of this title shall be directed shall execute the same by bringing the prisoner named therein, and the person who detains him, if so commanded by the warrant, before the court or judge issuing the same.

    Thereupon the person detaining such prisoner shall make a return in like manner and the like proceedings shall be had as if a writ of habeas corpus had been issued in the first instance.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-10.  Proceedings against person detaining prisoner
    If the person having the prisoner in his custody shall be brought before the  superior court, as for a criminal offense, he shall be examined, committed,  bailed or discharged in like manner as in other criminal cases of like nature.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:67-11.  Limitation of action for offenses against chapter
    No person shall be liable to an action for any offense against this chapter  unless the action is commenced against such person so offending within 2 years  after the offense is committed;  but if the person aggrieved shall be in  prison, by reason of such wrongful act, then within 2 years after the decease  of such party while in prison or his deliverance out of prison whichever shall  happen first.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-12.  Witnesses, production of prisoners or inmates as
    Upon the issuance of a writ by any court of competent jurisdiction of the United States or of another state, requiring the production before it of any prisoner or inmate of a penal or correctional institution in the state of New Jersey, as a witness in a criminal case or for prosecution as a defendant charged with crime, the keeper or person in charge of such institution, with the consent and approval of the attorney general, upon such conditions as the attorney general shall prescribe, shall produce or cause to be produced the inmate or prisoner according to the requirements of said writ.  The attorney general shall require the return of the prisoner or inmate to the institution from which taken, immediately upon the conclusion of such prosecution or testimony, and shall require the authorities of the demanding jurisdiction to pay or indemnify the keeper or person in charge of such institution for all expenses incurred.  He shall decline to honor such writs when in his opinion the same would not be in the furtherance of justice.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-13  Who may prosecute writ.
 
 	2A:67-13. Except as provided in N.J.S.2A:67-14, a person may prosecute a writ of habeas corpus, in accordance with this chapter, to inquire into the cause of the person's imprisonment or restraint, if the person is:
 
	a.	committed, detained, confined, or restrained of liberty, within this State, for a criminal or supposed criminal matter;
 
	b.	in custody by virtue of civil process issued out of a court in this State;
 
	c.	committed, detained, confined, or restrained of liberty, within this State, under any pretense;
 
	d.	in confinement on a charge of a criminal offense, which is of a bailable nature, for the purpose of posting bail; or
 
	e.	confined in a psychiatric facility, for the purpose of determining whether the person is in need of commitment to treatment.
 
	f.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2013, c.103)
 
	g.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2013, c.103)
 
	h.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2013, c.103)
 
	If sufficient cause appears, the complaint may be filed and the writ may be prosecuted by another on behalf of the person entitled to prosecute the writ.
 
	amended 2013, c.103, s.11.

2A:67-14.  Who may not prosecute writ
    The persons hereinafter specified shall not be entitled to prosecute writ of  habeas corpus:

    a.  Any person committed or restrained of his liberty by virtue of any process issued by any court of the United States, or any judge thereof, in cases where such court or judge has or shall have acquired exclusive jurisdiction.

    b.  Any person committed or restrained of his liberty by virtue of a final judgment of a competent tribunal of civil or criminal jurisdiction or by virtue  of any process issued pursuant thereto, but no order of commitment for an  alleged contempt, or upon contempt proceedings, to enforce the rights or remedies of a party or any process issued upon such order shall be deemed a final judgment or a process issued pursuant to a final judgment within the meaning of this section.

    c.  Any person in custody or restrained of his liberty for any capital crime  plainly and specially expressed in the warrant or commitment, unless the judge  to whom the application is made, as an act of discretion, shall direct the  issuance of the writ.

    d.  Any person in custody or restrained of his liberty on any civil process  who does not show either that he has, prior to applying for the writ, exhausted  the other remedies available to him in the courts of this state to secure his  release or that such remedies are or will be ineffective to protect his  rights.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:67-15.  Power and authority to issue writ
    The power and authority to issue writs of habeas corpus shall be and reside  in:

    a.  The superior court and each judge thereof.

     b.  Each county judge, who shall have concurrent jurisdiction in his county  with the judges of the superior court to grant such writ in all criminal cases  where a person may be confined in prison or detained in custody, and to hear  and determine the same in like manner as though the application had been made  before a judge of the superior court.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-16.  Application by complaint;  contempts;  verification
    Application for the writ shall be made, by complaint, either by the party for whose relief it is intended or by some person in his behalf, and shall be duly verified.  The complaint shall allege (a) the facts concerning the commitment, confinement or restraint of the person for whose relief the action has been instituted;  (b) the place of such confinement or restraint;  (c) the name of the person who has custody over him or by whom he is confined or restrained;  (d) the cause or pretense of such confinement or restraint, if known;  and (e) if the confinement or restraint is alleged to be illegal, in what the alleged illegality consists.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:67-17.  Issuance of writ;  contents
    The judge to whom the application is made shall grant such writ without delay or issue an order directing the defendant named in the complaint to show cause why the writ should not be granted, unless it appears from the complaint or otherwise that the applicant or person confined or restrained is not entitled thereto.

    The writ or order to show cause shall be directed to the person by whom such  party is confined or restrained in his liberty.  It shall be returned within 3  days unless for good cause additional time, not exceeding 20 days, is allowed.

    If the judge shall have reason to believe that the person confined or restrained may be removed from the state, or otherwise suffer irreparable injury, he may direct that the writ be made returnable and the person, confined  or restrained, produced before the court forthwith.

    If the prisoner shall be in the custody of a public officer, the judge may require that a bond be given in such amount as the judge may fix with sufficient surety and conditioned that the prisoner will not escape either in going to or returning from the place to which he is to be taken pursuant to the  writ.

    Except in proceedings under subsection g. of section 2A:67-13, the writ shall require the defendant to produce, in court, the party detained either upon the return to the writ or at the hearing after notice of the time and place thereof, unless the applicant, in writing, waives such production, or the  only questions presented are issues of law;  and may require such production in  any case.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-18.  Defect of form not cause for disobedience of writ
    Writs of habeas corpus shall not be disobeyed for any defect of form.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-19.  Service of writ
    A writ of habeas corpus issued under this chapter may be served by delivering it to the person to whom it is directed, together with a copy of the  complaint.

    If the person to whom the writ is directed cannot be found, then the writ may be served by leaving it, together with a copy of the complaint, at the jail  or other place in which the prisoner may be confined, with an under officer or  other person having charge of the prisoner at the time.

    If the person to whom the writ is directed conceals himself or refuses admittance, then the writ may be served by affixing it, together with a copy of  the complaint, in some conspicuous place on the outside, either of his dwelling  house or of the place where the party is confined.

    Except when the writ is issued on application of the attorney general, county prosecutor or on the court's own motion, no service of a writ requiring the production of the person confined or restrained with the return shall be valid upon a sheriff, keeper of the jail or other public officer, unless the party serving the writ shall pay or tender to the officer, in whose custody the  prisoner shall be, his fees and charges, allowed by law, for bringing the prisoner to and returning him from the place to which he is to be taken pursuant to the writ, and shall also deliver to the officer such bond, if any, as the court may have directed when authorizing the issuance of the writ.  If the prisoner shall be discharged, the officer shall repay the money so paid to him for the charges of carrying back such prisoner.

    No service on any other person shall be valid unless the party serving the writ shall pay or tender to such person the charges, if any, required by the court or judge issuing the writ and set forth therein.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-20.  Return
    Every public officer upon whom the writ shall be duly served, whether the writ be directed to him or not, and every other person to whom the writ shall be directed and upon whom it shall be duly served, shall make a return to the writ as required thereby.  The return to the writ may be made without producing  in court the person detained or restrained, unless the writ requires such  production.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-21.  Excuse for failure to produce person detained as required
    The defendant shall be excused for failure to comply with a command in the writ to produce the person detained, and the hearing may proceed without such production, if (a) the applicant, in writing, has waived such production, or (b) the court shall be satisfied that the person detained cannot be brought into court without danger to himself because of sickness or infirmity.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-22.  Contents of return;  verification
    The return shall set forth, fully and explicitly, whether the defendant has  or has not the party in his power or custody or under his restraint and, if he  has, the authority and true cause of the confinement or restraint.

    If a party is detained by virtue of any writ, warrant or other written authority, a copy thereof shall be annexed to the return.

    If the party, upon whom the writ shall have been served, shall have had the  party in his power or custody or under his restraint, but shall have transferred such custody or restraint to another, the return shall set forth fully the facts relating thereto.

    The return shall be verified unless the same is made by a public officer in  his official capacity.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-23.  Effect of return;  answer thereto
    The allegations of the return, if not controverted, shall be accepted as true except to the extent that the judge finds from the evidence that they are not true.

    At or before the time of hearing, the plaintiff or any other party in interest may file an answer to the return, which shall be verified, denying any  of the facts set forth in the return or alleging any other material facts.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-24.  Arrest for failure to produce prisoner or make return; commitment
    If the person upon whom the writ shall have been duly served refuses or neglects to produce the person named in the writ, or to make a full and explicit return to the writ, as required, and no sufficient cause is shown for such refusal or neglect, the court or judge before whom the writ has been made returnable, upon due proof of the service of the writ, shall forthwith initiate  contempt proceedings against such person by issuing an order of arrest against  him directed to the sheriff of any county commanding him forthwith to apprehend  such person and bring him before such court or judge. Such person shall be  committed to the county jail until he shall make return and comply with any  order that may be made by the court or judge relative to the party confined or  restrained.

    If the order of arrest is against the sheriff, it may be directed to any other person to be designated therein who shall have full power to execute the same, and the sheriff, when brought before the court or judge, may be committed  to the jail of any county other than his own.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:67-25.  Order to enforce production of prisoner
    When an order of arrest is issued against a defendant and the person named in the writ or order has not been produced as required, the court or judge issuing such order of arrest may also issue an order to the sheriff or other person designated therein, commanding him to bring forthwith before such court or judge the person named in the writ for production.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-26.  Custody pending determination
    When a person is produced before the court in habeas corpus proceedings, the  judge may, until judgment is given, commit such person to the custody of the  sheriff or place him in such care or under such custody as the circumstances of  the case may require.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:67-27  Time of hearing; notice.
 
 	2A:67-27. When the writ is returned, the court may hold the hearing immediately, unless the validity of a detention on any civil process, or the mental capacity of the party is to be determined, and may, in any case, set a date for the hearing, which shall be not more than five days after the return of the writ unless for good cause additional time is allowed.
 
	Notice of the time and place set for a later hearing shall be served at least two days before the hearing or earlier, as the court may order, by the applicant upon the defendant, and (a) if the party is in custody on any criminal matter, upon the county prosecutor of the county in which the alleged offense was committed, or (b) if the party is in custody on any civil process, upon each person having an interest in continuing the confinement or restraint or upon the party's attorney, or (c) if the party is in custody of any psychiatric facility or other institution, upon the person or persons whose application was the basis for commitment to the facility or institution, and upon the medical director or other head officer of the facility or institution.
 
	amended 2013, c.103, s.12.

2A:67-28  Hearing; jury.
 
 	2A:67-28. In all cases in which the mental capacity of the party is to be determined, the testimony shall be taken orally and the judge may hear the matter without a jury or may direct that the action be tried by a jury called from the general panel or, if not available, by a jury specially summoned as in other actions.
 
	In all other cases, the judge may hear the matter summarily on the complaint, return and answer to the return, or require that testimony be offered orally and, on its own motion, may summon witnesses and require any person to produce documents, records, or other writings.
 
	In a proceeding under subsection d. of N.J.S.2A:67-13, the judge may take testimony concerning the truth of affidavits and proofs upon which the order for process was made and process issued.
 
	amended 2013, c.103, s.13.

2A:67-29  Judgment.
  
	2A:67-29. In any proceeding under subsection a., b., or c. of N.J.S.2A:67-13, if no cause is shown for the imprisonment or restraint or for the continuation thereof, the judge shall discharge the party from the confinement or restraint.  If the party is not entitled to a discharge and is not bailed, the party shall be remanded by the judge to the custody or placed under the restraint from which the party was taken, so long as custody or restraint is lawful.  If the custody or restraint is not lawful, the judge shall commit the party to the custody of the officer or person lawfully entitled thereto.
 
	In any proceedings under subsection a., b., c., or d. of N.J.S.2A:67-13, if it appears that the person is entitled to be bailed, the judge shall discharge the person immediately, upon taking a secured or bonded recognizance in an amount as the judge may approve for the person's appearance, as the circumstances may require, and the judge shall then certify the writ with the return and the recognizance to the court where the appearance is to be made.
 
	In any proceeding under subsection d. of N.J.S.2A:67-13, the judge shall discharge the party in custody if the process was improperly or improvidently issued.
 
	In any proceeding under subsection e. of N.J.S.2A:67-13, the person shall not be discharged unless found not to be dangerous to self or dangerous to others or to property, either by the judge, if the hearing is held without a jury, or by unanimous verdict of the jury.
 
	No person shall be entitled to a discharge because of any informality or insufficiency in the original arrest or commitment.
 
	amended 2013, c.103, s.14.

2A:67-30.  Enforcement of court's order
    When, in a proceeding under subsection h. of section 2A:67-13 of this title,  the court orders the release of the person confined or restrained and his  return to the charitable institution, the officers of such institution shall  have full authority to put such order into effect and to call to their assistance duly constituted peace officers.  Anyone resisting or interfering with the proper execution of such order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-31.  Reimprisonment for same cause of person discharged upon writ; exceptions
    No person who has been discharged by the order of such court or judge upon a  writ of habeas corpus issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall  again be imprisoned, restrained or kept in custody for the same cause, but it  shall not be deemed the same cause:

    a.  If he shall have been discharged from a commitment on a criminal charge  and is afterwards committed for the same offense by the legal order or process  of the court wherein he shall be bound by recognizance to appear or in which he  shall be indicted or convicted for the same offense;  or,

    b.  If after a discharge for defect of proof or for any material defect in the commitment, in a criminal case, the prisoner is again arrested on sufficient proof, and committed by legal process for the same offense;  or,

    c.  If, in a civil action, the party has been discharged for any illegality  in the judgment or process hereinbefore specified, and is afterwards imprisoned  by legal process for the same cause of action;  or,

    d.  If, in a civil action, he shall have been discharged from commitment on  mesne process and shall afterwards be committed on execution in the same cause  or on mesne process in any other cause, after such first suit shall have been  discontinued.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-32.  Penalty for reimprisoning;  aiding or assisting; misdemeanor
    Any person, either solely or as a member of any court, or in the execution of any order, judgment or process, who shall knowingly recommit, imprison or restrain of his liberty, or cause to be recommitted, imprisoned or restrained of his liberty, for the same cause, except as provided by section 2A:67-31 of this title, any person so discharged or who shall knowingly aid or assist therein shall forfeit to the party aggrieved the sum of $1400, to be recovered in an action at law in the superior court and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-33.  Eluding writ by removing or transferring prisoner to other custody;  misdemeanor
    Any person having in his custody or under his power any party for whose relief a writ of habeas corpus shall have been duly issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and who with intent to elude the service of such writ or to avoid the effect thereof shall transfer the prisoner to the custody or place him under the power or control of another or conceal him or change the  place of his confinement or who shall knowingly aid or assist therein, shall be  deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-34.  Neglect or refusal to obey writ;  forfeiture;  misdemeanor
    If any officer or other person shall neglect or refuse to make the required  returns or to produce the prisoner according to the command of the writ, every  such officer and person so neglecting shall forfeit and pay to the party  aggrieved the sum of $500 and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:67-35.  Misdemeanor;  punishment
    Every person convicted of a misdemeanor under sections 2A:67-32, 2A:67-33 or  2A:67-34 of this title, shall be punished by fine or imprisonment, or both, at  the discretion of the court in which he shall be convicted but such fine shall  not exceed $1,000 nor such imprisonment 6 months.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:67-36.    Appeal to Appellate Division of Superior Court  
     2A:67-36. In all proceedings involving the writ of habeas corpus before a judge of the Superior Court, the prisoner may, after final decision by such judge, appeal therefrom to the Appellate Division of the Superior Court, if the imprisonment is for an alleged crime, and the decision is against the right of the prisoner to a discharge, and in any other case either party may so appeal. If a discharge, which is appealable, has been awarded, and an appeal is taken the discharge shall not be stayed on such appeal.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.112.  

2A:67A-1.  Right to proceed under act;  procedure hereunder additional
    Whenever a municipal or county governing body, any committee thereof, any board, commission, officer or body of any county, municipality, school district, or other special district or ad hoc local authority, is authorized or  required by law to conduct any hearing or investigation, take testimony or make  any determination affecting the rights, property, or obligations of any person,  it may proceed in accordance with this act which shall be construed as in  addition to and not in lieu of any other procedure provided by law.

     L.1953, c. 38, p. 750, s. 1, eff. March 19, 1953.

2A:67A-2.  Administering oaths;  examination of witnesses;  false testimony
    Whenever the officer, board, commission, committee or body is authorized to  take testimony, such officer and each of the members of the board, commission,  committee or body shall have power to administer oaths and to examine witnesses  subject to the penalties, provisions and limitations of chapter eighty-one of  Title 2A of the New Jersey Statutes.  Any person who shall willfully give false  testimony under oath in the course of such examination shall be guilty of  perjury.

     L.1953, c. 38, p. 751, s. 2.

2A:67A-3.  Subpoenas
    Any such officer, board, commission, committee or body authorized by law to  exercise the power of subpoena may by its subpoena compel the attendance and  testimony of witnesses and the production of books, papers, documents or tangible things related to any matter or subject within his or its powers of inquiry.  If a person under such subpoena shall refuse or fail to appear or refuse to be examined, or to answer any proper question, or to produce any books, papers, documents or tangible things, in accordance with the subpoena, the authority issuing the subpoena may apply to the Superior Court for an order  to compel him to do so.  If the person under subpoena shall engage in contemptuous conduct at any such hearing, investigation or inquiry, the said authority may apply to the court to compel him to refrain therefrom.

     L.1953, c. 38, p. 751, s. 3.

2A:67A-4.  Short title
    This act shall be known as the  "County and Municipal Investigations Law."

     L.1953, c. 38, p. 751, s. 4.

2A:68-12.1.  Tenure right, right of protection 
     Persons employed on the effective date of this act pursuant to N.J.S.2A:68-12, which is being repealed in accordance with section 14 of this act, shall not be deprived of any tenure right or any right of protection provided by Title 11A of the New Jersey Statutes or any pension law or retirement system. 

    L.1989,c.87,s.13. 

2A:81-2  Transactions with mentally incapacitated person; decedent; proof required.
  
	2A:81-2. In a civil action that is commenced or defended by a guardian on behalf of a person who is mentally incapacitated or by a personal representative on behalf of a decedent, any other party who asserts a claim or an affirmative defense against the person who is mentally incapacitated or against the personal representative, that is supported by oral testimony of a promise, statement, or act of the person who is mentally incapacitated before the onset of mental incapacity, or of the decedent, shall be required to establish the same by clear and convincing proof.
 
	amended 1960, c.52, s.45; 2013, c.103, s.15.

2A:81-4.  General rule
    Except as otherwise provided by statute, a witness shall not be excused from  answering any questions relevant and material to the issue.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:81-6.  Personal privilege of party called by adverse party in civil action
    In all civil actions in any court of record a party shall be sworn and shall  give evidence therein when called by the adverse party, but no party thereto  shall be compelled to be sworn or give evidence in any action brought to  recover a penalty or to enforce a forfeiture.  This section shall not apply to  actions for divorce.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:81-11.  Examination of adverse party as witness
    Except as otherwise provided by law, when any party is called as a witness by the adverse party he shall be subject to the same rules as to examination and cross-examination as other witnesses.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:81-15.  Disobedience;  penalties
    If any person on whom lawful process shall have been duly served to testify,  depose or give evidence concerning any cause or matter pending in any court and  to whom shall have been paid or tendered at the time of such service, 50 cents  if he is to attend in the county, and 1 dollar, if he is to attend out of the  county, shall not appear according to the command of such process, having no  lawful or reasonable excuse for such default, he shall:

    a.  For each offense forfeit to the aggrieved party a sum not exceeding $50,  to be ascertained and adjudged by the court in which he was subpoenaed to  attend;  and

    b.  Pay to the aggrieved party damages equivalent to the loss sustained by the want of his evidence, to be recovered in a civil action with costs; and

    c.  Be punishable for contempt of the court out of which the process issued.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:81-17.  Privilege of witness from arrest during attendance
    Except as provided in section 2A:81-21 of this Title, a witness shall be privileged from arrest in all civil actions, and no other, during necessary attendance at court or other place, required by subpoena previously duly served, and during his going to and returning therefrom, allowing 1 day for every 30 miles from his place of residence.

    Any arrest made in violation of the privilege given by this section shall be  a contempt of the court out of which the subpoena issued, and the court, may,  by an order, forthwith discharge the witness from arrest.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1960, c. 52, p. 463, s. 46, eff. July 1, 1960.

2A:81-17.2a.  Public employee, definition
    For the purposes of this act the term  "public employee"  shall mean any person who occupies any office, position or employment in the government of the  State of New Jersey, or the several counties and municipalities thereof, or any  political subdivision of the State, or a school district, or any special  district, or any authority, commission, board, or any branch or agency of the  public service.  This term shall include, but shall not be limited to, elected  and appointed persons.

     L.1970, c. 72, s. 1, eff. May 21, 1970.

2A:81-17.2a1.  Duty of employee to appear and testify;  removal for failure  or refusal
    It shall be the duty of every public employee to appear and testify upon matters directly related to the conduct of his office, position or employment before any court, grand jury or the State Commission of Investigation.  Any public employee failing or refusing to so appear and to so testify, after having been informed of his duty to appear and testify under this act by the prosecuting attorney, or a member of or attorney for the State Commission of Investigation, as the case may be, shall be subject to removal from his office,  position or employment.

     L.1970, c. 72, s. 2, eff. May 21, 1970.  Amended by L.1975, c. 246, s. 1, eff.  Oct. 28, 1975.

2A:81-17.2a2.  Immunity from use of evidence after claim of privilege against self-incrimination;  perjury or false swearing
    If any public employee, having claimed the privilege against self-incrimination, testifies before any court, grand jury or the State Commission of Investigation after having been informed that his failure to appear and testify would subject him to removal from his office, position or employment, such testimony and the evidence derived therefrom shall not be used  against such public employee in a subsequent criminal proceeding under the laws  of this State;  provided that no such public employee shall be exempt from  prosecution or punishment for perjury or false swearing committed while so  testifying.

     L.1970, c. 72, s. 3, eff. May 21, 1970.  Amended by L.1975, c. 246, s. 2, eff.  Oct. 28, 1975.

2A:81-17.2a3.  Removal for commission of misdemeanor
    Any public employee who admits the commission of a misdemeanor or high misdemeanor relating to his employment or touching the administration of his office or position before any court, grand jury or the State Commission of Investigation shall be subject to removal from such office, position or employment.

     L.1970, c. 72, s. 4, eff. May 21, 1970.

2A:81-17.2a4.  Removal proceedings
    If any public employee has subjected himself to removal as provided in section 2 or section 4 of this act, a proceeding may be instituted to effect such removal in the Superior Court by the Attorney General or a county prosecutor of this State by proceeding in lieu of prerogative writ.

     L.1970, c. 72, s. 5, eff. May 21, 1970.

2A:81-17.2a5.  Other laws relating to removal of public employees
    Nothing in this act shall be construed to annul or modify any other law of this State or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to any other law of this State relating to the removal of public employees from office, position or  employment.

     L.1970, c. 72, s. 6, eff. May 21, 1970.

2A:81-17.3.  Order compelling person to testify or produce evidence; immunity from use of such evidence;  contempt
    In any criminal proceeding before a court or grand jury, if a person refuses  to answer a question or produce evidence of any other kind on the ground that  he may be incriminated thereby and if the Attorney General or the county  prosecutor with the approval of the Attorney General, in writing, requests the  court to order that person to answer the question or produce the evidence, the  court shall so order and that person shall comply with the order.  After  complying and if but for this section, he would have been privileged to  withhold the answer given or the evidence produced by him, such testimony or  evidence, or any information directly or indirectly derived from such testimony  or evidence, may not be used against the person in any proceeding or  prosecution for a crime or offense concerning which he gave answer or produced  evidence under court order.  However, he may nevertheless be prosecuted or  subjected to penalty or forfeiture for any perjury, false swearing or contempt  committed in answering, or failing to answer, or in producing, or failing to  produce, evidence in accordance with the order.  If a person refuses to testify  after being granted immunity from prosecution and after being ordered to  testify as aforesaid, he may be adjudged in contempt and committed to the  county jail until such time as he purges himself of contempt by testifying as  ordered without regard to the expiration of the grand jury;  provided, however,  that if the grand jury before which he was ordered to testify has been  dissolved, he may then purge himself by testifying before the court.

     L.1968, c. 195, s. 1, eff. July 19, 1968.  Amended by L.1973, c. 112, s. 1, eff. May 7, 1973.

2A:81-17.4.  Attorney general's annual report on compelling evidence and granting immunity in criminal proceedings
    The Attorney General shall include in his annual report to the Governor and  Legislature, made pursuant to section 15 of P.L.1970, c. 74 (C. 52:17B-111) a  report on the application of this act.  The report shall contain:

    a.  The number of persons to whom immunity was granted or approved;

     b.  The number of indictments dismissed as a result of the granting or approval of immunity and the nature of the charges included therein;

     c.  The number of convictions obtained in cases in which a person or persons  had immunity granted to them or approved;

     d.  The number of persons adjudged in contempt for refusal to testify as a result of a grant or approval of immunity;

     e.  The number of persons committed to jail as a result of an adjudication of contempt in subsection d. above;

     f.  The number of persons who have purged themselves after being committed to jail;

     g.  Such other information as the Attorney General deems appropriate.

     The Attorney General shall report on such aspects of the operation of this act as he deems appropriate including any recommendations he may care to make as to legislative changes or improvements to effectuate the purposes of this act and to assure and protect individual rights and the rights of the citizenry  of New Jersey.

     L.1980, c. 185, s. 1.

2A:81-18.  Definitions
     "Witness,"  as used in this article shall include a person whose testimony  is desired in any proceeding or investigation by a grand jury or in a criminal  action, prosecution or proceeding.

    The word  "summons"  shall include a subpoena, order or other notice requiring the appearance of a witness.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:81-19.  Summoning witness in this state to testify in another state
    If a judge of a court of record in any state which by its laws has made provision for commanding persons within that state to attend and testify in this state certifies under the seal of such court that there is a criminal prosecution pending in such court, or that a grand jury investigation has commenced or is about to commence, that a person being within this state is a material witness in such prosecution, or grand jury investigation, and his presence will be required for a specified number of days, and that same cannot be insured voluntarily, upon presentation of such certificate to any judge of a  court of record in the county in which such person is, such judge shall fix a  time and place for a hearing, and shall make an order directing the witness to  appear at a time and place certain for the hearing.

    If at a hearing the judge determines that the witness is material and necessary, that it will not cause undue hardship to the witness to be compelled  to attend and testify in the prosecution or a grand jury investigation in the  other state, and that the laws of the state in which the prosecution is  pending, or grand jury investigation has commenced or is about to commence (and  of any other state through which the witness may be required to pass by  ordinary course of travel), will give to him protection from arrest and the  service of civil and criminal process, he shall issue a summons, with a copy of  the certificate attached, directing the witness to attend and testify in the  court where the prosecution is pending, or where a grand jury investigation has  commenced or is about to commence at a time and place specified in the summons.   In any such hearing the certificate shall be prima facie evidence of all the  facts stated therein.

    If said certificate recommends that the witness be taken into immediate custody and delivered to an officer of the requesting state to assure his attendance in the requesting state, such judge may, in lieu of notification of the hearing, direct that such witness be forthwith brought before him for said hearing;  and the judge at the hearing being satisfied of the desirability of such custody and delivery, for which determination the certificate shall be prima facie proof of such desirability may, in lieu of issuing summons, order that said witness be forthwith taken into custody and delivered to an officer of the requesting state.

    If the witness, who is summoned as above provided, after being paid or tendered by some properly authorized person the sum of 10 cents a mile for each  mile by the ordinary traveled route to and from the court where the prosecution  is pending and $5 for each day, that he is required to travel and attend as a  witness, fails without good cause to attend and testify as directed in the  summons, he shall be punished in the manner provided for the punishment of any  witness who disobeys a summons issued from a court of record in this state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:81-20.  Witness from another state summoned to testify in this state
    If a person in any state, which by its laws has made provision for commanding persons within its borders to attend and testify in criminal prosecutions, or grand jury investigations commenced or about to commence, in this state, is a material witness in a prosecution pending in a court of record  in this state, or in a grand jury investigation which has commenced or is about  to commence, a judge of such court may issue a certificate under the seal of  the court stating these facts and specifying the number of days the witness  will be required.  Said certificate may include a recommendation that the  witness be taken into immediate custody and delivered to an officer of this  state to assure his attendance in this state.  This certificate shall be presented to a judge of a court of record in the county in which the witness is  found.

    If the witness is summoned to attend and testify in this state he shall be tendered the sum of 10 cents a mile for each mile by the ordinary traveled route to and from the court where the prosecution is pending, and $5 for each day that he is required to travel and attend as a witness.  A witness who has appeared in accordance with the provisions of the summons shall not be required  to remain within this state a longer period of time than the period mentioned  in the certificate, unless otherwise ordered by the court.  If such witness,  after coming into this state, fails without good cause to attend and testify as  directed in the summons, he shall be punished in the manner provided for the  punishment of any witness who disobeys a summons issued from a court of record  in this state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:81-21.  Exemption from arrest and service of process
    If a person comes into this state in obedience to a summons directing him to  attend and testify in this state he shall not, while in this state pursuant to  such summons, be subject to arrest or the service of process, civil or  criminal, in connection with matters which arose before his entrance into this  state under the summons.

    If a person passes through this state while going to another state in obedience to a summons to attend and testify in that state or while returning therefrom, he shall not while so passing through this state be subject to arrest or the service or process, civil or criminal, in connection with matters  which arose before his entrance into this state under the summons.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:81-22.  Uniformity of interpretation
    This article shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purposes to make uniform the law of the states which enact it.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:81-23.  Short title
    This article may be cited as  "uniform act to secure the attendance of witnesses from within or without a state in criminal proceedings."

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:82-1.  Comparison of signature or writing
    In all cases where the genuineness of any signature or writing is in dispute, comparison of the disputed signature or writing with any writing proved to the satisfaction of the court to be genuine shall be permitted to be made by the witnesses;  and such writings and the testimony of witnesses respecting the same may be submitted to the court or jury as evidence of the genuineness or otherwise of the signature or writing in dispute;  provided nevertheless that where the handwriting of any person is sought to be disproved  by comparison with other writings made by him, not admissible in evidence in  the cause for any other purpose, such writings before they can be compared with  the signature or writing in dispute, must, if sought to be used before the  court or jury by the party in whose handwriting they are, be proved to have  been written before any dispute arose as to the genuineness of the signature or  writing in controversy.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:82-3.  Defenses to sealed instruments
    In any claim upon a sealed instrument, a party may plead and set up, in defense thereto, fraud in the consideration of the contract upon which recovery  is sought, or want or failure of consideration, as if the instrument were not  sealed.  In such cases the seal shall be only presumptive evidence of  sufficient consideration, which presumption may be rebutted as if the instrument were not sealed.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:82-4.1.  Recital in record that person was summoned or appeared; estoppel
    The recital in the record of any proceeding upon a foreign judgment, including a judgment of any court out of this State, that the defendant, or person sought to be affected by the judgment was summoned or appeared, shall not prevent or estop the defendant or person affected from proving that he was not summoned or did not appear.

     L.1983, c. 350, s. 1, eff. Sept. 29, 1983.

2A:82-4.2.  Jurisdiction;  burden of proof
    In any proceeding upon a foreign judgment, including a judgment of any court  out of this State, the plaintiff, or person seeking to enforce the judgment,  shall have the burden of proving that the requirements, statutory and  otherwise, of the foreign jurisdiction have been met, conferring jurisdiction  of the subject matter of the foreign proceeding on the foreign court or  tribunal and over the defendant or person sought to be affected by the  judgment.

     L.1983, c. 350, s. 2, eff. Sept. 29, 1983.

2A:82-4.3.  Limitations of actions;  burden of proof
    In any proceeding upon a foreign judgment, including a judgment of any court  out of this State, the plaintiff, or person seeking to enforce the judgment  shall have the burden of proving that the underlying cause of action which gave  rise to the awarding of the foreign judgment was commenced in the foreign  jurisdiction within the period required by statute of this State for the  commencement of a like action in this State.

     L.1983, c. 350, s. 3, eff. Sept. 29, 1983.

2A:82-4.4.  Award;  interest;  penalties
    A court, in any proceeding upon a foreign judgment, including a judgment of  any court out of this State, may award judgment for the plaintiff, or person  seeking to effect the judgment, including any interest on the judgment, but  shall not include as a part thereof any penalty, whether of a penal nature or  otherwise, imposed in connection with the foreign judgment.

     L.1983, c. 350, s. 4, eff. Sept. 29, 1983.

2A:82-4.5.  Judgments governed by Revised Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of  Support Act;  inapplicability of act
    The provisions of this act shall not be applicable to a foreign judgment governed by the  "Revised Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act (1968),"  P.L.1981, c. 243 (C. 2A:4-30.24 et seq.).

     L.1983, c. 350, s. 5, eff. Sept. 29, 1983.

2A:82-4.6.  Severability
    If any one or more sections, clauses, sentences or parts of this act shall for any reason be questioned in any court, and shall be adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, that judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remaining provisions hereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the specific provisions held unconstitutional or invalid.

     L.1983, c. 350, s. 6, eff. Sept. 29, 1983.

2A:82-4.7.  Meaning of  "any proceeding upon a foreign judgment, including a  judgment of any court out of this state"
    As used in this act,  "any proceeding upon a foreign judgment, including a judgment of any court out of this State"  means a judgment under the Philadelphia Wage and Net Profits Tax Ordinance (City Code Section 19-508).

     L.1983, c. 350, s. 7, eff. Sept. 29, 1983.

2A:82-5.  Record used to refresh memory
    When a notary public or any other person authorized to protest instruments under the laws of this state is called upon to testify concerning a protest made by him, he may, to refresh his memory, refer to the record thereof kept by  him as required by law.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:82-6.  Copies of record of protest as evidence
    If it appears that the notary or other officer of this state by whom any bill of exchange or promissory note was protested has died or removed from the state or, after diligent inquiry, his place of residence cannot be discovered, the record deposited in the county clerk's office, as required by section 7:5-5  of the title Bills, Notes and Checks, of the Revised Statutes, or a copy  thereof certified by such clerk, shall be received as competent evidence of the  matter contained in such record.

    When the register or other book of any notary public appointed and qualified  under the laws of any state of the United States containing a record of the  official acts of such notary public by him done in pursuance of his office is,  in pursuance of the law of such state, by reason of the death, removal or other  disability of the notary public, deposited in the office of the clerk,  prothonotary or recorder of deeds of the city, town or county in which the  notary public resided at the time of his acting as notary public, a copy of the  record or of any part thereof respecting the protesting of any note or bill of  exchange protested by the notary public, and the time when, place where and  upon whom demand of acceptance or payment was made, with a copy of the notice  of nonacceptance or nonpayment (if a copy of the notice shall appear on said  record), how the notice of nonacceptance or nonpayment was served, and the time  when, or if sent, in what manner, and the time when, and to whom, duly  certified under the hand and seal of such clerk, prothonotary or recorder of  deeds, or otherwise proved to be truly taken from said record, shall be held  and received in all the courts of this state as competent evidence of the facts  therein recited, and also of the official character of the notary public.  When  it shall appear from such record that the said note or bill of exchange had been protested for want of acceptance or payment thereof, and that the said notary public making such protest had duly notified the drawer or indorsers, by  mail, of the demand of payment or acceptance and refusal thereof, without  specifying the names or the post office address of such drawer or indorsers,  the copy of the record certified or proved as aforesaid, shall be held and  received in all courts of this state as competent evidence that the drawer and  indorsers of such note or bill of exchange were duly notified of such demand  and refusal.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:82-7.  Certificate of protest as evidence
    The certificate of a notary public of this state or of any other state of the United States, under his hand and official seal accompanying any bill of exchange or promissory note which has been protested by such notary for nonacceptance or nonpayment, shall be received in all the courts of this state as competent evidence of the official character of such notary, and also of the  facts therein certified as to the presentment and dishonor of such bill or note  and of the time and manner of giving or sending notice of dishonor to the  parties to such bill or note.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:82-13.  Presumption of publication of ordinance according to law
    Whenever any ordinance of any municipality may come in question or is produced in evidence, the publication thereof according to law shall be presumed to have been had until the contrary is shown.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:82-17.  Certificates of acknowledgment or proof of instruments as evidence of execution thereof
    If any instrument heretofore made and executed or hereafter to be made and executed shall have been acknowledged, by any party who shall have executed it,  or the execution thereof by such party shall have been proved by one or more of  the subscribing witnesses to such instrument, in the manner and before one of  the officers provided and required by law for the acknowledgment or proof of  instruments in order to entitle them to be recorded, and, when a certificate of  such acknowledgment or proof shall be written upon or under, or be annexed to  such instrument and signed by such officer in the manner prescribed by law,  such certificate of acknowledgment or proof shall be and constitute prima facie  evidence of the due execution of such instrument by such party.  Such  instrument shall be received in evidence in any court or proceeding in this  state in the same manner and to the same effect as though the execution of such  instrument by such party had been proved by other evidence.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:82-18.  Certification or authentication of instruments not acknowledged or proved;  effect as evidence
    If any instrument heretofore made and executed or hereafter to be made and executed, although not acknowledged or proved, shall have been certified or authenticated, as to the execution thereof by any party thereto, in any manner which may be prescribed by law in order to entitle such instrument to be recorded in any public office of this state without a certificate of acknowledgment or proof thereof, such certification or authentication shall be and constitute prima facie evidence of the due execution of such instrument by such party.  Such instrument shall be received in evidence in any court or proceeding in this state, in the same manner and to the same effect as though the execution of such instrument by such party had been proved by other evidence.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:82-19.  Exemplifications and records of certain foreign deeds or writings  as evidence
    The exemplification of any deeds or writings relating to estates, real or personal, within the state of New Jersey, proved and certified under the city seal of London or Edinburgh, in the kingdom of Great Britain, or under the seal  of the city of Dublin, in the kingdom of Ireland, or under the great seal of  any British colony in America, prior to July 4th, 1776, and any of the public  books of records or registers of the province of New Jersey, or of either of  the divisions thereof, prior to that date, shall be received in evidence in any  court of record within this state as fully as if the originals were then and  there produced and proved.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:82-23.  Original instruments produced;  notice to adverse party
    Any party to any cause pending in any court of this state, or to any proceeding in this state, may give, to any opposite party or his attorney at least 10 days before the time appointed for the trial or hearing of such cause or proceeding, notice in writing that such opposite party will be required to produce, at such trial or hearing, the original instead of the record or transcript of the record of any instrument or of any copy of any instrument recorded or registered in any public office of this state pursuant to law, which he may think proper to offer or introduce in evidence at such trial or hearing.  After the giving of such notice, no record or transcript of the record of any such instrument or of any such copy of any instrument shall be received in evidence, until proof shall be made, satisfactory to the court or officer before whom such record or transcript is offered, that the original instrument has been lost or unintentionally destroyed, or that after diligent search and inquiry made, such party has been unable to find the original or that such original is without the control of such party and that the production  thereof cannot be compelled by due process.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:82-24.  Certifications, notations or records of time of record, etc., of  instruments as prima facie proof of date of record, etc., thereof
    The certification or notation made, pursuant to law, by any public officer upon any instrument or document which shall have been recorded, registered or filed in his office, setting forth the date and time of day when such instrument shall have been so recorded, registered or filed, or any record kept  by any public officer pursuant to law of the date and time of day of the recording, registering or filing of any instrument or document in his office, shall be received in evidence in all courts and proceedings, in this state, as prima facie proof of the date and time of day of the recording, registering or filing of such instrument.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:82-38.  Photographic, photostatic, etc., copies as competent evidence
    If any business, institution, member of a profession or calling, or any department or agency of government, in the regular course of business or activity has kept or recorded any memorandum, writing, entry, print, representation or combination thereof, of any act, transaction, occurrence or event, and in the regular course of business has caused any or all of the same to be recorded, copied or reproduced by any photographic, photostatic, microfilm, microcard, miniature photographic, or other process which accurately  reproduces or forms a durable medium for so reproducing the original, the  original may be destroyed in the regular course of business unless its  preservation is required by law.  Such reproduction, when satisfactorily  identified, is as admissible in evidence as the original itself in any judicial  or administrative proceeding whether the original is in existence or not and an  enlargement or facsimile of such reproduction is likewise admissible in  evidence if the original reproduction is in existence and available for  inspection under direction of court.  The introduction of a reproduced record,  enlargement or facsimile, does not preclude admission of the original.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1964, c. 34, s. 1.

2A:82-39.  Interpretation and construction
    This article shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose of making uniform the law of those states which enact it.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:82-40.  Short title
    This article may be cited as the uniform photographic copies of business and  public records as evidence act.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:82-41.  Person against whom claim is asserted;  right of examination
    Any person against whom a claim is asserted for compensation or damages for  personal injuries or death resulting from personal injuries, either under the  workmen's compensation act of the state of New Jersey, chapter fifteen of Title  34 of the Revised Statutes, or at law, or his insurance carrier, shall be  permitted to examine the records of a hospital in reference to such injured or  deceased person.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:82-42.  Injured person or claimant;  right of examination
    Any person who has been injured, or his legal representative, who has asserted, or who is about to assert a claim for compensation or damages for personal injuries or death resulting therefrom, shall be permitted to examine the records of any hospital pertaining to the claim of such injured or deceased  person.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:82-43.  Attorneys and agents;  application of law
    The provisions of sections 2A:82-41 and 2A:82-42 of this title shall apply not only to such claimant, or person against whom such claim has been asserted and his insurance carrier, but also to their respective attorneys and duly authorized agents, subject to reasonable rules and regulations promulgated by any such hospital.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:82-44.  No liability for permitting examination
    No hospital, and no officer or employee of any hospital shall be liable in any action for damages in any court by reason of permitting the examination of such hospital's records under the provisions of this article.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:82-45.  Definition of hospital
    For the purpose of this article, a hospital shall be defined as any association, corporation or other institution maintaining a hospital for public  use in this state, supported in whole or in part by private charity, or owned,  operated and maintained by any individual, firm, corporation, municipal or  county board or body, or the state of New Jersey.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:82-46  Disclosure of identity of victims of certain crimes under age 18 prohibited.
 	1.	Disclosure of identity of victims of certain crimes under age 18 prohibited.  

	a.	In prosecutions for aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault, aggravated criminal sexual contact, criminal sexual contact, human trafficking involving sexual activity, a crime involving domestic violence as defined in section 3 of P.L.1991, c.261 (C.2C:25-19) which involves sexual activity, endangering the welfare of children under N.J.S.2C:24-4, abuse or neglect of a child pursuant to R.S.9:6-3, or in any action alleging an abused or neglected child under P.L.1974, c.119 (C.9:6-8.21 et seq.), the name, address, and identity of a victim who was under the age of 18 at the time of the alleged commission of an offense shall not appear on the indictment, complaint, or any other public record as defined in P.L.1963, c.73 (C.47:1A-1 et seq.).  In its place initials or a fictitious name shall appear.  
 
	b.	Any report, statement, photograph, court document, indictment, complaint or any other public record which states the name, address and identity of a victim shall be confidential and unavailable to the public. Unless authorized pursuant to subsection c. of this section, any person who purposefully discloses, releases or otherwise makes available to the public any of the above-listed documents which contain the name, address and identity of a victim who was under the age of 18 at the time of the alleged commission of an offense enumerated in subsection a. of this section shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense.  
 
	c.	The information described in this section shall remain confidential and unavailable to the public unless the court, after a hearing, determines that good cause exists for disclosure.  The hearing shall be held after notice has been made to the victim, parents of victim, spouse, partner in a civil union or other person legally responsible for the maintenance and care of the victim, and to the person charged with the commission of the offense, counsel or guardian of that person.  
 
	d.	Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the court from imposing further restrictions with regard to the disclosure of the name, address, and identity of the victim when it deems it necessary to prevent trauma or stigma to the victim.  
 
	L.1989, c.336, s.1; amended 2017, c.205, s.2.

2A:83-1.  Value of real estate
    In any action or proceeding for the acquisition or sale of land, or any interest or interests therein, or on review of the assessment for taxes of any real property, or in any action or proceeding in the Tax Court, any person offered as a witness in any such action or proceeding shall be competent to testify as to sales of comparable land, including any improvements thereon, contiguous or adjacent to the land in question, or in the vicinity or locality thereof, or otherwise comparable, from information or knowledge of such sales, obtained from the owner, seller, purchaser, lessee or occupant of such comparable land, or from information obtained from the broker or brokers or attorney or attorneys who negotiated or who are familiar with or cognizant of such sales, which testimony when so offered, shall be competent and admissible evidence in any such action or proceeding.

    In any action or proceeding in the Tax Court, the realty transfer fee, if any, paid upon the recording of any deed or other instrument of conveyance as well as the consideration or sales price stated therein or in the affidavit of consideration attached to and filed with any such deed or instrument shall be admitted as prima facie evidence of the true consideration or sales price of the said property.

    This section shall not be construed to apply to any action or proceeding instituted by any individual or private corporation authorized to take property  for public use where compensation must first be made to the owner thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1979, c. 114, s. 14, eff. July 1, 1979.

2A:83-4.  Finding of presumed death under federal statute as presumptive evidence
    A written finding of presumed death, made by the secretary of war, the secretary of the navy, the United States maritime war emergency board, or other  officer or employee of the United States authorized to make such finding,  pursuant to the federal missing persons act, as now or hereafter amended, or a  duly certified copy of such finding, shall be received in any court, office or  other place in this state as presumptive evidence of the death of the person  therein found to be dead, and the date, circumstances and place of his  disappearance.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:83-5.  Official record or report as evidence that person is missing, interned, etc.
    An official written report or record, or duly certified copy thereof, that a  person is missing, missing in action, interned in a neutral country, or beleagured, besieged or captured by an enemy, or is dead, or is alive, made by such board or by any officer or employee of the United States authorized by the  federal act referred to in this article or by any other law of the United States to make same, shall be received in any court, office or other place in this state as presumptive evidence that such person is missing, missing in action, interned in a neutral country, or beleagured, besieged or captured by an enemy, or is dead, or is alive, as the case may be.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:83-6.  Signature and certification deemed prima facie evidence
    For the purposes of this article, any finding, report or record, or duly certified copy thereof, purporting to have been signed by such board, or by such an officer or employee of the United States, as is described in this article, shall prima facie be deemed to have been signed and issued by such an officer or employee pursuant to law, and the person signing same shall prima facie be deemed to have acted within the scope of his authority.  If a copy purports to have been certified by a person authorized by law to certify the same, such certified copy shall be prima facie evidence of his authority so to certify.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:84-1.  Stenographic reporter in proceedings on request
    In all proceedings had before any official, tribunal, board or governing body of this state, where not otherwise provided for by law, the official, tribunal, board or governing body shall, upon request of either party to the proceeding and at the expense of the requesting party, designate a competent stenographic reporter, who shall be duly sworn, to report verbatim the proceeding, excepting the arguments of counsel.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:84-2.  Transcription of record of proceeding;  compensation
    The stenographer so designated shall, upon request, transcribe into typewriting the record of the proceeding upon payment to him therefor at the rate of 10 cents for each folio.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:84A-16.1. Dolls as testimonial aids 
    In prosecutions for those crimes described in sections 2C:14-2, 2C:14-3 and 2C:24-4 of the New Jersey Statutes, where the complaining witness is a child under the age of 16, the court shall permit the use of anatomically correct dolls, models or similar items of either or both sexes to assist the child's testimony. 

   L. 1985, c. 205, s. 1, eff. June 27, 1985. 

2A:84A-17  Privilege of accused.
 
 	2A:84A-17.  Privilege of accused.

	(1)	Every person has in any criminal action in which he is an accused a right not to be called as a witness and not to testify.  
 
	(2)	The spouse or one partner in a civil union couple of the accused in a criminal action shall not testify in such action except to prove the fact of marriage or civil union unless (a) such spouse or partner consents, or (b) the accused is charged with an offense against the spouse or partner, a child of the accused or of the spouse or partner, or a child to whom the accused or the spouse or partner stands in the place of a parent, or (c) such spouse or partner is the complainant.
 
	(3)	An accused in a criminal action has no privilege to refuse when ordered by the judge, to submit his body to examination or to do any act in the presence of the judge or the trier of the fact, except to refuse to testify.  
 
	L.1960, c.52, s.17; amended 1992, c.142, s.1; 2006, c.103, s.90.

2A:84A-18.  Definition of incrimination
    Rule 24.

    Within the meaning of this article, a matter will incriminate (a) if it constitutes an element of a crime against this State, or another State or the United States, or (b) is a circumstance which with other circumstances would be  a basis for a reasonable inference of the commission of such a crime, or (c) is  a clue to the discovery of a matter which is within clauses (a) or (b) above;   provided, a matter will not be held to incriminate if it clearly appears that  the witness has no reasonable cause to apprehend a criminal prosecution.  In  determining whether a matter is incriminating under clauses (a), (b) or (c) and  whether a criminal prosecution is to be apprehended, other matters in evidence,  or disclosed in argument, the implications of the question, the setting in  which it is asked, the applicable statute of limitations and all other factors,  shall be taken into consideration.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 455, s. 18, eff. July 1, 1960.

2A:84A-19.  Self-incrimination;  exceptions
    Rule 25.

    Subject to Rule 37, every natural person has a right to refuse to disclose in an action or to a police officer or other official any matter that will incriminate him or expose him to a penalty or a forfeiture of his estate, except that under this rule:

    (a) no person has the privilege to refuse to submit to examination for the purpose of discovering or recording his corporal features and other identifying  characteristics or his physical or mental condition;

    (b) no person has the privilege to refuse to obey an order made by a court to produce for use as evidence or otherwise a document, chattel or other thing under his control if some other person or a corporation or other association has a superior right to the possession of the thing ordered to be produced;

    (c) no person has a privilege to refuse to disclose any matter which the statutes or regulations governing his office, activity, occupation, profession or calling, or governing the corporation or association of which he is an officer, agent or employee, require him to record or report or disclose except to the extent that such statutes or regulations provide that the matter to be recorded, reported or disclosed shall be privileged or confidential;

    (d) subject to the same limitations on evidence affecting credibility as apply to any other witness, the accused in a criminal action or a party in a civil action who voluntarily testifies in the action upon the merits does not have the privilege to refuse to disclose in that action, any matter relevant to  any issue therein.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 455, s. 19, eff. July 1, 1960.

2A:84A-20  Lawyer-client privilege.
 
 	21.	Rule 26.

	(1)	General rule.  Subject to Rule 37 and except as otherwise provided by paragraph 2 of this rule communications between a lawyer and his client in the course of that relationship and in professional confidence, are privileged, and a client has a privilege (a) to refuse to disclose any such communication, and (b) to prevent his lawyer from disclosing it, and (c) to prevent any other witness from disclosing such communication if it came to the knowledge of such witness (i) in the course of its transmittal between the client and the lawyer, or (ii) in a manner not reasonably to be anticipated, or (iii) as a result of a breach of the lawyer-client relationship, or (iv) in the course of a recognized confidential or privileged communication between the client and such witness.  The privilege shall be claimed by the lawyer unless otherwise instructed by the client or his representative; the privilege may be claimed by the client in person, or if the client is incapacitated or deceased, by his guardian or personal representative.  Where a corporation or association is the client having the privilege and it has been dissolved, the privilege may be claimed by its successors, assigns, or trustees in dissolution.
 
	(2)	Exceptions.  Such privilege shall not extend (a) to a communication in the course of legal service sought or obtained in aid of the commission of a crime or a fraud, or (b) to a communication relevant to an issue between parties all of whom claim through the client, regardless of whether the respective claims are by testate or intestate succession or by inter vivos transaction, or (c) to a communication relevant to an issue of breach of duty by the lawyer to his client, or by the client to his lawyer.  Where 2 or more persons have employed a lawyer to act for them in common, none of them can assert such privilege as against the others as to communications with respect to that matter.
 
	(3)	Definitions.  As used in this rule (a) "client" means a person or corporation or other association that, directly or through an authorized representative, consults a lawyer or the lawyer's representative for the purpose of retaining the lawyer or securing legal service or advice from him in his professional capacity; and includes a person who is incapacitated whose guardian so consults the lawyer or the lawyer's representative on behalf of the person who is incapacitated, (b) "lawyer" means a person authorized, or reasonably believed by the client to be authorized to practice law in any State or nation the law of which recognizes a privilege against disclosure of confidential communications between client and lawyer.  A communication made in the course of the relationship between lawyer and client shall be presumed to have been made in professional confidence unless knowingly made within the hearing of some person whose presence nullified the privilege.
 
	L.1960, c.52, s.20; amended 2013, c.103, s.16.

2A:84A-21.  Newspaperman's privilege
    Rule 27.

    Subject to Rule 37, a person engaged on, engaged in, connected with, or employed by news media for the purpose of gathering, procuring, transmitting, compiling, editing or disseminating news for the general public or on whose behalf news is so gathered, procured, transmitted, compiled, edited or disseminated has a privilege to refuse to disclose, in any legal or quasi-legal  proceeding or before any investigative body, including, but not limited to, any  court, grand jury, petit jury, administrative agency, the Legislature or  legislative committee, or elsewhere.

    a.  The source, author, means, agency or person from or through whom any information was procured, obtained, supplied, furnished, gathered, transmitted,  compiled, edited, disseminated, or delivered;  and

    b.  Any news or information obtained in the course of pursuing his professional activities whether or not it is disseminated.

    The provisions of this rule insofar as it relates to radio or television stations shall not apply unless the radio or television station maintains and keeps open for inspection, for a period of at least 1 year from the date of an actual broadcast or telecast, an exact recording, transcription, kinescopic film or certified written transcript of the actual broadcast or telecast.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 458, s. 21, eff. July 1, 1960.  Amended by L. 1977, c. 253,  s. 1, eff. Oct. 5, 1977.

2A:84A-21a.  Definitions
    Unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context of this act, as  used in this act:

    a.   "News media"  means newspapers, magazines, press associations, news agencies, wire services, radio, television or other similar printed, photographic, mechanical or electronic means of disseminating news to the general public.

    b.   "News"  means any written, oral or pictorial information gathered, procured, transmitted, compiled, edited or disseminated by, or on behalf of any  person engaged in, engaged on, connected with or employed by a news media and  so procured or obtained while such required relationship is in effect.

    c.   "Newspaper"  means a paper that is printed and distributed ordinarily not less frequently than once a week and that contains news, articles of opinion, editorials, features, advertising, or other matter regarded as of current interest, has a paid circulation and has been entered at a United States post office as second class matter.

    d.   "Magazine"  means a publication containing news which is published and  distributed periodically, has a paid circulation and has been entered at a  United States post office as second class matter.

    e.   "News agency"  means a commercial organization that collects and supplies news to subscribing newspapers, magazines, periodicals and news broadcasters.

    f.   "Press association"  means an association of newspapers or magazines formed to gather and distribute news to its members.

    g.   "Wire service"  means a news agency that sends out syndicated news copy  by wire to subscribing newspapers, magazines, periodicals or news broadcasters.

    h.   "In the course of pursuing his professional activities"  means any situation, including a social gathering, in which a reporter obtains information for the purpose of disseminating it to the public, but does not include any situation in which a reporter intentionally conceals from the source the fact that he is a reporter, and does not include any situation in which a reporter is an eyewitness to, or participant in, any act involving physical violence or property damage.

     Added by L.1977, c. 253, s. 2, eff. Oct. 5, 1977.

2A:84A-21.1.  Criminal proceeding;  Subpena;  disclosure of information; application of act
    Where a newsperson is required to disclose information pursuant to a subpena  issued by or on behalf of a defendant in a criminal proceeding, not including  proceedings before administrative or investigative bodies, grand juries, or  legislative committees or commissions, the provisions and procedures in this  act are applicable to the claim and exercise of the newsperson's privilege  under Rule 27 (C. 2A:84A-21).

     L.1979, c. 479, s. 1, eff. Feb. 27, 1980.

2A:84A-21.2.  Time of proceedings
    Proceedings pursuant to this act shall take place before the trial, except that the court may allow a motion to institute proceedings pursuant to this act  to be made during trial if the court determines that the evidence sought is  newly discovered and could not have been discovered earlier through the exercise of due diligence.

     L.1979, c. 479, s. 2, eff. Feb. 27, 1980.

2A:84A-21.3.  Prima facie showing subpenaed materials obtained during professional activities;  waiver of privilege or other grounds for disclosure; hearing
    a.  To sustain a claim of the newsperson's privilege under Rule 27 the claimant shall make a prima facie showing that he is engaged in, connected with, or employed by a news media for the purpose of gathering, procuring, transmitting, compiling, editing or disseminating news for the general public or on whose behalf news is so gathered, procured, transmitted, compiled, edited  or disseminated, and that the subpenaed materials were obtained in the course  of pursuing his professional activities.

    b.  To overcome a finding by the court that the claimant has made a prima facie showing under a. above, the party seeking enforcement of the subpena shall show by clear and convincing evidence that the privilege has been waived under Rule 37 (C. 2A:84A-29) or by a preponderance of the evidence that there is a reasonable probability that the subpenaed materials are relevant, material  and necessary to the defense, that they could not be secured from any less  intrusive source, that the value of the material sought as it bears upon the  issue of guilt or innocence outweighs the privilege against disclosure, and  that the request is not overbroad, oppressive, or unreasonably burdensome which  may be overcome by evidence that all or part of the information sought is  irrelevant, immaterial, unnecessary to the defense, or that it can be secured  from another source. Publication shall constitute a waiver only as to the  specific materials published.

    c.  The determinations to be made by the court pursuant to this section shall be made only after a hearing in which the party claiming the privilege and the party seeking enforcement of the subpena shall have a full opportunity to present evidence and argument with respect to each of the materials or items  sought to be subpenaed.

     L.1979, c. 479, s. 3, eff. Feb. 27, 1980.

2A:84A-21.4.  In camera inspection;  hearing;  determination of admissibility;  order for production
    Upon a finding by the court that there has been a waiver as to any of the materials sought or that any of the materials sought meet the criteria set forth in subsection 3.b., the court shall order the production of such materials, and such materials only, for in camera inspection and determination as to its probable admissibility in the trial.  The party claiming the privilege and the party seeking enforcement of the subpena shall be entitled to  a hearing in connection with the in camera inspection of such materials by the  court, during which hearing each party shall have a full opportunity to be  heard.  If the court, after its in camera review of the materials, determines  that such materials are admissible according to the standards set forth in  subsection 3.b., the court shall direct production of such materials, and such  materials only.

     L.1979, c. 479, s. 4, eff. Feb. 27, 1980.

2A:84A-21.5.  Hearings;  findings of fact and conclusions of law
    After any hearing conducted by the court pursuant to section 3 or 4 hereof,  the court shall make specific findings of fact and conclusions of law with  respect to its rulings, which findings shall be in writing or set forth on the  record.

     L.1979, c. 479, s. 5, eff. Feb. 27, 1980.

2A:84A-21.6.  Appeals;  stay of penalty;  sealing of record;  return of privileged material
    An interlocutory appeal taken from a decision to uphold or quash a subpena shall act as a stay of all penalties which may have been imposed for failure to  comply with the court's order.  The record on appeal shall be kept under seal  until such time as appeals are exhausted.  In the event that all material or  any part thereof is found to be privileged, the record as to that privileged  material shall remain permanently sealed.  Any subpenaed materials which shall,  upon exhaustion and determination of such appeals, be found to be privileged,  shall be returned to the party claiming the privilege.

     L.1979, c. 479, s. 6, eff. Feb. 27, 1980.

2A:84A-21.7.  Co-defendants;  notice of proceedings;  right to intervene
    Where proceedings are instituted hereunder by one of several co-defendants in a criminal trial, notice shall be provided to all of the co-defendants. Any  co-defendant shall have the right to intervene if the co-defendant can demonstrate, pursuant to section 3, that the materials sought by the issuance of the subpena bear upon his guilt or innocence. Where such intervention is sought by a co-defendant, that co-defendant shall be required, prior to being permitted to participate in any in camera proceeding, to make that showing required of a defendant in section 3.

     L.1979, c. 479, s. 7, eff. Feb. 27, 1980.

2A:84A-21.8.  Assessment of costs or counsel fee
    If the court finds no reasonable basis for requesting the information has been shown, costs, including counsel fee, may be assessed against the party seeking enforcement of the subpena.  Where an application for costs or counsel fee is made, the judge shall set forth his reasons for awarding or denying same.

     L.1979, c. 479, s. 8, eff. Feb. 27, 1980.

2A:84A-21.9.  News media person or entity;  freedom from searches and seizures of documentary materials;  exceptions
    Any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship or other entity engaged  on, engaged in, connected with, or otherwise employed in gathering, procuring,  transmitting, compiling, editing, publishing, or disseminating news for the  public, or on whose behalf news is so gathered, procured, transmitted,  compiled, edited, published or disseminated shall be free from searches and  seizures, by State, county and local law enforcement officers with respect to  any documentary materials obtained in the course of pursuing the aforesaid  activities whether or not such material has been or will be disseminated or  published.

    This section shall not restrict or impair the ability of any law enforcement  officer, pursuant to otherwise applicable law, to search for or seize such  materials, if there is probable cause to believe that:

    a.  The person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship or other entity possessing the materials has committed or is committing the criminal offense for which the materials are sought;  or

    b.  The immediate seizure of the materials is necessary to prevent the death  of or serious bodily injury to a human being;  or

    c.  The giving of notice pursuant to a subpena duces tecum would result in the destruction, alteration or deliberate concealment of the documentary materials other than work product;  or

    d.  The documentary materials, other than work product, have not been produced in response to a court order directing compliance with a subpena duces  tecum, and

    (1) All appellate remedies have been exhausted by the party seeking to quash  the subpena duces tecum;  or

    (2) There is a probability that the delay in an investigation or trial occasioned by further proceedings relating to the subpena would threaten the interests of justice.  In the event a search warrant is sought pursuant to this  subparagraph, the person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship or other  entity possessing the materials shall be afforded adequate opportunity to  submit an affidavit to the court setting forth the basis for any contention  that the materials sought are not subject to seizure.

     L.1979, c. 488, s. 1, eff. Feb. 28, 1980.

2A:84A-21.10.  Applications for search warrant;  approval
    In the event a search warrant is sought pursuant to Section 1 of this act, all applications to the court for such warrants shall be approved in advance of  their submission by the Attorney General or the prosecutor of the county in  which execution of the warrant will take place.

     L.1979, c. 488, s. 2, eff. Feb. 28, 1980.

2A:84A-21.11.  Civil cause of action for damages due to violations
    a.  A person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship or other entity aggrieved by a search for or seizure of materials in violation of this act shall have a civil cause of action for damages for such search or seizure:

    (1) Against the State of New Jersey, or against any other governmental unit,  all of which shall be liable for violations of this act by their officers,  employees or agents while acting within the scope or under color of their  office, employment or agency.

    (2) Against an officer, employee or agent of the State of New Jersey or any  other governmental unit who has violated this act while acting other than within the scope or under color of his office, employment or agency. It shall be a complete defense to a civil action brought under this paragraph that the officer, employee or agent had a reasonable good faith belief in the lawfulness  of his conduct unless his error is due to an ignorance of an official statement  of the law.

    b.  The State of New Jersey or any other governmental unit, liable for violations of this act under paragraph 3 a. (1), may not assert as a defense to  a claim arising under this act the immunity of the officer, employee or agent  whose violation is complained of or his reasonable good faith belief in the  lawfulness of his conduct, except that such a defense may be asserted if the  violation complained of is that of a judge.

    c.  The remedy provided by paragraph 3 a. (1) against the State of New Jersey or any other governmental unit is exclusive of any other civil action or  proceeding for conduct constituting a violation of this act, against the officer, employee or agent whose violation gave rise to the claim, or against the estate of such officer, employee or agent.

    d.  A person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship or other entity having a cause of action under this section shall be entitled to recover actual  damages but not less than liquidated damages of $1,000.00, such punitive  damages as may be warranted, and such reasonable attorney's fee and other  litigation costs reasonably incurred as the court, in its discretion, may  award;  provided, however, that the State of New Jersey or any other governmental unit shall not be liable for interest prior to judgment.

    e.  The Attorney General is authorized to settle a claim for damages brought  against the State of New Jersey under this section and shall promulgate  regulations to provide for the commencement of an administrative inquiry  following a determination of a violation of this act by an officer, employee or  agent of the State of New Jersey or any other governmental unit and for the  imposition of administrative sanctions against such officer, employee or agent  if warranted.

    f.  A county prosecutor may settle a claim for damages brought against the county of his jurisdiction or any other governmental unit under this section.

     L.1979, c. 488, s. 3, eff. Feb. 28, 1980.

2A:84A-21.12.  Definitions
    As used in this act:  a.   "Documentary materials"  means materials upon which information is recorded and includes, but is not limited to, written or printed materials, photographs, tapes, videotapes, negatives, films, outtakes and interview files.

    b.   "Work product"  means any documentary materials created by or for a person in connection with his plans, or the plans of the person creating such materials, to gather, file procure, transmit, compile, edit, publish or disseminate news for the public, except such work product as constitutes contraband, or the fruits, instrumentalities or evidence of a crime.

    c.   "Any other governmental unit"  includes any branch, subdivision or agency of the government of the State or any locality within it.

    d.   "Attorney General"  means the Attorney General of the State of New Jersey, or his designee.

    e.   "County prosecutor"  means the duly appointed prosecutor of a county, or his designee.

     L.1979, c. 488, s. 4, eff. Feb. 28, 1980.

2A:84A-21.13.  Inapplicability of act to rights of department of corrections
    Nothing contained in this act shall be construed to limit the right of the Department of Corrections to search the offices of inmate newspapers or the public information offices of any inmate organization located within a correctional facility.

     L.1979, c. 488, s. 5, eff. Feb. 28, 1980.

2A:84A-22  Marital privilege - confidential communications.
  
	22.	Marital privilege--Confidential communications.

	(1)	Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall disclose any communication made in confidence between such person and his or her spouse or civil union partner. 
 
	(2)	There is no privilege: 
 
	(a)	if both spouses or partners consent to the disclosure; 
 
	(b)	if the communication is relevant to an issue in an action between the spouses or partners;
 
	(c)	in a criminal action or proceeding in which either spouse or partner consents to the disclosure; 
 
	(d)	in a criminal action or proceeding coming within section 17 of P.L.1960, c.52 (C.2A:84A-17); or
 
	(e)	in a criminal action or proceeding if the communication relates to an ongoing or future crime or fraud in which the spouses or partners were or are joint participants at the time of the communication. 
 
	(3)	When a spouse or partner is incapacitated or deceased, consent to the disclosure may be given for such spouse or partner by the guardian, executor, or administrator. The requirement for consent shall not terminate with divorce, dissolution of civil union or separation.  A communication between spouses or partners while living separate and apart under a divorce from bed and board or legal separation from a partner in a civil union shall not be a privileged communication.
 
	L.1960, c.52, s.22; amended 1992, c.142, s.2; 2013, c.103, s.17; 2015, c.138, s.2.

2A:84A-22.1  Definitions.
  
	1.	As used in this act, (a) "patient" means a person who, for the sole purpose of securing preventive, palliative, or curative treatment, or a diagnosis preliminary to such treatment, of the patient's physical or mental condition, consults a physician, or submits to an examination by a physician; (b) "physician" means a person authorized or reasonably believed by the patient to be authorized, to practice medicine in the State or jurisdiction in which the consultation or examination takes place; (c) "holder of the privilege" means the patient while alive and not under the guardianship or the guardian of the person of a patient who is incapacitated, or the personal representative of a deceased patient; (d) "confidential communication between physician and patient" means such information transmitted between physician and patient, including information obtained by an examination of the patient, as is transmitted in confidence and by a means which, so far as the patient is aware, discloses the information to no third persons other than those reasonably necessary for the transmission of the information or the accomplishment of the purpose for which it is transmitted.
 
	L.1968, c.185, s.1; amended 2013, c.103, s.18.

2A:84A-22.2.  Patient and physician privilege
    Except as otherwise provided in this act, a person, whether or not a party,  has a privilege in a civil action or in a prosecution for a crime or violation  of the disorderly persons law or for an act of juvenile delinquency to refuse  to disclose, and to prevent a witness from disclosing, a communication, if he  claims the privilege and the judge finds that (a) the communication was a  confidential communication between patient and physician, and (b) the patient  or the physician reasonably believed the communication to be necessary or  helpful to enable the physician to make a diagnosis of the condition of the  patient or to prescribe or render treatment therefor, and (c) the witness (i)  is the holder of the privilege or (ii) at the time of the communication was the  physician or a person to whom disclosure was made because reasonably necessary  for the transmission of the communication or for the accomplishment of the  purpose for which it was transmitted or (iii) is any other person who obtained  knowledge or possession of the communication as the result of an intentional  breach of the physician's duty of nondisclosure by the physician or his agent  or servant and (d) the claimant is the holder of the privilege or a person authorized to claim the privilege for him.

     L.1968, c. 185, s. 2, eff. July 19, 1968.

2A:84A-22.3  No privilege relative to certain communications between patient, physician.

	3.	There is no privilege under this act as to any relevant communication between the patient and his physician (a) upon an issue of the patient's condition in an action to commit him or otherwise place him under the control of another or others because of alleged incapacity, or in an action in which the patient seeks to establish his competence or in an action to recover  damages on account of conduct of the patient which constitutes a criminal offense other than a misdemeanor, or (b) upon an issue as to the validity of a document as a will of the patient, or (c) upon an issue between parties claiming by testate or intestate succession from a deceased patient.

	L.1968,c.185,s.3; amended 1997, c.379, s.10.

2A:84A-22.4.  Contract of patient;  condition of patient is element of claim;  nonprivileged communications
    There is no privilege under this act in an action in which the condition of  the patient is an element or factor of the claim or defense of the patient or  of any party claiming through or under the patient or claiming as a beneficiary  of the patient through a contract to which the patient is or was a party or  under which the patient is or was insured.

     L.1968, c. 185, s. 4, eff. July 19, 1968.

2A:84A-22.5.  Information reported to public official;  nonprivileged communications
    There is no privilege under this act as to information which the physician or the patient is required to report to a public official or as to information required to be recorded in a public office, unless the statute requiring the report or record specifically provides that the information shall not be disclosed.

     L.1968, c. 185, s. 5, eff. July 19, 1968.

2A:84A-22.6.  Obtaining physician to aid commission of crime or tort, or to  escape detection or apprehension;  nonprivileged communications
    No person has a privilege under this act if the judge finds that sufficient  evidence, aside from the communication has been introduced to warrant a finding  that the services of the physician were sought or obtained to enable or aid  anyone to commit or to plan to commit a crime or a tort, or to escape detection  or apprehension after the commission of a crime or a tort.

     L.1968, c. 185, s. 6, eff. July 19, 1968.

2A:84A-22.7.  Testimony by physician on request of holder of privilege; termination of privilege
    A privilege under this act as to a communication is terminated if the judge  finds that any person while a holder of the privilege has caused the physician  or any agent or servant of the physician to testify in any action to any matter  of which the physician or his agent or servant gained knowledge through the  communication.

     L.1968, c. 185, s. 7, eff. July 19, 1968.

2A:84A-22.8.  Utilization review committees of certified hospital or extended care facility;  exceptions
    Information and data secured by and in the possession of utilization review  committees established by any certified hospital or extended care facility in  the performance of their duties shall not be revealed or disclosed in any  manner or under any circumstances by any member of such committee except to:   (a) a patient's attending physician, (b) the chief administrative officer of  the hospital or extended care facility which it serves, (c) the medical  executive committee, or comparable enforcement unit, of such hospital or  extended care facility, (d) representatives of, including intermediaries or  carriers for, government agencies in the performance of their duties, under the  provisions of Federal and State law, or (e) any hospital service corporation,  medical service corporation or insurance company with which said patient has  pertinent coverage under a contract, policy or certificate, the terms of which  authorize the carrier to request and be given such information and data.

     L.1970, c. 313, s. 1, eff. Dec. 21, 1970.  Amended by L.1979, c. 68, s. 1, eff. April 10, 1979.

2A:84A-22.9.  Liability of member of utilization review committee for disclosure of information
    No member of a utilization review committee may be held liable for damages or otherwise prejudiced in any manner by reason of recommendations or findings made by said committee or for furnishing information or data obtained in the course of his duties as a member of a committee to the persons and officials mentioned in section 1 hereof.

     L.1970, c. 313, s. 2, eff. Dec. 21, 1970.

2A:84A-22.10. Hospital or long-term health care facility committees; professional review committees; liability of members  
     Any person who serves as a member of, is staff to, under a contract or other formal agreement with, participates with, or assists with respect to an action of:

  

    a.   A hospital or long-term health care facility committee established to administer a utilization review plan for such hospital or long-term health care facility; or

  

    b.   A hospital medical staff committee having the responsibility of evaluation and improvement of the quality of care rendered in such hospital; or

  

    c.   (Deleted by amendment, P.L.1985, c.506.)

  

    d.   A hospital peer-review committee having the responsibility for the review of the qualifications and credentials of physicians or dentists seeking appointment or reappointment to the medical or dental staff of a hospital, or of questions of the clinical or administrative competence of physicians or dentists so appointed, or of matters concerning limiting the scope of hospital privileges of physicians or dentists on the staff, or of matters concerning the dismissal or discharge of same; or  

    e.   A peer-review, ethics, grievance, judicial, quality assurance or professional relations committee or subcommittee thereof of a local, county or State medical, dental, podiatric, optometric, psychological, veterinary, chiropractic or pharmaceutical society or long-term health care facility association, of any such society or association itself, or of a health maintenance organization, when such society, association or organization or committee or subcommittee thereof is performing any peer-review, ethics, grievance, judicial, quality assurance or professional relations review function that  

    (1)  Is described in subsections a., b., and d., above of this section; or

  

    (2)  Involves any controversy or dispute between (a) a physician, dentist, podiatrist, optometrist, psychologist, veterinarian, chiropractor, pharmacist, nurse, dietitian or licensed administrator and a patient or, in the case of a veterinarian, the patient's owner, concerning the diagnosis, treatment or care of such patient or the fees or charges therefor, (b) a physician, dentist, podiatrist, optometrist, psychologist, veterinarian, chiropractor, pharmacist, nurse, dietitian or licensed administrator and a provider of medical, dental, podiatric, veterinary, optometric, psychological, or pharmaceutical benefits concerning any medical or health charges or fees of such physician, dentist, podiatrist, optometrist, psychologist, veterinarian, chiropractor, pharmacist, nurse, dietitian or licensed administrator, or (c) physicians, dentists, podiatrists, optometrists, psychologists, veterinarians, chiropractors, pharmacists, nurses, dietitians or licensed administrators:

 shall not be liable in damages to any person for any action taken or recommendation made by him within the scope of his function with the committee, subcommittee or society in the performance of said peer-review, ethics, grievance, judicial, quality assurance or professional relations review functions, if such action or recommendation was taken or made without malice and in the reasonable belief after reasonable investigation that such action or recommendation was warranted upon the basis of facts disclosed.  

    L.1979, c.128, s.1; amended 1985,c.506; 1987,c.241; 1989,c.300,s.24.  

2A:84A-22.13.   Findings, declarations 
    The Legislature finds and declares that: 

   a.   The emotional and psychological injuries that are inflicted on victims of violence are often more serious than the physical injuries suffered; 

   b.   Counseling is often a successful treatment to ease the real and profound psychological trauma experienced by these victims and their families;

   c.   In the counseling process, victims of violence openly discuss their emotional reactions to the crime.  These reactions are often highly intertwined with their personal histories and psychological profile; 

   d.   Counseling of violence and victims is most successful when the victims are assured their thoughts and feelings will remain confidential and will not be disclosed without their permission; and 

   e.   Confidentiality should be accorded all victims of violence who require counseling whether or not they are able to afford the services of private psychiatrists or psychologists. 

   Therefore, it is the public policy of this State to extend a testimonial privilege encompassing the contents of communications with a victim counselor and to render immune from discovery or legal process the records of these communications maintained by the counselor. 

   L. 1987, c. 169, s. 2. 

2A:84A-22.14  Definitions.

	3.	As used in this act:

	a.	"Act of violence" means the commission or attempt to commit any of the offenses set forth in subsection b. of section 11 of P.L.1971, c.317 (C.52:4B-11).

	b.	"Confidential communication" means any information exchanged between a victim and a victim counselor in private or in the presence of a third party who is necessary to facilitate communication or further the counseling process and which is disclosed in the course of the counselor's treatment of the victim for any emotional or psychological condition resulting from an act of violence.  It includes any advice, report or working paper given or made in the course of the consultation and all information received by the victim counselor in the course of that relationship.

	c.	"Victim" means a person who consults a counselor for the purpose of securing advice, counseling or assistance concerning a mental, physical or emotional condition caused by an act of violence.

	d.	"Victim counseling center" means any office, institution, or center offering assistance to victims and their families through crisis intervention, medical and legal accompaniment and follow-up counseling.

	e.	"Victim counselor" means a person engaged in any office, institution or center defined as a victim counseling center by this act, who has undergone 40 hours of training and is under the control of a direct services supervisor of the center and who has a primary function of rendering advice, counseling or assisting victims of acts of violence. "Victim counselor" includes a rape care advocate as defined in section 4 of P.L.2001, c.81 (C.52:4B-52).

	L.1987,c.169,s.3; amended 2001, c.81, s.1.

2A:84A-22.15  Victim counselor confidentiality privilege.
 
 	4.	Subject to Rule 37 of the Rules of Evidence, a victim counselor has a privilege not to be examined as a witness in any civil or criminal proceeding with regard to any confidential communication.  The privilege shall be claimed by the counselor unless otherwise instructed by prior written consent of the victim.  When a victim is incapacitated or deceased consent to disclosure may be given by the guardian, executor, or administrator except when the guardian, executor, or administrator is the defendant or has a relationship with the victim such that the guardian, executor, or administrator has an interest in the outcome of the proceeding.  The privilege may be knowingly waived by a juvenile.  In any instance where the juvenile is, in the opinion of the judge, incapable of knowing consent, the parent or guardian of the juvenile may waive the privilege on behalf of the juvenile, provided that the parent or guardian is not the defendant and does not have a relationship with the defendant such that he has an interest in the outcome of the proceeding.  A victim counselor or a victim cannot be compelled to provide testimony in any civil or criminal proceeding that would identify the name, address, location, or telephone number of a domestic violence shelter or any other facility that provided temporary emergency shelter to the victim of the offense or transaction that is the subject of the proceeding unless the facility is a party to the proceeding.
 
	L.1987, c.169, s.4; amended 2013, c.103, s.19.

2A:84A-22.16.   Where disclosure required 
    Nothing in this act shall be deemed to prevent the disclosure to a defendant in a criminal action of statements or information given by a victim to a county victim-witness coordinator, where the disclosure of the statements or information is required by the Constitution of this State or of the United States. 

   L. 1987, c. 169, s. 5. 

2A:84A-22.17  Trauma counseling for emergency services personnel.
	1. a. As used in this act:

	"Certified crisis assistance counselor" means a member of a law enforcement agency, emergency medical service unit, fire department or force, emergency communications provider, volunteer fire department, duly incorporated fire or first aid company, volunteer emergency, ambulance or rescue squad association or organization, an authorized representative of a collective bargaining unit or organization representing law enforcement officers or firefighters, or any private citizen designated by an emergency services provider to provide crisis assistance services who is certified by an entity designated by the Commissioner of Human Services to certify individuals to provide crisis assistance services.
 
	"Crisis assistance program" means a program established by an emergency services provider to provide crisis assistance services to employees and volunteers who, while providing emergency services, have been involved in incidents which may produce personal or job-related depression, anxiety, stress, or other psychological or emotional tensions, traumas, pressures, or disorders.  Such incidents may include, but shall not be limited to: an event involving the firing of a weapon; significant or serious bodily injury; death; a terroristic act; a hostage situation; or personal injury.
 
	"Crisis assistance services" means consultations, counseling, debriefing, defusing, intervention services, prevention services, and referrals provided to emergency services personnel through a crisis assistance program.
 
	"Emergency services personnel" means a person who is employed as a law enforcement officer, emergency medical service technician, firefighter, emergency communications operator, or in some related occupation or profession, or who serves as a volunteer member of a fire department, duly incorporated fire or first aid company, volunteer emergency, ambulance or rescue squad association or organization and provides emergency services for a local governmental unit.
 
	"Emergency services provider" means a local law enforcement agency, emergency medical services unit, fire department or force, emergency communications provider, volunteer fire department, duly incorporated fire or first aid company, volunteer emergency, ambulance or rescue squad association or organization or company which provides emergency services.
 
	b.	Except as otherwise provided in subsection c. of this act:
 
	(1)	All information exchanged between a certified crisis assistance counselor and any emergency services personnel participating in a crisis assistance program shall be deemed confidential and shall not be disclosed to any other person; and 
 
	(2)	A certified crisis assistance counselor shall be privileged against examination as a witness in any civil or criminal proceeding, or in any administrative or arbitration proceeding, with regard to the exchange of information that occurred in a crisis assistance program.
 
	c.	Nothing in this act shall be deemed to prohibit:
 
	(1)	A professional exchange of information between certified crisis assistance counselors, counseling supervisors, and appropriately licensed or certified psychologists, social workers, or mental health professionals designated by, or contracted by, the emergency services provider for the exclusive purpose of providing for the care and treatment of any emergency services personnel who have been involved in incidents which produced personal or job-related depression, anxiety, stress, or other psychological or emotional tensions, traumas, pressures, or disorders;
 
	(2)	An exchange of information concerning any threat or suggestion of suicide or physical harm;
 
	(3)	An exchange of information relating to child abuse or elder abuse; or
 
	(4)	An exchange of information relating to the commission of a crime.
 
	d. (1) An individual who provides crisis assistance services pursuant to this section shall:
 
	(a)	be certified by an entity designated by the Commissioner of Human Services to certify individuals to provide crisis assistance services; and
 
	(b)	provide documentation and annual proof of certification to each emergency services provider employing the services of the certified crisis assistance counselor.
 
	(2)	An emergency services provider employing the services of a certified crisis assistance counselor shall maintain the documentation and proof of certification provided by the counselor pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection, which shall be made available to the commissioner upon request.
 
	e.	If an emergency services provider employing the services of a certified crisis assistance counselor determines that the counselor has violated the requirements of this section, the provider shall promptly notify the entity that certified the counselor of the violation.  A counselor who violates the requirements of this section shall be considered decertified and shall be ineligible to provide crisis assistance services as a certified crisis assistance counselor for a period of five years from the date of decertification.
 
	L.2013, c.233, s.1; amended 2019, c.492.

2A:84A-22.18  Definitions.
	1.	As used in sections 1 and 2 of P.L.2022, c.51 (C.2A:84A-22.18 and C.2A:84A-22.19):
 
	"Person" includes an individual, partnership, association, limited liability company, or corporation.
 
	"Reproductive health care services" means all medical, surgical, counseling, or referral services relating to the human reproductive system including, but not limited to, services relating to pregnancy, contraception, or termination of a pregnancy.
 
	a.	Except as provided in sections 3 through 7 of P.L.1968, c.185 (C.2A:84A-22.3 through 2A:84A-22.7), section 1 of P.L.1970, c. 313 (C.2A:84A-22.8), section 29 of P.L.1968, c.401 (C.45:8B-29), and subsection b. of this section, in any civil action or proceeding preliminary thereto or in any probate, legislative or administrative proceeding, a covered entity, as set forth in the medical privacy and security rules pursuant to Parts 160 and 164 of Subchapter C of Subtitle A of Title 45 of the Code of Federal Regulations, established pursuant to the "Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996," Pub.L.104-191, shall not disclose, unless the patient or that patient's conservator, guardian, or other authorized legal representative explicitly consents in writing to the disclosure:
 
	(1) any communication made to the covered entity, or any information obtained by the covered entity from, a patient or the conservator, guardian, or other authorized legal representative of a patient relating to reproductive health care services that are permitted under the laws of this State; or
 
	(2) any information obtained by personal examination of a patient relating to reproductive health care services that are permitted under the laws of this State.
 
	A covered entity shall inform the patient or the patient's conservator, guardian, or other authorized legal representative of the patient's right to withhold such written consent at or before the time reproductive health care services are rendered or at such time as the patient discloses any information relating to reproductive health care services that have been previously rendered.
 
	b.	Written consent of the patient or the patient's conservator, guardian, or other authorized legal representative shall not be required for the disclosure of any communication or information:
 
	(1) pursuant to the laws of this State or the Rules of Court;
 
	(2) by a covered entity against whom a claim has been made, or there is a reasonable belief will be made, in an action or proceeding, to the covered entity's attorney or professional liability insurer or insurer's agent for use in the defense of the action or proceeding;
 
	(3) to the Commissioner of Health, Human Services, or Banking and Insurance, or any professional licensing board operating under the authority of the Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Law and Public Safety for records of a patient of a covered entity in connection with an investigation of a complaint, if the records are related to the complaint; or
 
	(4) if child abuse, abuse of an elderly individual, abuse of an individual who is incapacitated, or abuse of an individual with a physical or mental disability is known or in good faith suspected.  For the purposes of this paragraph, the provision of or material support for reproductive health care services that are permitted under the laws of this State shall not constitute abuse.
 
	Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to conflict with or displace any requirements or conditions for disclosure set forth under 45 C.F.R. ss.160.203 and 164.514.
 
	c.	Nothing in this section shall be construed to impede the lawful sharing of medical records as permitted by State or federal law or the Rules of Court.

	L.2022, c.51, s.1.

2A:84A-22.19  Disclosure of information, certain, expending of resources, certain, prohibited.
	2.	A public entity of this State or employee, appointee, officer or official or any other person acting on behalf of a public entity shall not provide any information or expend or use time, money, facilities, property, equipment, personnel or other resources in furtherance of any interstate investigation or proceeding seeking to impose civil or criminal liability upon a person or entity for:
 
	(1) the provision, receipt, or seeking of, or inquiring or responding to an inquiry about, reproductive health care services, as defined in section 1 of P.L.2022, c.51 (C.2A:84A-22.18), that are legal in this State; or
 
	(2) assisting, advising, aiding, abetting, facilitating, soliciting, or conspiring with any person or entity providing, receiving, seeking, or inquiring or responding to an inquiry about, reproductive health care services, as defined in section 1 of P.L.2022, c.51 (C.2A:84A-22.18), that are legal in this State.
 
	This section shall not apply to any investigation or proceeding when the conduct subject to potential liability under the investigation or proceeding would be subject to liability under the laws of this State if committed in this State.  This section shall not apply if it is necessary for the agency or person to engage in conduct otherwise prohibited by this section in order to comply with a valid order issued by a court with jurisdiction over the agency or person, or to comply with applicable provisions of State or federal law.

	L.2022, c.51, s.2.

2A:84A-23.   Cleric-penitent privilege  
    23.  Rule 511.  Cleric-penitent privilege.

   Any communication made in confidence to a cleric in the cleric's professional character, or as a spiritual advisor in the course of the discipline or practice of the religious body to which the cleric belongs or of the religion which the cleric professes, shall be privileged.  Privileged communications shall include confessions and other communications made in confidence between and among the cleric and individuals, couples, families or groups in the exercise of the cleric's professional or spiritual counseling role.  

   As used in this section, "cleric" means a priest, rabbi, minister or other person or practitioner authorized to perform similar functions of any religion.  

   The privilege accorded to communications under this rule shall belong to both the cleric and the person or persons making the communication and shall be subject to waiver only under the following circumstances:  

   (1)  both the person or persons making the communication and the cleric consent to the waiver of the privilege; or  

   (2)  the privileged communication pertains to a future criminal act, in which case, the cleric alone may, but is not required to, waive the privilege.

   L.1960,c.52,s.23; amended 1981,c.303,s.2; 1994,c.123.  

2A:84A-24.  Religious belief
    Rule 30.

    Every person has a privilege to refuse to disclose his theological opinion or religious belief unless his adherence or nonadherence to such an opinion or belief is material to an issue in the action other than that of his credibility  as a witness.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 458, s. 24, eff. July 1, 1960.

2A:84A-25.  Political vote
    Rule 31.

    Every person has a privilege to refuse to disclose the tenor of his vote at  a political election unless the judge finds that the vote was cast illegally.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 459, s. 25, eff. July 1, 1960.

2A:84A-26.  Trade secret
    Rule 32.

    The owner of a trade secret has a privilege, which may be claimed by him or  his agent or employee, to refuse to disclose the secret and to prevent other  persons from disclosing it if the judge finds that the allowance of the privilege will not tend to conceal fraud or otherwise work injustice.

     L.1960, c. 52, s.26,  p. 459, eff. July 1, 1960.

2A:84A-27.  Official information
    Rule 34.

    No person shall disclose official information of this State or of the United  States (a) if disclosure is forbidden by or pursuant to any Act of Congress or  of this State, or (b) if the judge finds that disclosure of the information in  the action will be harmful to the interests of the public.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 459, s. 27, eff. July 1, 1960.

2A:84A-28.  Identity of informer
    Rule 36.

    A witness has a privilege to refuse to disclose the identity of a person who  has furnished information purporting to disclose a violation of a provision of  the laws of this State or of the United States to a representative of the State  or the United States or a governmental division thereof, charged with the duty  of enforcing that provision, and evidence thereof is inadmissible, unless the  judge finds that (a) the identity of the person furnishing the information has  already been otherwise disclosed or (b) disclosure of his identity is essential  to assure a fair determination of the issues.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 459, s. 28, eff. July 1, 1960.

2A:84A-29.  Waiver of privilege by contract or previous disclosure; limitations
    Rule 37.

    A person waives his right or privilege to refuse to disclose or to prevent another from disclosing a specified matter if he or any other person while the holder thereof has (a) contracted with anyone not to claim the right or privilege or, (b) without coercion and with knowledge of his right or privilege, made disclosure of any part of the privileged matter or consented to  such a disclosure made by anyone.

    A disclosure which is itself privileged or otherwise protected by the common  law, statutes or rules of court of this State, or by lawful contract, shall not  constitute a waiver under this section.  The failure of a witness to claim a  right or privilege with respect to 1 question shall not operate as a waiver  with respect to any other question.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 459, s. 29, eff. July 1, 1960.

2A:84A-30.  Admissibility of disclosure wrongfully compelled
    Rule 38.

    Evidence of a statement or other disclosure is inadmissible against the holder of the privilege if the disclosure was wrongfully made or erroneously required.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 460, s. 30, eff. July 1, 1960.

2A:84A-31.  Reference to exercise of privileges
    Rule 39.

    If a privilege is exercised not to testify or to prevent another from testifying, either in the action or with respect to particular matters, or to refuse to disclose or to prevent another from disclosing any matter, the judge and counsel may not comment thereon, no presumption shall arise with respect to  the exercise of the privilege, and the trier of fact may not draw any adverse  inference therefrom.  In those jury cases wherein the right to exercise a  privilege, as herein provided, may be misunderstood and unfavorable inferences  drawn by the trier of the fact, or be impaired in the particular case, the  court, at the request of the party exercising the privilege, may instruct the  jury in support of such privilege.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 460, s. 31, eff. July 1, 1960.  Amended Sept. 14, 1979, eff. July 1, 1980.

2A:84A-32.  Effect of error in overruling claim of privilege
    Rule 40.

    (1) A party may predicate error on a ruling disallowing a claim of privilege  only if he is the holder of the privilege.

    (2) If a witness refuses to answer a question, under color of a privilege claimed pursuant to Rules 23 through 38, after the judge has ordered the witness to answer, and a contempt proceeding is brought against the witness, the court hearing the same shall order it dismissed if it appears that the order directing the witness to answer was erroneous.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 460, s. 32, eff. July 1, 1960.

2A:84A-32a  Motion for performance of forensic DNA testing, certain circumstances.
 
	1. a. Any eligible person may make a motion before the trial court that entered the judgment of conviction for the performance of forensic DNA testing.
 
	(1)	The motion shall be verified by the eligible person under penalty of perjury and shall do all of the following:
 
	(a)	explain why the identity of the defendant was a significant issue in the case;
 
	(b)	explain in light of all the evidence, how if the results of the requested DNA testing are favorable to the defendant, a motion for a new trial based upon newly discovered evidence would be granted;
 
	(c)	explain whether DNA testing was done at any prior time, whether the defendant objected to providing a biological sample for DNA testing, and whether the defendant objected to the admissibility of DNA testing evidence at trial.  If evidence was subjected to DNA or other forensic testing previously by either the prosecution or the defense, the court shall order the prosecution or defense to provide all parties and the court with access to the laboratory reports, underlying data and laboratory notes prepared in connection with the DNA testing;
 
	(d)	make every reasonable attempt to identify both the evidence that should be tested and the specific type of DNA testing sought; and
 
	(e)	include consent to provide a biological sample for DNA testing.
 
	(2)	Notice of the motion shall be served on the Attorney General, the prosecutor in the county of conviction, and if known, the governmental agency or laboratory holding the evidence sought to be tested.  Responses, if any, shall be filed within 60 days of the date on which the Attorney General and the prosecutor are served with the motion, unless a continuance is granted. The Attorney General or prosecutor may support the motion for DNA testing or oppose it with a statement of reasons and may recommend to the court that if any DNA testing is ordered, a particular type of testing be conducted.
 
	b.	The court, in its discretion, may order a hearing on the motion.  The motion shall be heard by the judge who conducted the trial unless the presiding judge determines that judge is unavailable. Upon request of either party, the court may order, in the interest of justice, that the eligible person who is serving a term of imprisonment at the time of the hearing be present at the hearing of the motion. 
 
	c.	The court shall appoint counsel for the eligible person who brings a motion pursuant to this section if that person is indigent.
 
	d.	The court shall not grant the motion for DNA testing unless, after conducting a hearing, it determines that all of the following have been established:
 
	(1)	the evidence to be tested is available and in a condition that would permit the DNA testing that is requested in the motion;
 
	(2)	the evidence to be tested has been subject to a chain of custody sufficient to establish it has not been substituted, tampered with, replaced or altered in any material aspect;
 
	(3)	the identity of the defendant was a significant issue in the case;
 
	(4)	the eligible person has made a prima facie showing that the evidence sought to be tested is material to the issue of the eligible person's identity as the offender;
 
	(5)	the requested DNA testing result would raise a reasonable probability that if the results were favorable to the defendant, a motion for a new trial based upon newly discovered evidence would be granted.  The court in its discretion may consider any evidence whether or not it was introduced at trial;
 
	(6)	the evidence sought to be tested meets either of the following conditions:
 
	(a)	it was not tested previously;
 
	(b)	it was tested previously, but the requested DNA test would provide results that are reasonably more discriminating and probative of the identity of the offender or have a reasonable probability of contradicting prior test results;
 
	(7)	the testing requested employs a method generally accepted within the relevant scientific community; and
 
	(8)	the motion is not made solely for the purpose of delay.
 
	e.	If the court grants the motion for DNA testing, the court order shall identify the specific evidence to be tested and the DNA technology to be used. 
 
	(1)	 If the parties agree upon a mutually acceptable laboratory that is accredited by a nonprofit professional association of persons actively involved in forensic science that is nationally recognized within the forensic science community and approved by the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation in accordance with the provisions of the Federal DNA Identification Act, 42 U.S.C.A. s.14131, the testing shall be conducted by that laboratory.
 
	(2)	If the parties fail to agree, the testing shall be conducted by the New Jersey State Police Office of Forensic Sciences Laboratory.  For good cause shown, however, the court may, subject to the provisions of section 2 of P.L.2015, c.127 (C.2A:84A-32c), direct the evidence to an alternative laboratory that is accredited by a nonprofit professional association of persons actively involved in forensic science that is nationally recognized within the forensic science community and approved by the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation in accordance with the provisions of the Federal DNA Identification Act, 42 U.S.C.A. s.14131.
 
	f.	The result of any testing ordered pursuant to this section shall be fully disclosed to the person filing the motion, the prosecutor and the Attorney General.  If requested by any party, the court shall order production of the underlying laboratory data and notes.
 
	g.	The costs of the DNA testing ordered pursuant to this section shall be borne by the eligible person.
 
	h.	An order granting or denying a motion for DNA testing pursuant to this section may be appealed, pursuant to the Rules of Court. 
 
	i.	DNA testing ordered by the court pursuant to this section shall be done as soon as practicable. 
 
	j.	DNA profile information from biological samples taken from an eligible person pursuant to a motion for post-conviction DNA testing in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be treated as confidential and shall not be deemed a public record under P.L.1963, c.73 (C.47:1A-1 et seq.) or the common law concerning access to public records; except as provided in section 2 of P.L.2001, c.377 (C.53:1-20.37).
 
	k.	As used in this act and in P.L.2015, c.127 (C.2A:84A-32c et al.):
 
	"DNA," "DNA sample," "State DNA databank," "CODIS" and "FBI" shall have the meaning set forth in section 3 of P.L.1994, c.136 (C.53:1-20.19).
 
	"NDIS-participating laboratory" is a laboratory that has been designated to operate CODIS and participate in the National and State DNA Index System.  
 
	l.	If evidence tested at a non-NDIS-participating laboratory pursuant to this section reveals a DNA profile that is not that of the eligible person or the victim, the court shall direct the prosecuting agency appearing on the motion to request that the New Jersey State Police Office of Forensic Services DNA Laboratory or other NDIS-participating laboratory involved in the matter submit the profile to CODIS, if the requirements and prerequisites for acceptance and submission are met, to determine whether it matches a DNA profile of a known individual or a DNA profile from an unsolved crime.
 
	m.	An eligible person may file a motion for the performance of forensic DNA testing with the trial court that entered the judgment of conviction. The motion may be considered in accordance with the provisions of this section only if the court finds just cause to hear the motion. 
 
	For a person who was convicted of a crime and is serving a sentence imposed for that criminal conviction, a determination of just cause shall be based on a reasonable probability that, if the results of the requested DNA testing were favorable, a motion for a new trial based on newly discovered evidence would be granted.
 
	For a person who has been convicted of a crime and has completed serving the sentence for that conviction, a determination of just cause shall be based on a significant likelihood that, if the results of the requested DNA testing were favorable, a motion for a new trial based on newly discovered evidence would be granted.
 
	n.	For the purposes of this section, "eligible person" means a person who was convicted of a crime: 
 
	(1)	and is currently serving a sentence imposed for that criminal conviction which includes a period of imprisonment; or
 
	(2)	who has completed serving the sentence for that conviction and demonstrates just cause as established in subsection m. of this section.
 
	L.2001, c.377, s.1; amended 2015, c.127, s.1.

2A:84A-32b  Rules.
	3.	The Supreme Court of New Jersey may adopt rules appropriate and necessary to effectuate the purpose of this act.

	L.2001,c.377,s.3.

2A:84A-32c  Procedures for DNA testing at accredited non-NDIS participating laboratory.
 
	2. a. If a party seeks to conduct DNA testing at an accredited non-NDIS participating laboratory that otherwise meets the requirements set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection e. of section 1 of P.L.2001, c.377 (C.2A:84A-32a) and the party seeks to submit the DNA profile information to CODIS in accordance with subsection l. of section 1 of P.L.2001, c.377 (C.2A:84A-32a) the party, upon notice to the Attorney General and to the NDIS-participating laboratory, may request the court to order the NDIS-participating laboratory within the State to evaluate whether the laboratory at which the party seeks to conduct DNA testing is in compliance with the FBI Quality Assurance Standards for Forensic DNA Testing Laboratories for the purpose of uploading crime scene profiles to CODIS. The Attorney General may appear on the motion on his own behalf or on behalf of the NDIS-participating laboratory, if that laboratory is a public entity.
 
	b.	The court may order the NDIS-participating laboratory to conduct an evaluation pursuant to subsection b. of this section only if the court finds that the moving party clearly demonstrates: 
 
	(1)	the New Jersey State Police Office of Forensic Sciences DNA Laboratory is not able to, or for practical reasons has determined not to, perform the specific testing and analysis sought by the moving party, or that its performance of the testing and analysis would not be substantially equivalent to that of the other laboratory, or that the testing would not otherwise be appropriate; 
 
	(2)	there is a significant likelihood that, if the results of the requested DNA testing were favorable to the moving party, a motion for a new trial based upon newly discovered evidence would be granted; 
 
	(3)	requiring the NDIS-participating laboratory to conduct the evaluation will not delay investigations or unduly burden the resources of the New Jersey State Police Office of Forensic Sciences DNA Laboratory or other NDIS-participating laboratory that may be involved in the matter; and 
 
	(4)	if an evaluation were undertaken, there would be a reasonable likelihood that the results of the evaluation would conclude in a finding by the NDIS-participating laboratory that the laboratory at which the party seeks to conduct DNA testing is in compliance with the FBI Quality Assurance Standards for Forensic DNA Testing Laboratories for the purpose of uploading crime scene profiles to CODIS, and that the results of that laboratory's DNA testing, if a DNA profile is generated, would comply with federal requirements for inclusion in CODIS.
 
	c.	If the court orders an evaluation pursuant to subsection b. of this section, within 120 days of receiving the court's order, the NDIS-participating laboratory shall complete the pre-approval process to determine if the non-NDIS-participating laboratory at which the party  seeks to conduct DNA testing is in compliance with FBI Quality Assurance Standards for Forensic DNA Testing Laboratories, by obtaining and reviewing the records of an on-site visit and assessment conducted by the FBI or another NDIS-participating laboratory.  If an on-site visit and assessment have not been conducted within the time frames required by federal law or the laboratory does not comply with other applicable standards, or the results of an on-site visit and assessment are unavailable, the NDIS-participating laboratory may, within the limits of available resources, conduct its own on-site visit and assessment of the laboratory at which the party seeks to conduct DNA testing, provided that the laboratory agrees to cooperate with the on-site visit and assessment and the moving party bears the costs associated with the on-site visit and assessment. 
 
	d.	In the event that the requirements set forth in the FBI Quality Assurance Standards for Forensic DNA Testing Laboratories following the effective date of P.L.2015, c.127 (C.2A:84A-32c et al.) are amended or otherwise superseded, the NDIS-participating laboratory shall complete such other process as may be prescribed for the assessment of non-NDIS-participating laboratories. 
 
	e.	A determination by the NDIS-participating laboratory as to whether the laboratory at which the party seeks to conduct DNA testing is in compliance with FBI Quality Assurance Standards for Forensic DNA Testing Laboratories shall not be subject to judicial review.
 
	L.2015, c.127, s.2.

2A:84A-32d  Construction of act.
 
	3.	Nothing in P.L.2015, c.127 (C.2A:84A-32c et al.) shall be construed to: 

	a.	create a right, obligation, or requirement regarding the preservation of evidence, including evidence that may contain a biological sample; 
 
	b.	provide a basis for a remedy or cause of action based on a failure to preserve or retain evidence, including evidence that may contain a biological sample; or
 
	c.	affect or modify the Guidelines for the Retention of Evidence promulgated by the Attorney General and any successor guidelines or directives promulgated or issued by the Attorney General.
 
	L.2015, c.127, s.3.

2A:84A-32e  Findings, declarations relative to preservation of biological evidence.
 	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	The value of properly preserved biological evidence has been enhanced by the discovery of modern DNA testing methods, which, coupled with a comprehensive system of DNA databases that store crime scene and offender profiles, allow law enforcement to improve its crime-solving potential;
 
	b.	Tapping the potential of preserved biological evidence requires that this evidence be properly identified, collected, preserved, stored, catalogued, and organized;
 
	c.	Law enforcement agencies indicate that "cold" case investigations are hindered by an inability to access biological evidence that was collected during criminal investigations;
 
	d.	Innocent people mistakenly convicted of serious crimes for which biological evidence is probative cannot prove their innocence if the evidence is not accessible for testing under appropriate circumstances;
 
	e.	It is established that the failure to update policies regarding the preservation of evidence squanders valuable law enforcement resources, manpower hours, and storage space; and
 
	f.	Simple but crucial enhancements to protocols for properly preserving biological evidence can solve old crimes, enhance public safety, and settle claims of innocence.
 
	L.2017, c.248, s.1.

2A:84A-32f  Definitions relative to the preservation of biological evidence.
 	2.	For the purposes of this act:

	"Biological evidence" means any item that contains blood, semen, hair, saliva, skin tissue, fingernail scrapings, bone, bodily fluids, or other identifiable biological material that was collected as part of the criminal investigation or may reasonably be used to incriminate or exculpate any person for the offense, whether this material is catalogued separately, such as on a slide or swab or in a test tube, or is present on other evidence, including, but not limited to, clothing, ligatures, bedding, or other household material, drinking cups, and cigarettes; the term also shall include the contents of a sexual assault examination kit.
 
	"Custody" means when a person currently is incarcerated, civilly committed, on parole or probation, or subject to sex offender registration.
 
	"Director" means the Director of the Division of Criminal Justice in the Department of Law and Public Safety.
 
	"DNA" means deoxyribonucleic acid.
 
	"Law enforcement or prosecuting agency" or "agency" means any governmental, public or private person or entity within this State charged with the collection, storage, or retrieval of biological evidence, including, but not limited to, law enforcement agencies, prosecutors' offices, courts, public hospitals, and crime laboratories.
 
	"Profile" means a unique identifier of a person which is derived from that person's DNA.  
 
	L.2017, c.248, s.2.

2A:84A-32g  Preservation of biological evidence.
 	3. a. Every law enforcement or prosecuting agency shall preserve any biological evidence secured in relation to an investigation or prosecution of a crime while:
 
	(1)	The crime remains unsolved; or
 
	(2)	The person convicted of that crime remains in custody.
 
	b.	The provisions of this section shall apply to biological evidence that:
 
	(1)	Was in the possession of the agency during the investigation and prosecution of the case; and
 
	(2)	At the time of conviction was likely to contain biological material.
 
	c.	The agency shall not destroy biological evidence if an additional co-defendant, convicted of the same crime, remains in custody and shall preserve this evidence while all co-defendants remain in custody.
 
	d.	The agency shall retain evidence in the amount and in a manner sufficient to develop a DNA profile from the biological material contained in or included on the evidence.
 
	e.	Upon written request of a defendant, the agency shall prepare an inventory of biological evidence that has been preserved in connection with the defendant's criminal case.
 
	f.	The agency may destroy evidence that includes biological material before the expiration of the time period specified in subsection a. of this section if:
 
	(1)	No other provision of federal or State law requires the agency to preserve the evidence;
 
	(2)	The agency sends certified delivery of notice of intent to destroy the evidence to:
 
	(a)	all persons who remain in custody as a result of the criminal conviction, delinquency adjudication, or commitment related to the evidence in question;
 
	(b)	the attorney of record for each person in custody;
 
	(c)	the public defender;
 
	(d)	the county prosecutor where the person was convicted; and
 
	(e)	the Attorney General; and
 
	(3)	A person notified pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection f. of this section, within 180 days after the date of receipt of the notice, does not:
 
	(a)	file a motion for performance of forensic DNA testing under section 1 of P.L.2001, c.377 (C.2A:84A-32a); or
 
	(b)	submit a written request for retention of evidence to the agency which provided notice of its intent to destroy evidence under paragraph (2) of subsection f. of this section.
 
	g.	If the agency receives a written request for retention of biological evidence after providing notice under paragraph (2) of subsection f. of this section of its intent to destroy that evidence, the agency shall retain the evidence while the person remains in custody.
 
	h.	The agency shall not be required to preserve physical evidence that is of such a size, bulk, or physical character as to render retention impracticable. When such retention is impracticable, the agency shall remove and preserve portions of the material evidence likely to contain biological evidence related to the offense, in a quantity sufficient to permit future DNA testing before returning or disposing of the physical evidence.
 
	i.	If the agency is unable to locate biological evidence that it is required to preserve under this act, the chief evidence custodian assigned to the entity charged with the preservation of the evidence shall provide an affidavit stipulating under penalty of perjury that describes the efforts taken to locate that evidence and that the evidence could not be located.
 
	L.2017, c.248, s.3.

2A:84A-32h  Responsibilities of the director.
	4.	The director shall:

	(1)	Devise standards regarding the proper collection, retention and cataloguing of biological evidence for ongoing investigations and prosecutions;
 
	(2)	Recommend practices, protocols, models, and resources for cataloguing and accessing preserved biological evidence currently in the possession of the State; and
 
	(3)	Administer and conduct training programs for law enforcement officers and other employees charged with preserving and cataloguing biological evidence regarding the methods and procedures outlined in this act.
 
	L.2017, c.248, s.4.

2A:84A-32i  Violations, disorderly persons offense.
 	5.	Any person who by virtue of employment, or official position, has possession of, or access to, biological evidence and destroys that evidence in violation of the provisions of this act is guilty of a disorderly person's offense.
 
	L.2017, c.248, s.5.

2A:84A-32j  Guidelines, procedures.
 	6.	The Attorney General shall promulgate guidelines and procedures governing the preservation of biological evidence as required by this act.
 
	L.2017, c.248, s.6.

2A:84A-32.1.  Prosecutions involving rape;  evidence of complaining witness'  previous sexual conduct
    In prosecutions for the crime of rape, assault with intent to commit rape, and breaking and entering with intent to commit rape, evidence of the complaining witness' previous sexual conduct shall not be admitted nor reference made to it in the presence of the jury except as provided in this act.  When the defendant seeks to admit the evidence for any purpose, he may apply for an order of the court at any time before or during the trial or preliminary hearing.  After the application is made, the court shall conduct a hearing in camera to determine the admissibility of the evidence.  If the court  finds that evidence offered by the defendant regarding the sexual conduct of  the complaining witness is relevant, and that the probative value of the  evidence offered is not outweighed by the probability that its admission will  create undue prejudice, confusion of the issues, or unwarranted invasion of the  privacy of the complaining witness, the court shall make an order stating what  evidence may be introduced and the nature of the questions which shall be  permitted.  The defendant may then offer evidence under the order of the  court.

     L.1976, c. 71, s. 1, eff. Aug. 26, 1976.

2A:84A-32.2.  Conduct one year or more prior to date of offense; presumption of inadmissibility
    In the absence of clear and convincing proof to the contrary, evidence of the complaining witness' sexual conduct occurring more than 1 year before the date of the offense charged is presumed to be inadmissible under this act.

     L.1976, c. 71, s. 2, eff. Aug. 26, 1976.

2A:84A-32.3.  Complaining witness defined
    As used in this act  "complaining witness"  means the alleged victim of the  crime charged, the prosecution of which is subject to this act.

     L.1976, c. 71, s. 3, eff. Aug. 26, 1976.

2A:84A-32.4  Prosecutions, certain actions, closed circuit testimony.
 	1. a. (1) In prosecutions for aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault, aggravated criminal sexual contact, criminal sexual contact, human trafficking involving sexual activity, a crime involving domestic violence as defined in section 3 of P.L.1991, c.261 (C.2C:25-19), endangering the welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.2C:24-4, abuse or neglect of a child pursuant to R.S.9:6-3, or in any action alleging an abused or neglected child under P.L.1974, c.119 (C.9:6-8.21 et seq.), the court may, on motion and after conducting a hearing in camera, order the taking of the testimony of a victim or witness on closed circuit television at the trial, out of the view of the jury, defendant, or spectators upon making findings as provided in subsection b. of this section. 
 
	(2)	In granting such an order, the court shall assure that: 
 
	(a)	the victim or witness will testify under oath; 
 
	(b)	the victim or witness will submit to cross-examination by the defendant's attorney; and
 
	(c)	the defendant, jury, and judge will be permitted to observe the demeanor of the victim or witness when making testimonial statements using closed circuit television.
 
	b.	An order under this section may be made only if the court determines by clear and convincing evidence that there is a substantial likelihood that the victim or witness would suffer severe emotional or mental distress if required to testify in the presence of spectators, the defendant, the jury, or all of them.  The order shall be specific as to whether the victim or witness will testify outside the presence of spectators, the defendant, the jury, or all of them and shall be based on specific findings relating to the impact of the presence of each. 
 
	c.	A motion seeking closed circuit testimony under subsection a. of this section may be filed by: 
 
	(1)	The victim or witness or, in the case of a victim or witness who is under the age of 18, the victim's or witness's attorney, parent or legal guardian; 
 
	(2)	The prosecutor; or
 
	(3)	The defendant or the defendant's counsel. 
 
	d.	The defendant's counsel shall be present in the same room as the victim or witness at the taking of testimony on closed circuit television.  The defendant and the defendant's attorney shall be able to confer privately with each other during the testimony by a separate audio system. 
 
	e.	If testimony is taken on closed circuit television pursuant to the provisions of this section, the video portion of the testimony shall not be recorded and shall not constitute part of the record on appeal. All audio transmissions, except private conversations between the defendant and the defendant's attorney, shall be recorded and thereafter shall be subject to the following provisions:
 
	(1)	If the victim or witness is 18 years of age or older at the time of the court proceedings, any recording of the audio portion of the closed circuit testimony shall constitute part of the record on appeal, unless the court orders otherwise for good cause shown upon motion of the parties. 
 
	(2)	If the victim or witness is under the age of 18 at the time of the court proceedings, any recording of the audio portion of the closed circuit testimony shall not constitute part of the record on appeal and shall be deemed confidential and not available to the public, unless the court orders otherwise for good cause shown upon motion of the parties. In making the determination regarding the availability of the audio portion of the testimony, the court shall consider potential trauma or stigma to the victim or witness.  A transcript of the audio portion of the closed circuit testimony shall constitute part of the record on appeal, subject to any personal identification safeguards contained in section 1 of P.L.1989, c.336 (C.2A:82-46).
 
	f.	For purposes of this section, "closed circuit television" means any closed-circuit, videoconferencing or other audio-visual electronic technology capable of producing a simultaneous, one-way broadcast from a victim or witness to a defendant in a separate physical location. The technology shall allow for the live observation of the victim or witness by the defendant, jury, and judge during the course of testimony or cross-examination, while excluding a victim or witness from directly hearing or viewing the defendant during the proceedings. 
 
	L.1985, c.126, s.1; amended 2013, c.51, s.16; 2017, c.205, s.1.

2A:84A-33.  Authority of Supreme Court
    The Supreme Court may adopt rules dealing with the admission or rejection of  evidence, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this article.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 461, s. 33, eff. June 20, 1960.

2A:84A-34.   Presentation of proposed rules at Judicial Conference  
     The subject matter and a tentative draft of a rule or rules proposed to be adopted pursuant to this article shall be entered upon the agenda and discussed at a Judicial Conference whose membership shall at least include delegates from the Supreme Court, the Appellate Division of the Superior Court, the judges of the Superior Court, the judges of the municipal courts, the surrogates, the State Bar Association, the county bar associations, the Senate and General Assembly, the Attorney General, the county prosecutors, the law schools of this State, and members of the public.  

    L.1960,c.52,s.34; amended 1991,c.91,s.118.  

2A:84A-35.  Public announcement of proposed rules;  delivery of copies
    The proposed rule or rules shall be publicly announced by the Supreme Court  on September 15 next following such Judicial Conference (or, if such day be a  Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, on the first day thereafter that is not),  and the court shall, on the same day, cause true copies thereof to be delivered  to the President of the Senate, the Speaker of the General Assembly, and the  Governor.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 461, s. 35, eff. June 20, 1960.

2A:84A-36.  Effective date of rules;  rules subject to cancellation by joint  resolution
    The rule or rules so announced and delivered shall take effect on July 1 next following;  provided, however, that all such rules shall remain subject to  cancellation at any time up to such effective date by joint resolution to that  effect adopted by the Senate and General Assembly and signed by the Governor.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 461, s. 36, eff. June 20, 1960.

2A:84A-37.  Change or cancellation of rules by statute or adoption of subsequent rules
    Any rule or rules so proposed or adopted shall be subject to change or cancellation at any time by statute or by a subsequent rule adopted pursuant to  this article.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 462, s. 37, eff. June 20, 1960.

2A:84A-38.  Adoption of rules at such time, or with such effective date, or  without presentation at Judicial Conference, as may be provided in joint resolution
    By joint resolution adopted by the Senate and General Assembly and signed by  the Governor with respect to a particular rule or rules therein specified, the  Supreme Court may adopt such rule or rules at such time or times, or with such  effective date, or without presentation at a Judicial Conference, as may be  provided in the joint resolution.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 462, s. 38, eff. June 20, 1960.

2A:84A-39.  Reduction or elimination of time during which rules may be canceled by joint resolution
    By joint resolution adopted by the Senate and General Assembly and signed by  the Governor with respect to a particular rule or rules therein specified, the  period of time provided in section 36 during which the same may be canceled by  joint resolution may be reduced or eliminated.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 462, s. 39, eff. June 20, 1960.

2A:84A-40.  Effect of rules on conflicting laws
    All previous laws or parts of laws dealing with the admission or rejection of evidence which shall be expressly identified by footnote to any rule so adopted, and which shall be a conflict or inconsistent with such rule or rules,  or included therein, revised or rendered obsolete thereby, shall be of no  further force or effect after such rule or rules shall have taken effect.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 462, s. 40, eff. June 20, 1960.

2A:84A-41.  Rules not to abridge, enlarge or modify substantive rights or eliminate right of trial by jury
    No rule adopted pursuant to this article shall abridge, enlarge or modify any substantive right or eliminate the right of trial by jury.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 462, s. 41, eff. June 20, 1960.

2A:84A-42.  Applicability of rules to pending proceedings or existing rights  or remedies
    No rule adopted pursuant to this article shall be made applicable to pending  proceedings or to existing rights or remedies except to the extent that such  application is fair and practicable, and does not impair the obligation of  contracts or deprive a party of any remedy for enforcing a contract which  existed when the contract was made.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 462, s. 42, eff. June 20, 1960.

2A:84A-43.  Publication of compilations and restatements of rules
    To the end that rules dealing with evidence may be conveniently presented and arranged, the Supreme Court may publish compilations and restatements thereof which may include, in addition to such rules as may be adopted pursuant  to this article, rules established by common law, statute, constitution or  otherwise, together with editorial notes, tables and references, and with  indications as to the source of each such rule.  Where practicable or  desirable, the numbering and arrangement of such publications shall conform to  standard or uniform works on the subject, or provide cross-reference thereto.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 462, s. 43, eff. June 20, 1960.

2A:84A-44.  Force and effect of existing rules dealing with admission or rejection of evidence
    All rules of court heretofore promulgated and which may deal with the admission or rejection of evidence shall be deemed to have the same force and effect as though they had been adopted pursuant to this article.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 463, s. 44, eff. June 20, 1960.

2A:84A-45.  Repeals
    The following acts and parts of acts and all amendments and supplements thereto are hereby repealed:  Sections 2A:81-3, 2A:81-5, 2A:81-7, 2A:81-9 and 2A:81-10 of Title 2A of the New Jersey Statutes.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 465, s. 49, eff. July 1, 1960.

2A:84A-47.  Effect of repeals
    No repeal effected by this act shall operate to revive any statute heretofore repealed nor to impair the obligation of contracts made before the effective date hereof, nor to deprive a party of any remedy for enforcing a contract which existed when the contract was made.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 465, s. 51, eff. July 1, 1960.

2A:84A-48.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as  "The Evidence Act, 1960."

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 465, s. 52, eff. July 1, 1960.

2A:84A-49.  Effective date
    This act shall take effect July 1, 1960, except that article III shall take  effect immediately.

     L.1960, c. 52, p. 465, s. 53, eff. July 1, 1960.

2A:93-5.1.  Restitution to victim;  hearing
    A person who has been convicted of a violation of N.J.S. 2A:93-4, 2A:93-6, 2A:97-1, 2A:105-1 or 2A:105-2 from which there has occurred pecuniary gain to the offender or pecuniary loss to the victim may be ordered by the court to make restitution to the victim, in addition to paying any fine.  In such a case  the court shall, without a jury, conduct such hearing as is necessary to make  findings as to the monetary amount of the pecuniary gain or pecuniary loss.   For the purposes of this section, the term  "gain"  means the amount of money  or the value of property derived by the offender, the term  "loss" means the  amount of money or the value of property separated from the victim, and the  term  "victim" includes the State or any of its political or administrative  subdivisions. No restitution ordered paid to the victim shall exceed the  victim's loss.

     L.1977, c. 214, s. 9, eff. Sept. 13, 1977.

2A:102-13  Trust funds.
 
	1.	Any and all moneys paid to a funeral director, undertaker, cemetery, or any other person, firm or corporation, under or in connection with an agreement for the sale of personal property to be used in connection with a funeral or burial, or for the furnishing of personal services of a funeral director, undertaker or cemetery, wherein the personal property is not to be delivered or the personal services are not to be rendered until the occurrence of the death of the person for whose funeral or burial such property or services are to be furnished, shall be trust funds in the possession of such funeral director, undertaker, cemetery, or other person, firm or corporation, and shall be deposited by him or it within 30 days after receipt thereof in a special account maintained exclusively for the deposit of such moneys in a federally insured State or federally chartered bank, savings bank or savings and loan association; or, if the person paying the moneys requests, in a pooled trust account established pursuant to P.L.1985, c.147 (C.3B:11-16 et al.) and chosen by the person paying the moneys, and shall be so held on deposit, together with any interest thereon, until said personal property has been delivered and said personal services have been rendered, unless sooner repaid, in whole or in part.  No depository institution shall be liable for the misuse, misapplication or improper withdrawal by any such funeral director, undertaker, cemetery or other person, firm or corporation, of any moneys deposited in such depository institution pursuant to this act.
 
	Any agreement for funeral goods or funeral services, or both, executed on or after the effective date of P.L.1993, c.147 by a provider shall comply with the provisions set forth in sections 1 through 13 of P.L.1993, c.147 (C.45:7-82 to 45:7-94).
 
	L.1957, c.182, s.1; amended 1985, c.147, s.4; 1993, c.147, s.16; 2009, c.155.

2A:102-14.  Repayment on demand
    The amount of any and all moneys paid under or in connection with such an agreement, together with interest, if any, accrued thereon while on deposit as so required shall be repaid on demand at any time prior to the delivery of the personal property or the rendering of the personal services.

     L.1957, c. 182, p. 633, s. 2.

2A:102-15.  Invalid advance funeral payment agreements
    Any provision of any such agreement whereby a person who pays money under or  in connection therewith waives any provision of this act shall be void.

     L.1957, c. 182, p. 633, s. 3.

2A:102-16.   Violations, certain; theft  
    4.   Any person, firm or corporation who or which, having received any moneys under or in connection with such an agreement, shall fail to deposit or keep on deposit, misapply or misappropriate or to repay any and all such moneys as provided in this act, is guilty of theft by failure to make the required disposition of property received pursuant to N.J.S.2C:20-9.  

   Any person, firm or corporation receiving moneys under P.L.1957, c.182 (C.2A:102-13 et seq.) is presumed:  

   a.   to know his or its obligations relevant to criminal liability under this section; and  

   b.   to have dealt with property as his or its own if he or it fails to pay or account upon lawful demand or if an audit reveals a shortage or falsification of accounts.  

   L.1957,c.182,s.4; amended 1993,c.147,s.17.  

2A:102-16.1. Irrevocable trusts, certain, conditions  
     1.   Notwithstanding the provisions of P.L.1957, c.182 (C.2A:102-13 et seq.) to the contrary, an agreement may provide that the trust shall be irrevocable during the lifetime of the beneficiary, if at the time of the signing of an agreement, the beneficiary or grantor of the trust is:  

    a.   An aged, blind or disabled applicant for, or recipient of, benefits pursuant to the Supplemental Security Income Program under P.L.1973, c.256 (C.44:7-85 et seq.) or any Medicaid program under P.L.1968, c.413 (C.30:4D-1 et seq.) utilizing the eligibility criteria of the Supplemental Security Income Program in regard to burial spaces and funds set aside for burial expenses; or  

    b.   An aged, blind or disabled person who reasonably anticipates applying for, or receiving, the benefits provided for in subsection a. of this section within six months.  

    An irrevocable trust established pursuant to this section shall not affect the selection of funeral goods or services or the selection of the funeral home.  If the beneficiary or grantor of the trust enters into an agreement, reasonably anticipating that the beneficiary or grantor will become an applicant for, or recipient of, these programs within six months from the execution of the agreement, the agreement shall provide that, in the event the beneficiary or grantor of the trust does not become an applicant for, or recipient of, any of these programs within the six month period, the trust shall revert to a revocable trust.  

    As used in this section "agreement" means an agreement for the sale of personal property to be used in connection with a funeral or burial, or for the furnishing of personal services of a funeral director or undertaker, wherein the personal property is not to be delivered or the personal services are not to be rendered until the occurrence of the death of the person for whose funeral or burial the property or services are to be furnished.  

    L.1991,c.502,s.1.  

2A:102-16.2. Crimes concerning funeral trusts  
    3.  a.  A person shall be guilty of a crime of the fourth degree if he knowingly or purposefully solicits or induces any person to execute an irrevocable trust pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1991, c.502 (C.2A:102-16.1) with an intent to collect or charge more than the fair market value for funeral goods or services.  

   b.   A person shall be guilty of a crime of the fourth degree if the proceeds of the trust are expended on anything other than the fair market value of the funeral goods or services.  

   L.1991,c.502,s.3.  

2A:102-17.   Nonapplicability of act  
    5.   This act shall not apply to

  

   a.   the sale of lots or graves by a cemetery; or

  

   b.   the use of individually issued insurance policies as funding vehicles for prepaid funeral agreements.  

   L.1957,c.182,s.5; amended 1993,c.147,s.18.  

2A:102-18.   Definitions used in C.2A:102-13 et seq.  
    19.  As used in P.L.1957, c.182 (C.2A:102-13 et seq.):

  

   "Assigned funeral insurance policy" means any insurance policy or annuity contract that is not a newly issued funeral insurance policy, but that, at the time an assignment was made of some or all of its proceeds, was intended to provide funds to the provider, whether directly or indirectly, at the time of the insured's death in connection with a prepaid funeral agreement.  

   "Deliver" or "delivery" means the conveyance of actual control and possession of prepaid funeral goods that have been permanently relinquished by a provider, or other person, firm or corporation, or an agent thereof, to the purchaser or person paying the moneys, or personal representative of the intended funeral recipient.  Delivery has not been made if the provider, or other person, firm or corporation, or an agent thereof:  

   (1)  Arranges or induces the purchaser or person paying the moneys to arrange for the storage or warehousing of prepaid funeral goods ordered pursuant to a prepaid funeral agreement, with or without evidence that legal title has passed; or  

   (2)  Acquires or reacquires actual or constructive possession or control of prepaid funeral goods after their initial delivery to the purchaser or person paying the moneys or personal representative of the intended funeral recipient.  

   This definition of delivery shall apply to this term as used in P.L.1957, c.182 (C.2A:102-13 et seq.), notwithstanding the provisions set forth in the Uniform Commercial Code, Title 12A of the New Jersey Statutes.  

   "Funeral insurance policy" means any newly issued funeral insurance policy or assigned funeral insurance policy.  

   "Funeral trust" means a commingled or non-commingled account held in a pooled trust or P.O.D. account, established in accordance with P.L.1957, c.182 (C.2A:102-13 et seq.) or P.L.1985, c.147 (C.3B:11-16 et al.), which is intended as the depository for cash payments connected with a prepaid funeral agreement.  

   "Intended funeral recipient" means the person named in a prepaid funeral agreement for whose bodily disposition the prepaid funeral agreement is intended to provide.  The intended funeral recipient may or may not be the purchaser.  

   "Newly issued funeral insurance policy" means any insurance policy or annuity contract that, at the time of issue, was intended to provide, or was explicitly marketed for the purpose of providing, funds to the provider, whether directly or indirectly, at the time of the insured's death in connection with a prepaid funeral agreement.  

   "Payable on death account" or "P.O.D. account" means an account payable on request to the purchaser or intended funeral recipient of a prepaid funeral agreement, during the lifetime of the intended funeral recipient and on his death, to a provider of funeral goods and services.  

   "Pooled trust" means a pooled trust account established pursuant to P.L.1985, c.147 (C.3B:11-16 et al.).  

   "Preneed funeral arrangements" means funeral arrangements made with an intended funeral recipient or his guardian, agent or next of kin, for the funeral of the intended funeral recipient.  

   "Prepaid funeral agreement" means a written agreement and all documents related thereto made by a purchaser with a provider prior to the death of the intended funeral recipient, with which there is connected a provisional means of paying for preneed funeral arrangements upon the death of the intended funeral recipient by the use of a funeral trust or funeral insurance policy, made payable to a provider and in return for which the provider promises to furnish, make available or provide the prepaid funeral goods or services, or both, specified in the agreement, the delivery of which occurs after the death of the intended funeral recipient.  

   "Prepaid funeral goods" means personal property typically sold or provided in connection with a funeral, or the final disposition of human remains, including, but not limited to, caskets or other primary containers, cremation or transportation containers, outer burial containers, vaults, as defined in N.J.S.8A:1-2, memorials as defined in N.J.S.8A:1-2, funeral clothing or accessories, monuments, cremation urns, and similar funeral or burial items, which goods are purchased in advance of need and which will not be delivered until the death of the intended funeral recipient named in a prepaid funeral agreement. Prepaid funeral goods shall not mean the sale of interment spaces and related personal property offered or sold by a cemetery company as provided for in N.J.S.8A:1-1 et seq.  

   "Prepaid funeral services" means those services typically provided in connection with a funeral, or the final disposition of human remains, including, but not limited to, funeral directing services, embalming services, care of human remains, preparation of human remains for final disposition, transportation of human remains, use of facilities or equipment for viewing human remains, visitation, memorial services or services which are used in connection with a funeral or the disposition of human remains, coordinating or conducting funeral rites or ceremonies and similar funeral or burial services, including limousine services provided in connection therewith, which services are purchased in advance of need and which will not be provided or delivered until the death of the intended funeral recipient named in a prepaid funeral agreement.  Prepaid funeral services shall not mean the sale of services incidental to the provision of interment spaces or any related personal services offered or sold by a cemetery company as provided for in N.J.S.8A:1-1 et seq.  

   "Provider" means a person, firm or corporation duly licensed and registered pursuant to the "Mortuary Science Act," P.L.1952, c.340 (C.45:7-32 et seq.) to engage in the business and practice of funeral directing or mortuary science, or an individual serving as an agent thereof and so licensed:  

   (1)  Operating a duly registered mortuary in accordance with P.L.1952, c.340 (C.45:7-32 et seq.) and the regulations promulgated thereunder;  

   (2)  Having his or its business and practice based within the physical confines of the registered mortuary; and  

   (3)  Engaging in the practice of making preneed funeral arrangements, including, but not limited to, offering the opportunity to purchase or enroll in prepaid funeral agreements.  

   "Purchaser" means the person named in a prepaid funeral agreement who purchases the prepaid funeral goods and services to be provided thereunder. The purchaser may or may not be the intended funeral recipient.  If the purchaser is different than the intended funeral recipient, it is understood that the relationship of the purchaser to the intended funeral recipient includes a means to provide administrative control over the agreement on behalf of the intended funeral recipient.  

   L.1993,c.147,s.19; amended 1994,c.163,s.3.  

2A:102-19  Funeral trust, insurance policy excluded from resource consideration in determining eligibility for certain benefits.

	1.	An aged, blind or disabled applicant for, or recipient of, benefits under the Supplemental Security Income program established pursuant to Title XVI of the federal Social Security Act, Pub.L.92-603 (42 U.S.C. s.1381 et seq.), or an applicant for, or recipient of, benefits under the Medicaid program established pursuant to P.L.1968, c.413 (C.30:4D-1 et seq.), the Work First New Jersey program established pursuant to P.L.1997, c.38 (C.44:10-55 et seq.) or the "Work First New Jersey General Public Assistance Act," P.L.1947, c.156 (C.44:8-107 et seq.), or any successor program thereof, shall have excluded from resource consideration, in determining eligibility for benefits, any moneys of the applicant, applicant's spouse and any other member of his immediate family, as defined in N.J.A.C.10:71-4.4, in an irrevocable funeral trust or irrevocably assigned newly issued funeral insurance policy, as those terms are defined in section 19 of P.L.1993, c.147 (C.2A:102-18), that are equivalent to the fair market value of funeral and burial goods and services selected and contracted for that are intended for the use of the applicant, applicant's spouse and any other member of his immediate family.  All income paid to the irrevocable funeral trust or any increase in the face value or death benefit attributable to the irrevocably assigned newly issued funeral insurance policy, shall inure to the value or benefit of the irrevocable funeral trust or irrevocably assigned newly issued funeral insurance policy and shall not be countable as income for continuing eligibility.

	L.1999,c.193,s.1.

2A:102-20  Difference between price, services provided paid to State.

	2.	Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, any moneys remaining in an irrevocable funeral trust or irrevocably assigned newly issued funeral insurance policy that are the result of a difference between the price of funeral and burial goods and services actually provided to the intended funeral recipient, as defined in section 19 of P.L.1993, c.147 (C.2A:102-18), upon that person's death, and the accumulated value of the irrevocable funeral trust or irrevocably assigned newly issued funeral insurance policy, shall be paid over to the State according to the provisions of this act if, at the time of death, the intended funeral recipient was receiving benefits pursuant to section 1 of this act, and the moneys that established the irrevocable funeral trust or the irrevocably assigned newly issued funeral insurance policy were those of the intended funeral recipient or the intended funeral recipient's spouse. 

	L.1999,c.193,s.2.

2A:102-21  Office of the Public Guardian for Elderly Adults considered purchaser, sole beneficiary under certain circumstances; disposition of remaining moneys.

	3. a. If the intended funeral recipient is under the care and guardianship of the Office of the Public Guardian for Elderly Adults, established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1985, c.298 (C.52:27G-23), in the creation of an irrevocable funeral trust fund or the purchase of an irrevocably assigned newly issued funeral insurance policy, or upon taking charge of such assets, the Office of the Public Guardian for Elderly Adults shall name itself as purchaser, as defined in section 19 of P.L.1993, c.147 (C.2A:102-18), or sole beneficiary, as appropriate.  In the case of an irrevocably assigned newly issued funeral insurance policy that provides for a settlement of proceeds, the Office of the Public Guardian for Elderly Adults may, as an alternative to being named beneficiary, be named as payee of the balance of any remaining moneys subsequent to the delivery, as defined in section 19 of P.L.1993, c.147 (C.2A:102-18) of funeral and burial goods and services, but with a claim superior to any beneficial interest.

	b.	Any moneys remaining thereafter shall be paid to the Division of Medical Assistance and Health Services in the Department of Human Services, by the Office of the Public Guardian for Elderly Adults, in accordance with an order of the Superior Court discharging the Public Guardian for Elderly Adults as guardian of the decedent.

	L.1999,c.193,s.3.

2A:102-22  Payment of remainder to Division of Medical Assistance and Health Services.

	4. a. In the case of an irrevocable funeral trust of a decedent who is not under the care and guardianship of the Office of the Public Guardian for Elderly Adults, the entire remainder after the payment of funeral and burial goods and services shall be paid to the Division of Medical Assistance and Health Services in the Department of Human Services, as though the division were the purchaser of the trust.

	b.	In the case of an irrevocably assigned newly issued funeral insurance policy of a decedent who is not under the care and guardianship of the Office of the Public Guardian for Elderly Adults, the policy shall not be excluded as a resource pursuant to section 1 of this act unless the Division of Medical Assistance and Health Services in the Department of Human Services is named the sole beneficiary of the policy, either at the time of issue or during the time that the insured was an applicant for or recipient of benefits of programs specified in section 1 of this act.  In the case of an irrevocably assigned newly issued funeral insurance policy that provides for a settlement of proceeds, the Division of Medical Assistance and Health Services in the Department of Human Services may, as an alternative to being named beneficiary, be named as a payee of the balance of any remaining moneys subsequent to the delivery of funeral and burial goods and services, but with a claim superior to any beneficial interest.


	L.1999,c.193,s.4.

2A:102-23  Establishment of dedicated bank account.

	5.	The Division of Medical Assistance and Health Services in the Department of Human Services shall establish a dedicated bank account into which a pooled trust, depository institution or insurance company shall deposit, by means of electronic funds transfer, any moneys to which the State is entitled under the provisions of section 4 of this act and which are funds of decedents whom the pooled trust, depository institution or insurance company reasonably believes were recipients of benefits of programs specified in section 1 of this act at the time of death.  A pooled trust, depository institution or insurance company so making deposits shall periodically, but not less than once each calendar quarter, provide to the Director of the Division of Medical Assistance and Health Services in the Department of Human Services, or his designee, a record of the deposits made along with the names and other identifying information of those decedents.  As the basis for the actions specified herein, the pooled trust, depository institution or insurance company shall use reasonable business standards of care and judgment, and is entitled to rely upon a designation of an account or contract as irrevocable as signifying program eligibility under section 1 of this act.  A pooled trust, depository institution or insurance company, as a condition of offering or providing an irrevocable funeral trust or irrevocably assigned newly issued funeral insurance policy within the State, shall comply with the provisions of this act.

	L.1999,c.193,s.5.

2A:102-24  Inclusion of statement in prepaid funeral agreement, insurance policy.

	6.	A prepaid funeral agreement as defined in section 19 of P.L.1993, c.147 (C.2A:102-18) which is subject to the provisions of this act shall include, in a conspicuous manner, the following statement:  "New Jersey law requires this agreement to be irrevocable for applicants or recipients of public assistance programs (such as the Medicaid, Supplemental Security Income (SSI), Work First New Jersey and Work First New Jersey General Public Assistance programs, or any successor program thereof) and for the State of New Jersey to be named as beneficiary of any irrevocable funeral trust or irrevocably assigned newly issued funeral insurance policy purchased or created for the provision and payment of funeral and burial goods and services.  Any moneys remaining after the provision of funeral goods and services shall be paid over to the State as required by law."

	L.1999,c.193,s.6.

2A:102-25  Relief from liability for claims paid improperly to State.

	7.	A person, firm, corporation, association, funeral home, pooled trust, depository institution or insurance company and their employees or agents that, in accordance with the provisions of this act, pays money to the State in good faith is relieved of all liability for any claim then existing or which thereafter may arise or be made in respect to the money paid. The estate or personal representative of a deceased person may seek restitution on behalf of the estate for a payment that may have been improperly made to the State.  The pooled trust, depository institution or insurance company shall forward the claim, together with its opinion as to whether the payment was improperly made to the State, to the Director of the Division of Medical Assistance and Health Services in the Department of Human Services, or his designee, who shall review the claim and, if the claim is justified, refund in a timely manner moneys found to have been improperly paid over to the State

	L.1999,c.193,s.7.

2A:102-26  Inter-agency coordination of financial accounting.

	8.	The Division of Medical Assistance and Health Services in the Department of Human Services shall coordinate between itself and the Division of Consumer Support in the Department of Health and Senior Services, such inter-agency and inter-governmental financial accounting as is necessary to accurately identify, allocate and transfer benefit credits resulting from this act between the departments on a program basis, and between them and such other agencies of federal, State and local governments as may be applicable.

	L.1999,c.193,s.8.

2A:123-3.  Definitions
    As used in this act the following words shall have the following meanings:

     "Articles of wearing apparel"  means any costume or article of clothing worn or intended to be worn by individuals except hats, gloves and footwear; provided, however, that such hats do not constitute, nor are part of a covering for the neck, face or shoulders when worn by individuals;  and provided, further, that such gloves are not more than fourteen inches in length  and are not affixed to or do not form an integral part of another garment;  and  provided, further, that such footwear does not consist of hosiery, in whole or  in part, and is not affixed to nor does not form an integral part of another  garment.

     "Fabric " means any material (other than a fiber, filament or yarn) woven,  knitted, felted or otherwise produced from or in combination with any natural  or synthetic filament or substitute therefor which is intended or sold for use  in wearing apparel except that interlining fabrics, when intended or sold for  use in wearing apparel, shall not be subject to this act.

     "Interlining"  means any fabric which is intended for incorporation into an  article of wearing apparel as a layer between an outer shell and an inner lining.

     "Commissioner"  means the Commissioner of Labor and Industry of the State of New Jersey.

     "Department"  means the Department of Labor and Industry of the State of New Jersey.

     "Sale,"   "sell"  or  "sold"  means offering or exposing for sale or exchange or hire or lease, or consigning and delivering in consignment for sale, exchange, hire, or lease, or holding in possession with like intent. The possession of any article of wearing apparel or fabric, as herein defined, by any manufacturer or dealer, or his agent or servant in the course of business shall be presumptive evidence of intent to sell.

     "Manufacture"  means making, make or made, and includes converting, processing, altering, repairing, finishing, or preparing for sale any article of wearing apparel or fabric as wearing apparel and fabric are herein defined.

     L.1953, c. 267, p. 1787, s. 1, eff. Jan. 1, 1954.

2A:123-4.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the  "Flammable Fabrics Act."

     L.1953, c. 267, p. 1788, s. 2, eff. Jan. 1, 1954.

2A:123-5.  Manufacture, sale or transportation of flammable wearing apparel  forbidden
    The manufacture for, or sale or offer for sale, transport or causing to be transported for the purpose of sale or delivery after sale within the State of New Jersey of any article of wearing apparel or fabric which, under the provisions of section four of this act, is so highly flammable as to be dangerous when worn by individuals shall be unlawful.

     L.1953, c. 267, p. 1788, s. 3, eff. Jan. 1, 1954.

2A:123-6.  Articles deemed highly flammable
    Any article of wearing apparel or fabric shall be deemed so highly flammable, as to be dangerous when worn by individuals, within the meaning of this act, if any uncovered or exposed part of such article of wearing apparel or fabric exhibits rapid and intense combustion or burning when tested under the conditions and in the manner prescribed by rules and regulations adopted by  the commissioner pursuant to section five of this act.

     L.1953, c. 267, p. 1788, s. 4, eff. Jan. 1, 1954.

2A:123-7.  Enforcement of act; rules and regulations
    This act, except as herein otherwise specifically provided, shall be enforced by the department, and the commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to adopt, amend and enforce rules and regulations establishing the conditions under which, and the manner in which, articles of wearing apparel or  fabric shall be tested to determine whether or not they are so highly flammable, as to be dangerous when worn by individuals, within the meaning of this act, if any uncovered or exposed part of such article of wearing apparel or fabric exhibits rapid and intense burning when so tested, if such conditions  and manner of testing shall, in all respects, from time to time, conform to the  conditions and manner prescribed in the Commercial Standard promulgated by the  Secretary of Commerce of the United States of America effective January 30,  1953, and identified as  "Flammability of Clothing Textiles, Commercial  Standard 191-53,"  or in the Commercial Standard promulgated by the Secretary  of Commerce effective May 22, 1953, and identified as  "General Purpose Vinyl  Plastic Film, Commercial Standard 192-53,"  and modifications or supplements  thereto enacted by the Congress of the United States or promulgated by the  Secretary of Commerce of the United States of America which shall result from,  and be developed under, the same procedures as were in use and effect in  connection with the establishment of "Flammability of Clothing Textiles,  Commercial Standard 191-53,"  or "General Purpose Vinyl Plastic Film,  Commercial Standard 192-53,"  and also to adopt, amend and enforce rules and  regulations designed and intended to effectuate the general purposes of this  act and the specific objectives herein set forth, which said rules and  regulations shall include the authorization to the commissioner to cause  inspections, analyses, tests and examinations to be made of any article of  wearing apparel or fabric which he has reason to believe falls within the prohibitions of this act.

     L.1953, c. 267, p. 1788, s. 5, eff. Jan. 1, 1954.  Amended by L.1954, c. 210,  p. 777, s. 1, eff. Aug. 5, 1954.

2A:123-8.  Filing of rules and regulations;  amendment and revision
    Such rules and regulations promulgated by the commissioner pursuant to this  act shall be filed in the offices of the Secretary of State and of the department before becoming effective and may from time to time be amended and revised.

     L.1953, c. 267, p. 1789, s. 6, eff. Jan. 1, 1954.

2A:123-9.  Inspection of places where wearing apparel or fabrics are sold or  manufactured
    Every place where articles of wearing apparel or fabrics are sold or manufactured shall be subject to inspection by the commissioner, who shall have  power to inspect the manufacture or sale or delivery of all such articles of  wearing apparel or fabrics covered by this act.  The commissioner shall have  power to cause examinations and tests to be made of such articles of wearing  apparel or fabrics and to seize and hold as evidence any article of wearing  apparel or fabric which is made or sold or held in possession in violation of  this act or of the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder.

     L.1953, c. 267, p. 1789, s. 7, eff. Jan. 1, 1954.

2A:123-10.  Injunction;  confiscation proceedings;  bond
    Whenever the department has reason to believe that any article of wearing apparel has been manufactured or has been offered for sale in violation of the provisions of this act or of the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, proceedings to enjoin such manufacture or sale or other disposition of such wearing apparel or fabrics may be instituted by the commissioner in the Superior Court of the State of New Jersey, and said commissioner may also institute proceedings for the confiscation of such article of wearing apparel or fabric in said Superior Court of the State of New Jersey and shall make such  disposition of said wearing apparel or fabric as he shall be ordered so to do  by said Superior Court of the State of New Jersey;  provided, however, that  said Superior Court may order the delivery of such condemned articles of wearing apparel or fabric to the owner or claimant thereof upon payment of legal costs and charges and upon the execution and deposit with said Superior Court of a good and sufficient bond conditioned upon said articles of wearing apparel or fabric not being disposed of until properly and adequately treated or processed so that such articles of wearing apparel or fabrics will comply with the provisions of this act and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto.

     L.1953, c. 267, p. 1790, s. 8, eff. Jan. 1, 1954.

2A:123-11.  Violations;  penalty
    Any person who willfully violates this act shall forfeit and pay a penalty of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense, nor less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the second or any subsequent offense, to be sued for and recovered by and in the name of the department in a summary proceeding in accordance with the penalty enforcement law.  (N.J.S. 2A:58-1 et seq.)  Each article of wearing apparel or fabric made,  sold or exposed for sale shall constitute a separate violation.

     L.1953, c. 267, p. 1790, s. 9, eff. Jan. 1, 1954.

2A:123-12.  Penalties inapplicable to person who furnishes guaranty
    The penalties provided for a violation of this act shall not apply to any person who establishes (1) a guaranty received in good faith, signed by and containing the name and address of the person by whom the fabric or wearing apparel covered by the guaranty was manufactured or from whom it was received, to the effect that reasonable and representative tests made under the rules and  regulations in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this act show that  the specific type of fabric covered by the guaranty and used in the wearing  apparel or fabric covered by the guaranty when so tested was not highly  flammable within the meaning of this act; and (2), that he has not, by further  processing affected the flammability of the fabric or wearing apparel covered  by the guaranty which he received. Such guaranty shall either be (1) a  separate guaranty specifically designating the wearing apparel or fabric guaranteed, in which case it may be on the invoice or other paper relating to such wearing apparel or fabric;  or (2) continuing guaranty filed with the commissioner or with the Federal Trade Commission applicable to any wearing apparel or fabric handled by the guarantor in such form as the commissioner or the Federal Trade Commission, as the case may be, by rules and regulations, may prescribe.  It is provided, however, that a person furnishing such a guaranty  (except a person relying upon a guaranty received in good faith to furnish a  guaranty to the same effect, if he, by further processing, has not affected the  flammability of the wearing apparel or fabric covered by the guaranty) shall  not be relieved thereby from any of the penalties prescribed for the violations  of this act.

     L.1953, c. 267, p. 1791, s. 10, eff. Jan. 1, 1954.  Amended by L.1954, c. 210, p. 778, s. 2, eff. Aug. 5, 1954.

2A:123-13.  Exemptions from provisions of act
    The provisions of this act shall not apply (a) to any common carrier, contract carrier or freight forwarder with respect to an article of wearing apparel or fabric shipped or delivered for shipment in the ordinary course of its business;  or (b) to any person manufacturing, delivering for shipment, shipping, selling or offering for sale or export from the United States of America to any foreign country an article of wearing apparel or fabric made in accordance with the specifications of the purchaser;  or (c) to any convertor, processor, or finisher in performing a contract or commission service for the account of a person subject to the provisions of this act;  provided, however, that said convertor, processor, or finisher does not cause any article of wearing apparel or fabric to become subject to this act contrary to the terms of the contract or commission service; or (d) to any article of wearing apparel or fabric shipped or delivered for shipment into commerce for the purpose of finishing or processing to render article or fabric not highly flammable under the provisions of this act and to the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto.

     L.1953, c. 267, p. 1791, s. 11, eff. Jan. 1, 1954.

2A:123-14.  Wearing apparel or fabrics being transported or held for delivery
    Nothing contained in this act shall apply to such wearing apparel or fabrics  while being transported upon vessels, vehicles or railroad cars, or while being  held for delivery;  provided, such transport and delivery is subject to and in  conformity with regulations now or hereafter prescribed by the Interstate  Commerce Commission.

     L.1953, c. 267, p. 1792, s. 12, eff. Jan. 1, 1954.

2A:123-15.  Effective date
    This act shall take effect January first, one thousand nine hundred and fifty-four.

     L.1953, c. 267, p. 1792, s. 13.

2A:123-16.  Definitions
    As used in this act:

    a.   "Director"  means the Director of the Division of Consumer Affairs and  his designated representatives.

    b.   "Flame resistant"  means the ability of a material to resist combustion  and the conduction or continuation of fire when an ignition source is removed.

    c.   "Sale,"   "sell"  or  "sold"  means offering or exposing for sale, or exchange or hire or lease, or consigning and delivering in consignment for sale, exchange, hire, or lease, or holding in possession with like intent. The  possession of any tents or sleeping bags, as herein defined, by any dealer, or  his agent or servant in the course of business shall be presumptive of intent  to sell.

    d.   "Sleeping bag"  means a bag that is usually lined or padded and normally designed for sleeping outdoors or in a camp or tent.

    e.   "Tent"  means a collapsible shelter, for one or more persons, of canvas  or other material, either natural or synthetic or any combination thereof,  stretched and sustained by poles and used for camping outdoors or as a  temporary building.

     L.1975, c. 286, s. 1, eff. Jan. 12, 1976.

2A:123-17.  Nonflame resistant sleeping bags or tents;  prohibition of sale,  holding for sale or transportation for sale
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to sell, hold for sale, or to cause the transportation for purposes of sale or delivery after sale within the State any  sleeping bag or tent that is not classified by the Director of the Division of  Consumer Affairs as being flame resistant according to the standards and  regulations that the director shall promulgate pursuant to this act.

     L.1975, c. 286, s. 2, eff. Dec. 1, 1976.

2A:123-18.  Standards and regulations
    The director is authorized, empowered and directed, within 6 months of the effective date of this act, to establish and to promulgate pursuant to law, such standards and regulations necessary to implement and enforce this act; provided, however, that all such standards and regulations, including standards and facilities for testing material for its compliance with this act,  shall be acceptable and safe standards for flame resistance.

     L.1975, c. 286, s. 3, eff. Jan. 12, 1976.

2A:123-19.  Inspection of places for sale of articles
    Every place where tents and sleeping bags are sold shall be subject to inspection by the director, or his agents who shall have power to inspect the sale or delivery of all such tents, sleeping bags, covered by this act. The director shall have the power to cause examinations and tests to be made of such tents and sleeping bags and to seize and hold as evidence any such article  sold or held in possession in violation of this act or of the rules and  regulations promulgated hereunder.

     L.1975, c. 286, s. 4, eff. Jan. 12, 1976.

2A:123-20.  Violations;  injunctions;  confiscation of articles
    Whenever the director has reason to believe that any tent or sleeping bag has been offered for sale in violation of the provisions of this act or of the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, proceedings to enjoin such sale or  other disposition of such articles may be instituted by the director in the  Superior Court, and said director may also institute proceedings for the confiscation of such tents or sleeping bags in said Superior Court and shall make such disposition of said tents or sleeping bags as he shall be ordered so to do by the court;  provided, however, that the court may order the delivery of such confiscated articles to the owner or claimant thereof upon payment of legal costs and charges and upon the execution and deposit with the court of a good and sufficient bond conditioned upon said tents or sleeping bags not being  disposed of until properly and adequately treated or processed so that such  articles will comply with the provisions of this act and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto.

     L.1975, c. 286, s. 5, eff. Jan. 12, 1976.

2A:123-21.  Violations;  penalties
    Any person who willfully violates this act shall forfeit and pay a penalty of not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00 for the first offense, and not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for the second or any subsequent offense, to be sued for and recovered by and in the name of the division in a summary proceeding in accordance with the penalty enforcement law (N.J.S. 2A:58-1 et seq.).  Each tent or sleeping bag sold or exposed for sale shall constitute a separate violation.

     L.1975, c. 286, s. 6, eff. Jan. 12, 1976.

2A:123-22.  Violations;  inapplicability of penalty;  guaranty of flame resistance by supplier or manufacturer of article
    The penalties provided for a violation of this act shall not apply to any person who establishes a guaranty received in good faith, signed by and containing the name and address of the person by whom the tent or sleeping bag covered by the guaranty was manufactured or from whom it was received, to the effect that reasonable and representative tests made under the rules and regulations in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this act show that the specific type tent or sleeping bag covered by the guaranty when so tested was flame resistant within the meaning of this act;  and that he has not, by further processing affected the flammability of the tent or sleeping bag covered by the guaranty which he received.  Such guaranty shall either be a separate guaranty specifically designating the tent or sleeping bag guaranteed,  in which case it may be on the invoice or other paper relating to such  articles, or a continuing guaranty filed with the director or with the Federal  Trade Commission applicable to any tent or sleeping bag handled by the  guarantor in such form as the director or the Federal Trade Commission, as the  case may be, by rules and regulations, may prescribe.  It is provided, however,  that a person furnishing such a guaranty, except a person relying upon a  guaranty received in good faith to furnish a guaranty to the same effect, if  he, by further processing, has not affected the flammability of the tent or  sleeping bag covered by the guaranty, shall not be relieved thereby from any of  the penalties prescribed for the violations of this act.

     L.1975, c. 286, s. 7, eff. Jan. 12, 1976.

2A:123-23.  Exemptions from application of act
    The provisions of this act shall not apply (a) to any common carrier, contract carrier or freight forwarder with respect to any tent or sleeping bag shipped or delivered for shipment in the ordinary course of its business;  or (b) to any person manufacturing, delivering for shipment, shipping, selling or offering for sale or export any tent or sleeping bag from this State to any other state or foreign country, or (c) to any convertor, processor, or finisher  in performing a contract or commission service for the account of a person  subject to the provisions of this act; provided, however, that said convertor,  processor, or finisher does not cause any tent or sleeping bag to become  subject to this act contrary to the terms of the contract or commission  service;  or (d) to any tent or sleeping bag shipped or delivered for shipment  into commerce for the purpose of finishing or processing to render the articles  flame resistant under the provisions of this act or the rules and regulations  promulgated pursuant thereto.

     L.1975, c. 286, s. 8, eff. Jan. 12, 1976.

2A:123-24.  Inapplicability of act to articles in transit or being held for  delivery
    Nothing contained in this act shall apply to tents or sleeping bags being transported upon vessels, vehicles or railroad cars, or being held for delivery;  provided, such transport and delivery is subject to and in conformity with regulations now or hereafter prescribed by the Interstate Commerce Commission.

     L.1975, c. 286, s. 9, eff. Jan. 12, 1976.

2A:149-1.  Unauthorized use of voting machine or electrical voting system for recording votes
    Any person who uses a voting machine or electrical voting system of any legislative or other public body of this state for the purpose of recording a vote or votes thereon or thereby upon any matter or question being considered or voted upon by the members of such legislative or public body, and who is not  entitled to use the same for those purposes, is guilty of a misdemeanor.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:151-57.3.  Violations;  penalty
    All violations of this chapter where no specific penalty is otherwise prescribed shall be considered to be misdemeanors.

     L.1966, c. 60, s. 44.

2A:152-1.  Definitions
    In the construction of this subtitle, the following words shall, unless repugnant to the context, or unless another and different definition or meaning  is expressly given or stated, have the meaning herein given to them:

     "Indictment"  includes  "accusation of crime."

      "Property"  shall include every matter or thing, whether real or personal,  tangible or intangible, upon or with respect to which any offense may be  committed.

     "Prosecutor"  includes  "prosecutor of the pleas,"   "county prosecutor," "prosecuting officer"  and  "prosecuting attorney."

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:152-2.  Forfeiture of estate and benefit of clergy abolished
    No conviction or judgment for any offense against this state, shall make or  work corruption of blood, disinhersion of heirs, loss of dower, or forfeiture  of estate.

    The benefit of clergy is abolished.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:152-3.  Information not to lie
    No information for a matter merely criminal for which an indictment will lie, and in which no civil right is involved, or forfeiture or penalty given by  law to any private person or common informer is prosecuted for, shall be exhibited or sustained in any court of this state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:152-4.  Laws relating to particular counties or localities not affected
    R.S. 2:178-4 saved from repeal.  (This section provides that nothing in this  subtitle shall be construed to repeal or alter any law or part thereof which  refers to particular counties or other localities.)

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:152-12.   Continued violations of criminal law in municipalities; notice to municipal authorities  
     2A:152-12. Whenever the mayor or other chief executive, or the chief of police or other head officer of police, of any municipality, shall be notified by a written communication delivered to him personally, signed by the governor or attorney general, or by a judge of the Superior Court or the prosecutor of the county in which the municipality is situate, stating that it is alleged, and that there is reason to believe it to be true, that there exists in one or more places in such municipality, designated in the communication, open, continued or notorious violation of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes, which section or sections shall be stated in such communication, by any person occupying or carrying on business in such place or places, whether such person be known or unknown, the mayor or other chief executive or the chief of police or other head police officer so notified shall take immediate, proper and efficient measures, by complaint and arrest or by raid and arrest or otherwise, to prevent the further continuance of such illegal practices and to bring any person so alleged to be offending to justice.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.119.  

2A:152-13.  Notice as authority to make complaint;  warrants;  absence of liability
    The receipt of the communication mentioned in section 2A:152-12 of this title, by any officer named in said section, shall be sufficient warrant and authority for such officer to make a complaint upon information and belief founded thereon, charging that such person, known or unknown, is engaged in such illegal practices and violating the criminal laws of this state as in the communication stated, and any judge or magistrate having jurisdiction to issue criminal process may take and receive such complaint and issue a warrant for the arrest of such person, known or unknown, found upon the premises designated  in the communication, and direct that such person be brought before such judge  or magistrate to be dealt with as law and justice shall require.

    The officer making any complaint hereunder shall not be liable to any action, civil or criminal, by any person taken upon or found in the place or places mentioned in the written communication.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:152-17.   Payment of transcripts for indigent defendants  
     Any person convicted of any crime may make application under oath to any judge of the Law Division of the Superior Court of the county where the venue was laid showing that a copy of the transcript of the record, testimony and proceedings at the trial is necessary for the filing of any application with the trial court, and that he is unable, by reason of poverty, to defray the expense of procuring the same, and any such judge may, being satisfied of the facts stated and of the sufficiency thereof, certify the expense thereof to the county treasurer, who shall thereupon pay such expense, the amount thereof having been approved by the judge to whom such application was made. Where such person appeals to the Appellate Division of the Superior Court and copies of the transcript of the proceedings in the trial court are needed therefor he may make a similar application to such court which, being satisfied of the facts stated and the sufficiency thereof, may certify the expense and amount thereof to the county treasurer who shall thereupon pay such expense.  

    L.1956,c.134,s.1; amended 1991,c.91,s.120.  

2A:152-18.  Reimbursement
    The county treasurer shall file a notice of said payment and the amount thereof with the institution in which said person, upon whose application the transcript of the record was prepared, is confined, and, to the extent of the expense incurred, the county treasurer shall be reimbursed from any institutional earnings of such person, in the event that the application for relief is denied by the trial court or an appellate court.

     L.1956, c. 134, p. 555, s. 2.

2A:152-19.  Effective date
    This act shall take effect January 1, 1957.

     L.1956, c. 134, p. 556, s. 3.

2A:153-1.  Authority of governor in general
    The governor or person administering the government for the time being may issue a proclamation for apprehending and securing any person, known or unknown, charged, on oath of one or more credible witnesses, with having committed murder, kidnapping, burglary, robbery, arson or other heinous crime within this state, or for apprehending any person charged with aiding, abetting  or concealing any such person, and in such proclamation may offer such reward  as he may think proper, according to the nature and aggravation of the crime,  not exceeding $25,000 for any 1 person.  The reward shall be paid, on  conviction of the party charged, to such person or persons as the governor or  person administering the government for the time being may, in his discretion,  deem entitled thereto.  Such payment shall be made by the state treasurer, out  of any public money in his hands unappropriated, on warrant of the comptroller  under certification of the governor or person administering the government for  the time being.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:153-2.    Authority of chosen freeholders  
     2A:153-2. The board of chosen freeholders of any county, on the recommendation and request in writing of the prosecutor of the county, approved by a judge of the Superior Court may offer a reward not exceeding $5,000 for the detection and apprehension of any person guilty of murder, kidnapping, burglary, robbery, arson or other heinous crime in such county, the reward to be payable after conviction out of such funds of the county as may be applicable thereto. The reward shall be paid to such person or persons as the board of chosen freeholders may, in its discretion, deem entitled thereto.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.121.  

2A:153-3.  Escaped county prisoners;  authority of chosen freeholders
    The board of chosen freeholders of any county may publicly advertise the escape of any prisoner or prisoners from any penal institution in such county, and may offer a reward not exceeding $300 for the detection and apprehension of  each of such escaped prisoners.  Any reward offered hereunder shall be payable  only after the recapture and return of the prisoner or prisoners to the  institution from which the escape was made. The amount of the reward and the  expense of advertising shall be paid out of such funds of the county as may be  applicable thereto.  The reward shall be paid to such person or persons as the  board of chosen freeholders may, in its discretion, deem entitled thereto.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:153-4.    Reward by municipality for apprehension of certain persons  
     The governing body of any municipality, on the recommendation and request in writing of the municipal police chief or principal law enforcement officer of such municipality, approved by a judge of the Superior Court may offer a reward not exceeding $3,000.00 for the detection and apprehension of any person guilty of murder, kidnapping, burglary, robbery, arson, or other heinous crime in such municipality; the reward is to be payable after conviction out of such funds of the municipality as may be applicable thereto. The reward shall be paid to such person or persons as the municipal governing body may, in its discretion, deem entitled thereto, but no such reward may be paid to any public employee, whose duty it is to investigate or to enforce the law.  

    L.1967,c.171,s.1; amended 1991,c.91,s.122.  

2A:153-4.1.  Acts of graffiti 
     The governing body of any municipality may, by ordinance, provide for the offering of rewards not exceeding $500.00 each, for the detection and apprehension of any person guilty of purposely or knowingly damaging tangible property of another by an act of graffiti in violation of N.J.S. 2C:17-3.  A reward is to be payable after conviction out of those funds of the municipality made available therefor.  The reward shall be paid to any person who the governing body, acting upon the recommendation of the municipal chief of police or other principal municipal law enforcement officer, may deem entitled thereto, but no reward shall be paid to any public employee whose duty it is to investigate or to enforce the law or to the employee's spouse, child or parent, living in the same household. 

    For the purposes of this act, "act of graffiti" means the drawing, painting or the making of any inscription on a bridge, building, public transportation vehicle, rock, wall, sidewalk, street or other exposed surface on public or private property without the permission of the owner. 

    P.L. 1987,c.45. 

2A:154-1.    Conservators of the peace; powers and duties  
     2A:154-1. Any judge of the Superior Court, or of a municipal court shall have power to cause to be kept all laws made or to be made for the conservation of the peace and for the good government of the citizens and inhabitants of this State, within their respective counties, according to the force, form and effect of such laws, and to apprehend, and to cause to come before them, and imprison and punish all persons offending against such laws, or any of them, in their respective counties, in such manner as, according to such laws, shall be right and proper, and to perform and execute all such matters, acts and things as by law appertain to their office, and are or shall be enjoined upon them, or be committed to their charge and execution.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.123.  

2A:154-2.  Qualifications of peace officers
    No sheriff or other person authorized to appoint special deputy sheriffs, constables, marshals, policemen or other peace officers in this state, for the purpose of preserving the public peace and preventing or quelling public disturbances, shall appoint as such any person who is not a qualified voter of this state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:154-3  Powers of certain officers.
 	2A:154-3. a.  All court attendants, sheriff's officers, and county correctional police officers in the competitive class of civil service who have been or who may hereafter be appointed by the sheriff or board of chosen freeholders of any county in this State shall, by virtue of  the appointment and in addition to any other power or authority, be empowered to act as officers for the detection, apprehension, arrest, and conviction of offenders against the law. 
 
	b.	In addition to the powers set forth in subsection a. of this section, any county correctional police officer who has satisfactorily completed a basic training course approved by the Police Training Commission, as provided by P.L.1961, c.56 (C.52:17B-66 et seq.), shall have full power of arrest for any crime committed in the officer's presence anywhere within the territorial limits of the State of New Jersey.
 
	c.	A county correctional police officer who has full power of arrest pursuant to subsection b. of this section, and is acting under lawful authority beyond the territorial limits of the employing county, shall have all of the immunities from tort liability and shall have all of the pension, relief, disability, workers' compensation, insurance, and other benefits enjoyed while performing duties within the employing county.
 
	amended 1968, c.326; 1968, c.398; 1993, c.248; 1996, c.40; 2019, c.219, s.2.

2A:154-4  Authorization to exercise police powers.
	1.	All correctional police officers of the State of New Jersey and investigators in the Department of Corrections, including all promotional ranks and positions responsible for overseeing correctional police officers and investigators so long as they have an underlying correctional police officer or investigator title, and parole officers employed by the State Parole Board, who have been or who may hereafter be appointed or employed, shall, by virtue of such appointment or employment and in addition to any other power or authority, be empowered to exercise full police powers and to act as peace officers, at all times, for the detection, apprehension, arrest, and conviction of offenders against the law.
 
	Correctional police officers empowered with full police powers under this section shall, while performing their duties in a lawful manner, be deemed to be acting under lawful authority and shall enjoy all the immunities from tort liability and shall have all the pension, relief, disability, workmen's compensation, insurance, and other benefits they otherwise enjoy when performing their regular duties.
 
	L.1968, c.427, s.1; (Title amended 1982, c.230, s.1); amended 1982, c.230, s.2; 1993, c.246, s.1; 2001, c.79, s.14; 2017, c.293, s.2; 2025, c.243, s.5.

2A:154-5  Empowerment of federal law enforcement officers.
 
	1.	The following persons employed as full-time law enforcement officers by the Federal Government, who are empowered to effect an arrest with or without warrant for violations of the United States Code and who are authorized to carry firearms in the performance of their duties, shall be empowered to act as an officer for the arrest of offenders against the laws of this State where the person reasonably believes that a crime of the first, second or third degree is or is about to be committed or attempted in his presence: 
 
	Federal Bureau of Investigation special agents; 
 
	United States Secret Service special agents; 
 
	Immigration and Naturalization Service special agents, investigators and patrol officers; 
 
	United States Marshal Service deputies; 
 
	Drug Enforcement Administration special agents; 
 
	United States Postal inspectors; 
 
	United States Postal police officers while in the performance of
 
their official duties; 
 
	United States Customs Service special agents, inspectors and patrol officers; 
 
	United States General Services Administration special agents; 
 
	United States Department of Agriculture special agents; 
 
	Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms special agents; 
 
	Internal Revenue Service special agents and inspectors; 
 
	Department of the Interior special agents, investigators, and park rangers; 
 
	Federal Reserve law enforcement officers while in the performance of their official duties; and 
 
	United States Department of Defense police officers.
 
	L.1983, c.268, s.1; amended 1999, c.218; 2003, c.139; 2004, c.10; 2008, c.42, s.2.

2A:154-6  Powers of United States Park Police relative to arrest of offenders.
 
	1.	Full-time law enforcement officers employed by the Department of the Interior as park police who are empowered to effect an arrest with or without a warrant for violations of the United States Code and who are authorized to carry firearms in the performance of their duties shall be empowered to act as an officer for the arrest of offenders against the laws of this State:
 
	a.	where the person reasonably believes that a crime of the first, second, or third degree is or is about to be committed or attempted in his presence; and
 
	b.	where the person reasonably believes that a crime of the fourth degree, a disorderly persons offense, a petty disorderly persons offense, or a violation of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes is or is about to be committed or attempted in his presence on Ellis Island or in Liberty State Park within 500 feet of the ferry terminal serving passengers bound for the Statue of Liberty National Monument or Ellis Island or in Liberty State Park within 500 feet of the access bridge to Ellis Island while that officer is in performance of his official duties. 
 
	L.2008, c.42, s.1.

2A:155-1.  Short title
    This chapter may be cited as the  "uniform law on fresh pursuit."

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:155-2.  Definitions
    As used in this chapter:

     "State"  shall include the District of Columbia.

      "Fresh pursuit"  shall include fresh pursuit as defined by the common law,  and also the pursuit of a person who has committed a felony or who is reasonably suspected of having committed a felony.  It shall also include the pursuit of a person suspected of having committed a supposed felony, though no felony has actually been committed, if there is reasonable ground for believing  that a felony has been committed.  Fresh pursuit as used herein shall not  necessarily imply instant pursuit, but pursuit without unreasonable delay.

     "Felony"  shall include high misdemeanor.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:155-3.  Application and construction of chapter
    The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable only to such officers of  a state which has enacted a statute similar to the provisions hereof, and this  chapter shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate the general  purpose of making uniform the laws of the states which enact it.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:155-4.  Officers of other states in fresh pursuit;  authority to make arrests in this state
    Any member of a duly organized state, county or municipal peace unit of another state of the United States who enters this state in fresh pursuit, and continues within this state in such fresh pursuit, of a person in order to arrest him on the ground that he is believed to have committed a felony in such  other state, shall have the same authority to arrest and hold such person in  custody, as has any member of any duly organized state, county or municipal  peace unit of this state, to arrest and hold in custody a person on the ground  that he is believed to have committed a felony in this state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:155-5.  Hearing before magistrate;  commitment or discharge
    If an arrest is made in this state by an officer of another state in accordance with the provisions of section 2A:155-4 of this title, he shall, without unnecessary delay, take the person arrested before a neighboring magistrate, who shall conduct a hearing for the purpose of determining the lawfulness of the arrest.  If the magistrate determines that the arrest was lawful he shall commit the person arrested to await for a reasonable time the issuance of an extradition warrant by the governor of this state or admit him to bail for such purpose.  If the magistrate determines that the arrest was unlawful he shall discharge the person arrested.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:155-6.  Lawfulness of arrest
    Section 2A:155-4 of this title shall not be construed so as to make unlawful  any arrest in this state which would otherwise be lawful.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:155-7.  Copies of chapter to other states
    It shall be the duty of the secretary of state to certify a copy of this chapter to the executive department of each of the states of the United States.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:156-1.  Peace officer in fresh pursuit may arrest anywhere in state
    Any peace officer of this state in fresh pursuit of a person who is reasonably believed by him to have committed a high misdemeanor in this state or has committed, or attempted to commit, any criminal offense in this state in  the presence of such officer, or for whom such officer holds a warrant of arrest for a criminal offense, shall have the authority to arrest and hold in custody such person anywhere in this state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:156-2.   "Fresh pursuit"  defined
    The term  "fresh pursuit"  as used in this chapter shall include fresh pursuit as defined by the common law, and also the pursuit of a person who has committed a high misdemeanor or is reasonably suspected of having committed a high misdemeanor in this state, or who has committed or attempted to commit any  criminal offense in this state in the presence of the arresting officer referred to in section 2A:156-1 of this title, or for whom such officer holds a  warrant of arrest for a criminal offense.  It shall also include the pursuit of  a person suspected of having committed a supposed high misdemeanor in this  state, though no high misdemeanor has actually been committed, if there is  reasonable ground for so believing. Fresh pursuit as used herein shall not  necessarily imply instant pursuit, but pursuit without unreasonable delay.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:156-3.  Validity of arrest
    Section 2A:156-1 of this title shall not make unlawful an arrest which would  otherwise be lawful.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:156-4.  Short title
    This chapter may be cited as the  "uniform act on intrastate fresh pursuit" .

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:156A-1.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the  "New Jersey Wiretapping and  Electronic Surveillance Control Act."

     L.1968, c. 409, s. 1, eff. Jan. 1, 1969.

2A:156A-2  Definitions.
 
	2.	As used in this act:

	a.	"Wire communication" means any aural transfer made in whole or in part through the use of facilities for the transmission of communications by the aid of wire, cable or other like connection between the point of origin and the point of reception, including the use of such connection in a switching station, furnished or operated by any person engaged in providing or operating such facilities for the transmission of intrastate, interstate or foreign communication.  "Wire communication" includes any electronic storage of such communication, and the radio portion of a cordless telephone communication that is transmitted between the cordless telephone handset and the base unit;
 
	b.	"Oral communication" means any oral communication uttered by a person exhibiting an expectation that such communication is not subject to interception under circumstances justifying such expectation, but does not include any electronic communication;
 
	c.	"Intercept" means the aural or other acquisition of the contents of any wire, electronic or oral communication through the use of any electronic, mechanical, or other device;
 
	d.	"Electronic, mechanical or other device" means any device or apparatus, including an induction coil, that can be used to intercept a wire, electronic or oral communication other than:
 
	(1)	Any telephone or telegraph instrument, equipment or facility, or any component thereof, furnished to the subscriber or user by a provider of wire or electronic communication service in the ordinary course of its business and being used by the subscriber or user in the ordinary course of its business; or furnished by such subscriber or user for connection to the facilities of such service and used in the ordinary course of its business; or being used by a provider of wire or electronic communication service in the ordinary course of its business, or by an investigative or law enforcement officer in the ordinary course of his duties; or
 
	(2)	A hearing aid or similar device being used to correct subnormal hearing to not better than normal;
 
	e.	"Person" means that term as defined in R.S.1:1-2 and includes any officer or employee of the State or of a political subdivision thereof;
 
	f.	"Investigative or law enforcement officer" means any officer of the State of New Jersey or of a political subdivision thereof who is empowered by law to conduct investigations of, or to make arrests for, any offense enumerated in section 8 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-8) and any attorney authorized by law to prosecute or participate in the prosecution of any such offense;
 
	g.	"Contents," when used with respect to any wire, electronic or oral communication, includes any information concerning the identity of the parties to such communication or the existence, substance, purport, or meaning of that communication, except that for purposes of sections 22, 23, 24 and 26 of P.L.1993, c.29 (C.2A:156A-28, C.2A:156A-29, C.2A:156A-30, and C.2A:156A-32) contents, when used with respect to any wire, electronic, or oral communication means any information concerning the substance, purport or meaning of that communication;
 
	h.	"Court of competent jurisdiction" means the Superior Court;
 
	i.	"Judge," when referring to a judge authorized to receive applications for, and to enter, orders authorizing interceptions of wire, electronic or oral communications, means one of the several judges of the Superior Court to be designated from time to time by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court to receive applications for, and to enter, orders authorizing interceptions of wire, electronic or oral communications pursuant to this act;
 
	j.	"Communication common carrier" means any person engaged as a common carrier for hire, in intrastate, interstate or foreign communication by wire or radio or in intrastate, interstate or foreign radio transmission of energy; but a person engaged in radio broadcasting shall not, while so engaged, be deemed a common carrier;
 
	k.	"Aggrieved person" means a person who was a party to any intercepted wire, electronic or oral communication or a person against whom the interception was directed;
 
	l.	"In-progress trace" means the determination of the origin of a telephonic communication to a known telephone during the communication;
 
	m.	"Electronic communication" means any transfer of signs, signals, writing, images, sounds, data, or intelligence of any nature transmitted in whole or in part by a wire, radio, electromagnetic, photoelectric or photo-optical system that affects interstate, intrastate or foreign commerce, but does not include:
 
	(1)	Any wire or oral communication;
 
	(2)	Any communication made through a tone-only paging device; or
 
	(3)	Any communication from a tracking device;
 
	n.	"User" means any person or entity who:
 
	(1)	Uses an electronic communication service; and
 
	(2)	Is duly authorized by the provider of such service to engage in such use;
 
	o.	"Electronic communication system" means any wire, radio, electromagnetic, photo-optical or photoelectronic facilities for the transmission of electronic communications, and any computer facilities or related electronic equipment for the electronic storage of such communications;
 
	p.	"Electronic communication service" means any service which provides to the users thereof the ability to send or receive wire or electronic communications;
 
	q.	"Electronic storage" means:
 
	(1)	Any temporary, intermediate storage of a wire or electronic communication incidental to the electronic transmission thereof; and
 
	(2)	Any storage of such communication by an electronic communication service for purpose of backup protection of the communication;
 
	r.	"Readily accessible to the general public" means, with respect to a radio communication, that such communication is not:
 
	(1)	Scrambled or encrypted;
 
	(2)	Transmitted using modulation techniques whose essential parameters have been withheld from the public with the intention of preserving the privacy of such communication;
 
	(3)	Carried on a subcarrier or other signal subsidiary to a radio transmission;
 
	(4)	Transmitted over a communication system provided by a common carrier, unless the communication is a tone-only paging system communication; or
 
	(5)	Transmitted on frequencies allocated under part 25, subpart D, E, or F of part 74, or part 94 of the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission, unless, in the case of a communication transmitted on a frequency allocated under part 74 that is not exclusively allocated to broadcast auxiliary services, the communication is a two-way voice communication by radio;
 
	s.	"Remote computing service" means the provision to the public of computer storage or processing services by means of an electronic communication system;
 
	t.	"Aural transfer" means a transfer containing the human voice at any point between and including the point of origin and the point of reception;
 
	u.	"Tracking device" means an electronic or mechanical device which permits the tracking of the movement of a person or device;
 
	v.	"Point of interception" means the site at which the investigative or law enforcement officer is located at the time the interception is made;
 
	w.	"Location information" means global positioning system data, enhanced 9-1-1 data, cellular site information, and any other information that would assist a law enforcement agency in tracking the physical location of a cellular telephone or wireless mobile device.
 
	L.1968, c.409, s.2; amended 1978, c.51, s.1; 1993, c.29, s.1; 1999, c.151, s.2; 2009, c.184, s.1.

2A:156A-3.   Interception, disclosure, use of wire, electronic, oral communication; violation  
    3.   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this act, any person who:

  

   a.   Purposely intercepts, endeavors to intercept, or procures any other person to intercept or endeavor to intercept any wire, electronic or oral communication; or  

   b.   Purposely discloses or endeavors to disclose to any other person the contents of any wire, electronic or oral communication, or evidence derived therefrom, knowing or having reason to know that the information was obtained through the interception of a wire, electronic or oral communication; or  

   c.   Purposely uses or endeavors to use the contents of any wire, electronic or oral communication, or evidence derived therefrom, knowing or having reason to know, that the information was obtained through the interception of a wire, electronic or oral communication;  

   shall be guilty of a crime of the third degree.  Subsections b. and c. of this section shall not apply to the contents of any wire, electronic or oral communication, or evidence derived therefrom, that has become common knowledge or public information.  

   L.1968,c.409,s.3; amended 1989,c.85,s.1; 1993,c.29,s.2.  

2A:156A-4.  Lawful interception activities; exceptions
	4.	It shall not be unlawful under this act for:

	a.	An operator of a switchboard, or an officer, agent or employee of a provider of wire or electronic communication service, whose facilities are used in the transmission of a wire or electronic communication, to intercept, disclose or use that communication in the normal course of his employment while engaged in any activity which is a necessary incident to the rendition of his service or to the protection of the rights or property of the provider of that service.  No provider of wire or electronic communication service shall utilize service observing or random monitoring except for mechanical or service quality control checks;

	b.	Any investigative or law enforcement officer to intercept a wire, electronic or oral communication, where such officer is a party to the communication or where another officer who is a party to the communication requests or requires him to make such interception;

	c.	Any person acting at the direction of an investigative or law enforcement officer to intercept a wire, electronic or oral communication, where such person is a party to the communication or one of the parties to the communication has given prior consent to such interception; provided, however, that no such interception shall be made without the prior approval of the Attorney General or his designee or a county prosecutor or his designee;  

	d.	A person not acting under color of law to intercept a wire, electronic or oral communication, where such person is a party to the communication or one of the parties to the communication has given prior consent to such interception unless such communication is intercepted or used for the purpose of committing any criminal or tortious act in violation of the Constitution or laws of the United States or of this State or for the purpose of committing any other injurious act.  The fact that such person is the subscriber to a particular telephone does not constitute consent effective to authorize interception of communications among parties not including such person on that telephone.  Any person who unlawfully intercepts or uses such communication as provided in this paragraph shall be subject to the civil liability established in section 24 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-24), in addition to any other criminal or civil liability imposed by law;  

	e.	Any person to intercept or access an electronic communication made through an electronic communication system that is configured so that such electronic communication is readily accessible to the general public;  

	f.	Any person to intercept any radio communication which is transmitted:

	(1)  by any station for the use of the general public, or that relates to ships, aircraft, vehicles, or persons in distress;  

	(2)  by any governmental, law enforcement, civil defense, private land mobile, or public safety communication system, including police and fire, readily accessible to the general public;  

	(3)  by a station operating on an authorized frequency within the bands allocated to the amateur, citizens band, or general mobile radio services; or 

	(4)  by any marine or aeronautical communications system;

	g.	Any person to engage in any conduct which:

	(1)  is prohibited by section 633 of the Communications Act of 1934; or

	(2)  is excepted from the application of section 705(a) of the Communications Act of 1934 by section 705(b) of that Act;  

	h.	Any person to intercept any wire or electronic communication the transmission of which is causing harmful interference to any lawfully operating station or consumer electronic equipment, to the extent necessary to identify the source of such interference; or for other users of the same frequency to intercept any radio communication made through a system that utilizes frequencies monitored by individuals engaged in the provision or the use of such system, if such communication is not scrambled or encrypted; or

	i.	A provider of electronic communication service to record the fact that a wire or electronic communication was initiated or completed in order to protect such provider, another provider furnishing service toward the completion of the wire or electronic communication, or a user of that service, from fraudulent, unlawful or abusive use of such service.

	L.1968,c.409,s.4; amended 1975, c.131, s.1; 1978, c.51, s.2; 1993, c.29, s.3; 1999, c.151, s.3.

2A:156A-4.1  Interception of wire, electronic communications, certain; permitted.
 
	1. a. It shall not be a violation of any provision of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-1 et seq.) for a person acting under color of law to intercept the wire or electronic communications of a suspected computer trespasser transmitted to, through, or from a computer or any other device with Internet capability, if:
 
	(1)	the owner or operator of the computer or other device authorizes the interception of the computer trespasser's wire or electronic communications on the computer;
 
	(2)	the person acting under color of law is lawfully engaged in an investigation;
 
	(3)	the person acting under color of law has reasonable grounds to believe that the contents of the computer trespasser's wire or electronic communications will be relevant to the investigation; and
 
	(4)	such interception does not acquire communications other than those transmitted to or from the computer trespasser.
 
	b.	For purposes of this section, "computer trespasser" means a person who accesses a computer or any other device with Internet capability without authorization and thus has no reasonable expectation of privacy in any communication transmitted to, through, or from the computer or other device.  The term "computer trespasser" does not include a person known by the owner or operator of the computer or other device with Internet capability to have an existing contractual relationship with the owner or operator of the computer or other device for access to all or part of the computer or other device.
 
	c.	Any aggrieved person in any trial, hearing, or proceeding in or before any court or other authority of this State may move to suppress the contents of any wire or electronic communication intercepted in accordance with subsection a. of this section, or evidence derived therefrom, on the grounds that the communication was unlawfully intercepted or the interception was not made in conformity with the provisions of this section.  The motion shall be made at least 10 days before the trial, hearing, or proceeding unless there was no opportunity to make the motion or the moving party was not aware of the grounds for the motion.  Motions by coindictees are to be heard in a single consolidated hearing.  The court, upon the filing of such motion by the aggrieved person, shall make available to the aggrieved person or his counsel for inspection such portions of the intercepted communication, or evidence derived therefrom, as the court determines to be in the interests of justice. If the motion is granted, the entire contents of all intercepted wire or electronic communications obtained during or after any interception which is determined to be in violation of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-1 et seq.) or evidence derived therefrom, shall not be received in evidence in the trial, hearing or proceeding.
 
	In addition to any other right to appeal, the State shall have the right to appeal from an order granting a motion to suppress upon certification to the court that the appeal is not taken for purposes of delay.  The appeal shall be taken within the time specified by the Rules of Court and shall be diligently prosecuted.
 
	L.2009, c.142, s.1.

2A:156A-5.   Possession, sale, distribution, manufacture, or advertisement of intercepting devices; violation  
    5.   Except as otherwise specifically provided in section 6 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-6), any person who:  

   a.   Purposely possesses an electronic, mechanical or other device, knowing or having reason to know that the design of such device renders it primarily useful for the purpose of the surreptitious interception of a wire, electronic or oral communication;  

   b.   Purposely sells an electronic, mechanical or other device, knowing or having reason to know that the design of such device renders it primarily useful for the purpose of the surreptitious interception of a wire, electronic or oral communication;  

   c.   Purposely distributes an electronic, mechanical or other device, knowing or having reason to know that the design of such device renders it primarily useful for the purpose of the surreptitious interception of a wire, electronic or oral communication;  

   d.   Purposely manufactures or assembles an electronic, mechanical or other device, knowing or having reason to know that the design of such device renders it primarily useful for the purpose of the surreptitious interception of a wire, electronic or oral communication; or  

   e.   Purposely places in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement of any electronic, mechanical or other device, knowing or having reason to know that the design of such device renders it primarily useful for the purpose of the surreptitious interception of a wire, electronic or oral communication or of any electronic, mechanical or other device where such advertisement promotes the use of such device for the purpose of the surreptitious interception of a wire, electronic or oral communication;  

   shall be guilty of a crime of the third degree.

  

   L.1968,c.409,s.5; amended 1975,c.131,s.2; 1989,c.85,s.2; 1993,c.29,s.4.  

2A:156A-6.   Lawful activities concerning devices  
    6.   It shall not be unlawful under this act for:

  

   a.   A provider of wire or electronic communication service, or an officer, agent or employee of, or a person under contract with such a provider of wire or electronic communication service in the normal course of the business of providing that wire or electronic communication service; or  

   b.   A person under contract with the United States, a state or a political subdivision thereof, or an officer, agent or employee of a state or a political subdivision thereof; to possess, sell, distribute, manufacture or assemble any electronic, mechanical or other device, while acting in furtherance of the appropriate activities of the United States, a state or a political subdivision thereof or a provider of wire or electronic communication service.  

   L.1968,c.409,s.6; amended 1975,c.131,s.3; 1993,c.29,s.5.  

2A:156A-7.   Seizure, forfeiture of unlawful device  
    7.   Any electronic, mechanical or other device possessed, used, sent, distributed, manufactured, or assembled in violation of this act may be seized and forfeited to the State pursuant to chapter 64 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes.  

   L.1968,c.409,s.7; amended 1993,c.29,s.6.  

2A:156A-8  Authorization for application for order to intercept communications.
 
 	8.	The Attorney General, county prosecutor or a person designated to act for such an official and to perform his duties in and during his actual absence or disability, may authorize, in writing, an ex parte application to a judge designated to receive the same for an order authorizing the interception of a wire, or electronic or oral communication by the investigative or law enforcement officers or agency having responsibility for an investigation when such interception may provide evidence of the commission of the offense of murder, kidnapping, gambling, robbery, bribery, a violation of paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection b. of N.J.S.2C:12-1, a violation of section 3 of P.L.1997, c.353 (C.2C:21-4.3), a violation of N.J.S.2C:21-19 punishable by imprisonment for more than one year, a violation of P.L.1994, c.121 (C.2C:21-23 et seq.), a violation of sections 1 through 5 of P.L.2002, c.26 (C.2C:38-1 through C.2C:38-5), a violation of N.J.S.2C:33-3, a violation of N.J.S.2C:17-2, a violation of sections 1 through 3 of P.L.1983, c.480 (C.2C:17-7 through 2C:17-9), a violation of N.J.S.2C:12-3 (terroristic threats), violations of N.J.S.2C:35-3, N.J.S.2C:35-4 and N.J.S.2C:35-5, violations of sections 112 through 116, inclusive, of the "Casino Control Act," P.L.1977, c.110 (C.5:12-112 through 5:12-116), a violation of section 1 of P.L.2005, c.77 (C.2C:13-8), a violation of N.J.S.2C:34-1 punishable by imprisonment for more than one year, arson, burglary, theft and related offenses punishable by imprisonment for more than one year, endangering the welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.2C:24-4, escape, forgery and fraudulent practices punishable by imprisonment for more than one year, alteration of motor vehicle identification numbers, unlawful manufacture, purchase, use, or transfer of firearms, unlawful possession or use of destructive devices or explosives, weapons training for illegal activities pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1983, c.229 (C.2C:39-14), racketeering or a violation of subsection g. of N.J.S.2C:5-2, leader of organized crime, organized criminal activity directed toward the unlawful transportation, storage, disposal, discharge, release, abandonment or disposition of any harmful, hazardous, toxic, destructive, or polluting substance, or any conspiracy to commit any of the foregoing offenses or which may provide evidence aiding in the apprehension of the perpetrator or perpetrators of any of the foregoing offenses.
 
	L.1968, c.409, s.8; amended 1975, c.131, s.4; 1978, c.51, s.3; 1989, c.85, s.3; 1993, c.29, s.7; 1995, c.119; 1999, c.25, s.1; 1999, c.151, s.4; 2002, c.26, s.6; 2013, c.51, s.14.

2A:156A-9.   Contents of application  
    9.   Each application for an order of authorization to intercept a wire, electronic or oral communication shall be made in writing upon oath or affirmation and shall state:  

   a.   The authority of the applicant to make such application;

  

   b.   The identity and qualifications of the investigative or law enforcement officers or agency for whom the authority to intercept a wire, electronic or oral communication is sought and the identity of whoever authorized the application.  

   c.   A particular statement of the facts relied upon by the applicant, including:  (1) The identity of the particular person, if known, committing the offense and whose communications are to be intercepted; (2) The details as to the particular offense that has been, is being, or is about to be committed; (3) The particular type of communication to be intercepted; and a showing that there is probable cause to believe that such communication will be communicated on the wire or electronic communication facilities involved or at the particular place where the oral communication is to be intercepted; (4) Except as provided in subsection g. of this section, the character and location of the particular wire or electronic communication facilities involved or the particular place where the oral communication is to be intercepted; (5) A statement of the period of time for which the interception is required to be maintained; if the character of the investigation is such that the authorization for interception should not automatically terminate when the described type of communication has been first obtained, a particular statement of facts establishing probable cause to believe that additional communications of the same type will occur thereafter; (6) A particular statement of facts showing that other normal investigative procedures with respect to the offense have been tried and have failed or reasonably appear to be unlikely to succeed if tried or to be too dangerous to employ;  

   d.   Where the application is for the renewal or extension of an order, a particular statement of facts showing the results thus far obtained from the interception, or a reasonable explanation of the failure to obtain such results;  

   e.   A complete statement of the facts concerning all previous applications, known to the individual authorizing and to the individual making the application, made to any court for authorization to intercept a wire, electronic or oral communication involving any of the same facilities or places specified in the application or involving any person whose communication is to be intercepted, and the action taken by the court on each such application;  

   f.   Such additional testimony or documentary evidence in support of the application as the judge may require; and  

   g.   An application need not meet the requirements of paragraph (4) of subsection c. of this section if:  

   (1)  with respect to the application for an interception of an oral communication:  

   (a)  the application is approved by the Attorney General or county prosecutor or a person designated to act for such an official and to perform his duties in and during his actual absence or disability; and  

   (b)  the application contains a full and complete statement as to why specification is not practical and identifies the person committing the offense and whose communications are to be intercepted; and  

   (c)  the judge finds that such specification is not practical.

  

   (2)  with respect to the application for an interception of a wire or electronic communication:  

   (a)  the application is approved by the Attorney General or county prosecutor or a person designated to act for such an official and to perform his duties in and during his actual absence or disability; and  

   (b)  the application identifies the person believed to be committing the offense and whose communications are to be intercepted and the applicant makes a showing of a purpose, on the part of that person, to thwart interception by changing facilities; and  

   (c)  the judge finds that such purpose has been adequately shown.

  

   An interception of a communication under an order issued in conformity with this subsection shall not begin until the facilities from which, or the place where, the communication is to be intercepted is ascertained by the person implementing the interception order.  A provider of wire or electronic communication service that has received an order as provided for in this subsection may make a motion that the court modify or quash the order on the ground that the provider's assistance with respect to the interception cannot be performed in a timely or reasonable fashion.  The court upon notice to the Attorney General or county prosecutor shall decide such a motion expeditiously.  

   L.1968,c.409,s.9; amended 1975,c.131,s.5; 1993,c.29,s.8.  

2A:156A-10.  Consideration of application; basis of order  
    10.  Upon consideration of an application, the judge may enter an ex parte order, as requested or as modified, authorizing the interception of a wire, electronic or oral communication, if the court determines on the basis of the facts submitted by the applicant that there is or was probable cause for belief that:  

   a.   The person whose communication is to be intercepted is engaging or was engaged over a period of time as a part of a continuing criminal activity or is committing, has or had committed or is about to commit an offense as provided in section 8 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-8);  

   b.   Particular communications concerning such offense may be obtained through such interception;  

   c.   Normal investigative procedures with respect to such offense have been tried and have failed or reasonably appear to be unlikely to succeed if tried or to be too dangerous to employ;  

   d.   Except in the case of an application meeting the requirements of subsection g. of section 9 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-9), the facilities from which, or the place where, the wire, electronic or oral communications are to be intercepted, are or have been used, or are about to be used, in connection with the commission of such offense, or are leased to, listed in the name of, or commonly used by, such individual;  

   e.   The investigative or law enforcement officers or agency to be authorized to intercept the wire, electronic or oral communication are qualified by training and experience to execute the interception sought; and  

   f.   In the case of an application, other than a renewal or extension, for an order to intercept a communication of a person or on a facility which was the subject of a previous order authorizing interception, the application is based upon new evidence or information different from and in addition to the evidence or information offered to support the prior order, regardless of whether such evidence was derived from prior interceptions or from other sources.  

   As part of the consideration of an application in which there is no corroborative evidence offered, the judge shall inquire in camera as to the identity of any informants or any other additional information concerning the basis upon which the investigative or law enforcement officer or agency has applied for the order of authorization which the judge finds relevant in order to determine if there is probable cause pursuant to this section.  

   L.1968,c.409,s.10; amended 1975,c.131,s.6; 1993,c.29,s.9.  

2A:156A-11.  Orders affecting public and certain private communication facilities; privileged communications  
    11.  If the facilities from which a wire or electronic communication is to be intercepted are public, no order shall be issued unless the court, in addition to the matters provided in section 10 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-10), determines that there is a special need to intercept wire or electronic communications over such facilities.  

   If the facilities from which, or the place where, the wire, electronic or oral communications are to be intercepted are being used, or are about to be used, or are leased to, listed in the name of, or commonly used by, a licensed physician, a licensed practicing psychologist, an attorney-at-law, a practicing clergyman, or a newspaperman, or is a place used primarily for habitation by a husband and wife, no order shall be issued unless the court, in addition to the matters provided in section 10 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-10), determines that there is a special need to intercept wire, electronic or oral communications over such facilities or in such places. Special need as used in this section shall require in addition to the matters required by section 10 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-10), a showing that the licensed physician, licensed practicing psychologist, attorney-at-law, practicing clergyman or newspaperman is personally engaging in or was engaged in over a period of time as a part of a continuing criminal activity or is committing, has or had committed or is about to commit an offense as provided in section 8 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-8) or that the public facilities or the place used primarily for habitation by a husband and wife are being regularly used by someone who is personally engaging in or was engaged in over a period of time as a part of a continuing criminal activity or is committing, has or had committed or is about to commit such an offense.  No otherwise privileged wire, electronic or oral communication intercepted in accordance with, or in violation of, the provisions of this act, shall lose its privileged character.  

   L.1968,c.409,s.11; amended 1975,c.131,s.7; 1978,c.51,s.4; 1993,c.29,s.10. 

2A:156A-12.  Order; contents; limitations; extensions; renewals; progress reports; assistance of providers; point of execution
	12.  Each order authorizing the interception of any wire, electronic or oral communication shall state:

	a.	The judge is authorized to issue the order;

	b.	The identity of, or a particular description of, the person, if known, whose communications are to be intercepted;

	c.	The character and location of the particular communication facilities as to which, or the particular place of the communication as to which, authority to intercept is granted, or, in the case of an application meeting the requirements of subsection g. of section 9 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-9) that specification is not practical or that the purpose to thwart interception by changing facilities has been shown;  

	d.	A particular description of the type of the communication to be intercepted and a statement of the particular offense to which it relates;

	e.	The identity of the investigative or law enforcement officers or agency to whom the authority to intercept a wire, electronic or oral communication is given and the identity of whoever authorized the application; and

	f.	The period of time during which such interception is authorized, including a statement as to whether or not the interception shall automatically terminate when the described communication has been first obtained.

	No order entered under this section shall authorize the interception of any wire, electronic or oral communication for a period of time in excess of that necessary under the circumstances. Every order entered under this section shall require that such interception begin and terminate as soon as practicable and be conducted in such a manner as to minimize or eliminate the interception of such communications not otherwise subject to interception under this act by making reasonable efforts, whenever possible, to reduce the hours of interception authorized by said order. In the event the intercepted communication is in a language other than English, or is in a code, and an interpreter or expert in that language or code is not reasonably available during the interception period or a portion of the interception period, minimization shall be accomplished as soon as practicable after the interception.  Except as provided below in subsection g. of this section, no order entered under this section shall authorize the interception of wire, electronic or oral communications for any period exceeding 20 days.  Extensions or renewals of such an order may be granted for two additional periods of not more than 10 days.  No extension or renewal shall be granted unless an application for it is made in accordance with this section, and the court makes the findings required by sections 10 and 11 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-10 and 2A:156A-11) and by this section.

	g.	Orders entered under this section to provide evidence of racketeering in violation of N.J.S.2C:41-2, leader of organized crime in violation of subsection g. of N.J.S.2C:5-2, or leader of narcotics trafficking network in violation of N.J.S.2C:35-3, may authorize the interception of wire, electronic or oral communications for a period not to exceed 30 days and extensions or renewals of any order may be granted for additional periods of not more than 30 days, without limitation on the number of extension or renewal orders; provided, however, that orders authorized pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed six months.  

	h.	Whenever an order authorizing an interception is entered, the order may require reports to be made to the judge who issued the order showing what progress has been made toward achievement of the authorized objective and the need for continued interception.  Such reports shall be made at such intervals as the court may require.

	An order authorizing the interception of a wire, electronic or oral communication shall, upon request of the applicant, direct that a provider of  electronic communication service shall furnish the applicant forthwith all information, facilities and technical assistance necessary to accomplish the interception unobtrusively and with a minimum of interference with the services that such provider is affording the person whose communications are to be intercepted.

	The obligation of a provider of electronic communication service under such an order shall include but is not limited to conducting an in-progress trace during an interception and shall also include the provision of technical assistance and equipment and utilization of any technological features which are available to the provider of electronic communication service.  The obligation of the provider of electronic communication service to conduct an in-progress trace and provide other technical assistance may arise pursuant to court order based upon probable cause, under circumstances not involving an interception pursuant to this act. Any provider of electronic communication service furnishing such facilities or assistance shall be compensated therefor by the applicant at the prevailing rates.  Said provider shall be immune from civil liability for any assistance rendered to the applicant pursuant to this section.

	An order authorizing the interception of a wire, electronic or oral communication may be executed at any point of  interception within the jurisdiction of an investigative or law enforcement officer executing the order.

	L.1968,c.409,s.12; amended 1975, c.131, s.8; 1978, c.51, s.5; 1989, c.85, s.4; 1993, c.29, s.11; 1999, c.151, s.5.

2A:156A-13.  Verbal approval for emergency interception  
    13.  Whenever, upon informal application by an authorized applicant, a judge determines there are grounds upon which an order could be issued pursuant to this act, and that an emergency situation exists that involves: a. the investigation of conspiratorial activities of organized crime, related to an offense designated in section 8 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-8); or b. immediate danger of death or serious bodily injury to any person, dictating authorization for immediate interception of wire, electronic or oral communication before an application for an order could with due diligence be submitted to him and acted upon, the judge may grant verbal approval for such interception without an order, conditioned upon the filing with him, within 48 hours thereafter, of an application for an order which, if granted, shall recite the verbal approval and be retroactive to the time of such verbal approval.  Such interception shall immediately terminate when the communication sought is obtained or when the application for an order is denied. In the event no application for an order is made, the content of any wire, electronic or oral communication intercepted shall be treated as having been obtained in violation of this act.  

   In the event no application is made or an application made pursuant to this section is denied, the court shall require the wire, tape or other recording of the intercepted communication to be delivered to, and sealed by, the court and such evidence shall be retained by the court in accordance with section 14 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-14) and the same shall not be used or disclosed in any legal proceeding except in a civil action brought by an aggrieved person pursuant to section 24 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-24) or as otherwise authorized by court order. Failure to effect delivery of any such wire, tape or other recording shall be punishable as contempt by the court directing such delivery.  Evidence of verbal authorization to intercept an oral, electronic or wire communication shall be a defense to any charge against the investigating or law enforcement officer for engaging in unlawful interception.  

   L.1968,c.409,s.13; amended 1993,c.29,s.12.  

2A:156A-14.  Recording, transfer, custody of tapes  
    14.  Any wire, electronic or oral communication intercepted in accordance with this act shall, if practicable, be recorded by tape, wire or other comparable method.  The recording shall be done in such a way as will protect it from editing or other alteration.  Immediately upon the expiration of the order or extensions or renewals thereof, the tapes, wires or other recordings shall be transferred to the judge issuing the order and sealed under his direction.  Custody of the tapes, wires or other recordings shall be maintained wherever the court directs.  They shall not be destroyed except upon an order of such court and in any event shall be kept for 10 years. Duplicate tapes, wires or other recordings may be made for disclosure or use pursuant to subsection a. of section 17 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-17). The presence of the seal provided by this section, or a satisfactory explanation for its absence, shall be a prerequisite for the disclosure of the contents of any wire, electronic or oral communication, or evidence derived therefrom, under subsection b. of section 17 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-17).  

   L.1968,c.409,s.14; amended 1993,c.29,s.13.  

2A:156A-15.  Sealing of applications, orders and supporting papers; destruction;  disclosure of contents;  violations
    Applications made and orders granted pursuant to this act and supporting papers shall be sealed by the court and shall be held in custody as the court shall direct and shall not be destroyed except on order of the court and in any  event shall be kept for 10 years.  They may be disclosed only upon a showing of  good cause before a court of competent jurisdiction.

    Any violation of the provisions of this section may be punished as contempt  of the issuing or denying court.

     L.1968, c. 409, s. 15, eff. Jan. 1, 1969.

2A:156A-16.  Service, contents of inventory  
    16.  Within a reasonable time but not later than 90 days after the termination of the period of the order or of extensions or renewals thereof, or the date of the denial of an order applied for under section 13 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-13), the issuing or denying judge shall cause to be served on the persons named in the order or application, persons arrested as a result of the interception of their conversations, persons indicted as a result of the interception of their conversations, persons whose conversations were intercepted and against whom indictments are likely to be returned, persons whose conversations were intercepted and who are potential witnesses to criminal activities, and such other parties to the intercepted communications as the judge may in his discretion determine to be in the interest of justice, an inventory which shall include:  

   a.   Notice of the entry of the order or the application for an order denied under section 13 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-13);  

   b.   The date of the entry of the order or the denial of an order applied for under section 13 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-13);  

   c.   The period of authorized or disapproved interception; and

  

   d.   The fact that during the period wire, electronic or oral communications were or were not intercepted.  

   The court, upon filing of a motion, may in its discretion make available to such persons or their attorneys for inspection such portions of the intercepted communications, applications and orders as the court determines to be in the interest of justice.  On an ex parte showing of good cause to the court the serving of the inventories required by this section may be postponed.  

   L.1968,c.409,s.16; amended 1978,c.51,s.6; 1993,c.29,s.14.  

2A:156A-17.  Disclosure of intercepted communications  
    17.  a.  Any investigative or law enforcement officer or other person who, by any means authorized by this act, has obtained knowledge of the contents of any wire, electronic or oral communication, or evidence derived therefrom, may disclose or use such contents or evidence to investigative or law enforcement officers of this or another state, any of its political subdivisions, or of the United States to the extent that such disclosure or use is appropriate to the proper performance of the official duties of the officer making or receiving the disclosure.  

   b.   Any person who, by any means authorized by this act, has obtained any information concerning any wire, electronic or oral communication or evidence derived therefrom intercepted in accordance with the provisions of this act, may disclose the contents of such communications or derivative evidence while giving testimony under oath or affirmation in any criminal proceeding in any court of this or another state or of the United States or before any federal or State grand jury; provided, however, that the contents of any wire, electronic or oral communication may be initially disclosed solely through the use of the testimony of a witness to such communication or the actual recording of the communication.  

   c.   The contents of any intercepted wire, electronic or oral communication, or evidence derived therefrom, may otherwise be disclosed or used only upon a showing of good cause before a court of competent jurisdiction.  

   L.1968,c.409,s.17; amended 1975,c.131,s.9; 1993,c.29,s.15.  

2A:156A-18.  Disclosure of intercepted communications relating to other offenses  
    18.  When an investigative or law enforcement officer, while engaged in intercepting wire, electronic or oral communications in the manner authorized herein, intercepts wire, electronic or oral communications relating to offenses other than those specified in the order of authorization, the contents thereof, and evidence derived therefrom, may be disclosed or used as provided in subsection a. of section 17 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-17). Such contents and any evidence derived therefrom may be used under subsection b. of section 17 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-17) when authorized or approved by a judge of competent jurisdiction where such judge finds on subsequent application that the contents were otherwise intercepted in accordance with the provisions of this act.  Such application shall be made as soon as practicable.  

   L.1968,c.409,s.18; amended 1993,c.29,s.16.  

2A:156A-19.  Unlawful use, disclosure, third degree crime  
    19.  Except as specifically authorized pursuant to this act any person who knowingly uses or discloses the existence of an order authorizing interception of a wire, electronic or oral communication or the contents of, or information concerning, an intercepted wire, electronic or oral communication or evidence derived therefrom, is guilty of a crime of the third degree.  

   L.1968,c.409,s.19; amended 1989,c 85,s.5; 1993,c.29,s.17.  

2A:156A-20.  Disclosure of contents of intercepted communications at trial, proceeding  
    20.  The contents of any wire, electronic or oral communication intercepted in accordance with the provisions of this act, or evidence derived therefrom, shall not be disclosed in any trial, hearing, or proceeding before any court of this State unless not less than 10 days before the trial, hearing, or proceeding the parties to the action have been served with a copy of the order and accompanying application under which the interception was authorized.  

   The service of inventory, order, and application required by this section may be waived by the court where it finds that the service is not practicable and that the parties will not be prejudiced by the failure to make the service.  

   L.1968,c.409,s.20; amended 1993,c.29,s.18.  

2A:156A-21.  Action to suppress contents of intercepted communications  
    21.  Any aggrieved person in any trial, hearing, or proceeding in or before any court or other authority of this State may move to suppress the contents of any intercepted wire, electronic or oral communication, or evidence derived therefrom, on the grounds that:  

   a.   The communication was unlawfully intercepted;

  

   b.   The order of authorization is insufficient on its face;

  

   c.   The interception was not made in conformity with the order of authorization or in accordance with the requirements of section 12 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-12).  

   The motion shall be made at least 10 days before the trial, hearing, or proceeding unless there was no opportunity to make the motion or the moving party was not aware of the grounds for the motion.  Motions by coindictees are to be heard in a single consolidated hearing.  

   The court, upon the filing of such motion by the aggrieved person, shall make available to the aggrieved person or his counsel for inspection such portions of the intercepted communication, or evidence derived therefrom, as the court determines to be in the interests of justice.  If the motion is granted, the entire contents of all intercepted wire, electronic or oral communications obtained during or after any interception which is determined to be in violation of this act under subsection a., b., or c. of this section, or evidence derived therefrom, shall not be received in evidence in the trial, hearing or proceeding.  

   In addition to any other right to appeal, the State shall have the right to appeal from an order granting a motion to suppress if the official to whom the order authorizing the intercept was granted shall certify to the court that the appeal is not taken for purposes of delay. The appeal shall be taken within the time specified by the Rules of Court and shall be diligently prosecuted.  

   L.1968,c.409,s.21; amended 1975,c.131,s.10; 1978,c.51,s.7; 1993,c.29,s.19.

2A:156A-22.  Report by issuing or denying judge to Administrative Director of courts;  contents
    Within 30 days after the expiration of an order or an extension or renewal thereof entered under this act or the denial of an order confirming verbal approval of interception, the issuing or denying judge shall make a report to the Administrative Director of the courts stating that:

    a.  An order, extension or renewal was applied for;

     b.  The kind of order applied for;

     c.  The order was granted as applied for, was modified, or was denied;

     d.  The period of the interceptions authorized by the order, and the number  and duration of any extensions or renewals of the order;

     e.  The offense specified in the order, or extension or renewal of an order;

     f.  The identity of the person authorizing the application and of the investigative or law enforcement officer and agency for whom it was made; and

     g.  The character of the facilities from which or the place where the communications were to be intercepted.

     L.1968, c. 409, s. 22, eff. Jan. 1, 1969.

2A:156A-23.  Annual reports of Superior Court, Supreme Court and attorney general;  records of attorney general and county prosecutors
    a.  In addition to reports required to be made by applicants pursuant to Federal law, all judges of the Superior Court authorized to issue orders pursuant to this act shall make annual reports on the operation of this act to the Administrative Director of the Courts.  The reports by the judges shall contain (1) the number of applications made;  (2) the number of orders issued; (3) the effective periods of such orders;  (4) the number and duration of any renewals thereof;  (5) the crimes in connection with which the conversations were sought;  (6) the names of the applicants;  and (7) such other and further particulars as the Administrative Director of the Courts may require.

    b.  In addition to reports required to be made by applicants pursuant to Federal Law, the Attorney General shall make annual reports on the operation of  this act to the Administrative Director of the Courts.  The reports by the Attorney General shall contain (1) the number of applications made; (2) the number of orders issued;  (3) the effective periods of such orders; (4) the number and duration of any renewals thereof;  (5) the crimes in connection with  which the conversations were sought;  (6) the name of the applicants; (7) the  number of indictments resulting from each application; (8) the crime or crimes  which each indictment charges;  and (9) the disposition of each indictment.

    c.  In addition to reports required to be made by applicants pursuant to Federal law, the Attorney General shall receive and maintain records of all interceptions authorized pursuant to section 4 b. (C. 2A:156A-4) and shall include such information in his annual report to the Governor and the Legislature.  It shall be the obligation of all law enforcement agencies in the  State to file with the Attorney General on forms prescribed by the Attorney  General information pertinent to the operation of section 4 b. The information  on the forms shall include, but not be limited to (1) the name of the  investigative or law enforcement officer making the interception;  (2) the law  enforcement agency employing the officer involved in the interception;  (3) the  character of the investigation or activity involved; and (4) the results of  such activity.

    d.  In addition to reports and records otherwise required by law, the Attorney General and the county prosecutor shall maintain records of all interceptions authorized by them pursuant to section 4 c., on forms prescribed by the Attorney General.  Such records shall include the name of the person requesting the authorization, the reasons for the request, and the results of any authorized interception.  The Attorney General shall require that copies of  such records maintained by county prosecutors be filed with him periodically  and he shall report annually to the Governor and Legislature on the operation  of section 4 c.

    e.  The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and the Attorney General shall annually report to the Governor and the Legislature on such aspects of the operation of this act as they respectively deem appropriate including any recommendations they may care to make as to legislative changes or improvements  to effectuate the purposes of this act and to assure and protect individual  rights.

     L.1968, c. 409, s. 23, eff. Jan. 1, 1969.  Amended by L.1975, c. 131, s. 11, eff. June 30, 1975;  L.1978, c. 51, s. 8, eff. June 23, 1978.

2A:156A-24.  Civil action for damages, attorney's fee by persons whose communications are intercepted unlawfully  
    24.  Any person whose wire, electronic or oral communication is intercepted, disclosed or used in violation of this act shall have a civil cause of action against any person who intercepts, discloses or uses or procures any other person to intercept, disclose or use, such communication; and shall be entitled to recover from any such person:  

   a.   Actual damages, but not less than liquidated damages computed at the rate of $100.00 a day for each day of violation, or $1,000.00, whichever is higher;  

   b.   Punitive damages; and

  

   c.   A reasonable attorney's fee and other litigation costs reasonably incurred.  

   L.1968,c.409,s.24; amended 1993,c.29,s.20.  

2A:156A-25.  Good faith reliance on court order as defense
    A good faith reliance on a court order authorizing the interception shall constitute a complete defense to a civil or criminal action brought under this act or to administrative proceedings brought against a law enforcement officer.

     L.1968, c. 409, s. 25, eff. Jan. 1, 1969.

2A:156A-26.  Partial invalidity
    If any section, subsection or portion or provision of any section or sections of this act or the application thereof by or to any person or circumstances is declared invalid, the remainder of the section or sections or subsection of this act and the application thereof by or to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

     L.1968, c. 409, s. 26, eff. Jan. 1, 1969.

2A:156A-27.  Unlawful access to stored communications  
    21.  Unlawful access to stored communications.

  

   a.   A person is guilty of a crime of the fourth degree if he (1) knowingly accesses without authorization a facility through which an electronic communication service is provided or exceeds an authorization to access that facility, and (2) thereby obtains, alters, or prevents authorized access to a wire or electronic communication while that communication is in electronic storage.  

   b.   A person is guilty of a crime of the third degree if, for the purpose of commercial advantage, private commercial gain, or malicious destruction or damage, he (1) knowingly accesses without authorization a facility through which an electronic communication service is provided or exceeds an authorization to access that facility, and (2) thereby obtains, alters, or prevents authorized access to a wire or electronic communication while that communication is in electronic storage.  

   c.   This section does not apply to conduct authorized:  (1) by the person or entity providing a wire or electronic communication service; or (2) by a user of that service with respect to a communication of or intended for that user; or (3) by section 10 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-10), section 13 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-13), or by section 23 or 24 of P.L.1993, c.29 (C.2A:156A-29 or C.2A:156A-30).  

   L.1993,c.29,s.21.  

2A:156A-28.  Disclosure of contents  
    22.  Disclosure of contents.

  

   a.  (1)  Except as provided in subsection b. of this section, a person or entity providing an electronic communication service to the public shall not knowingly  divulge to any person or entity the contents of a communication while in electronic storage by that service; and  

   (2)  Except as provided in subsection b. of this section, a person or entity providing remote computing service to the public shall not knowingly divulge to any person or entity the contents of any communication which is carried or maintained on that service:  

   (a)  on behalf of, and received by means of electronic transmission from, or created by means of computer processing of communications received by means of electronic transmission from, a subscriber or customer of the service; and 

   (b)  solely for the purpose of providing storage or computer processing services to the subscriber or customer, if the provider is not authorized to access the contents of any such communication for the purpose of providing any services other than storage or computer processing.  

   b.   A person or entity may divulge the contents of a communication:

  

   (1)  to an addressee or intended recipient of the communication or an agent of the addressee or intended recipient;  

   (2)  as authorized or required by section 4 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-4), section 17 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-17), section 18 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-18) or section 23 of P.L.1993, c.29 (C.2A:156A-29);

   (3)  with the lawful consent of the originator or an addressee or intended recipient of the communication, or the subscriber in the case of a remote computing service;  

   (4)  to a person employed or authorized or whose facilities are used to forward the communication to its destination;  

   (5)  as may be necessarily incident to the rendition of the service or to the protection of the rights or property of the provider; or  

   (6)  to a law enforcement agency, if the contents were inadvertently obtained by the provider and appear to pertain to the commission of a crime.  

   L.1993,c.29,s.22.  

2A:156A-29  Requirements for access.
 
	23. Requirements for access.

	a.	A law enforcement agency, but no other governmental entity, may require the disclosure by a provider of electronic communication service or remote computing service of the contents of an electronic communication without notice to the subscriber or the customer if the law enforcement agency obtains a warrant.
 
	b.	Except as provided in subsection c. of this section, a provider of electronic communication service or remote computing service may disclose a record or other information pertaining to a subscriber or customer of the service to any person other than a governmental entity. This subsection shall not apply to the contents covered by subsection a. of this section.
 
	c.	A provider of electronic communication service or remote computing service or a communication common carrier shall disclose a record, the location information for a subscriber's or customer's mobile or wireless communications device, or other information pertaining to a subscriber or customer of the service, other than contents covered by subsections a. and f. of this section, to a law enforcement agency under the following circumstances:
 
	(1)	the law enforcement agency has obtained a warrant;
 
	(2)	the law enforcement agency has obtained the consent of the subscriber or customer to the disclosure; 
 
	(3)	the law enforcement agency has obtained a court order for such disclosure under subsection e. of this section; or
 
	(4)	with respect to only the location information for a subscriber's or customer's mobile or wireless communications device and not to a record or other subscriber or customer information, the law enforcement agency believes in good faith that an emergency involving danger of death or serious bodily injury to the subscriber or customer requires disclosure without delay of information relating to the emergency.
 
	A law enforcement agency receiving records or information pursuant to this subsection is not required to provide notice to the customer or subscriber.
 
	d.	Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no service provider, its officers, employees, agents or other specified persons shall be liable in any civil action for damages as a result of providing information, facilities or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order or warrant under this section.
 
	e.	A court order for disclosure under subsection b. or c. may be issued by a judge of competent jurisdiction and shall issue only if the law enforcement agency offers specific and articulable facts showing that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the record or other information pertaining to a subscriber or customer of an electronic communication service or remote computing service or communication common carrier is relevant and material to an ongoing criminal investigation.  A judge who has issued an order pursuant to this section, on a motion made promptly by the service provider, may quash or modify such order, if the information or records requested are unusually voluminous in nature or compliance with such order otherwise would cause an undue burden on such provider.
 
	f.	A provider of electronic communication service or remote computing service shall disclose to a law enforcement agency or to the State Commission of Investigation the:
 
	(1)	name;
 
	(2)	address;
 
	(3)	telephone or instrument number or other subscriber number or identity, including any temporarily assigned network address;
 
	(4)	local and long distance telephone connection records or records of session times and durations;
 
	(5)	length of service, including start date, and types of services utilized; and
 
	(6)	means and source of payment for such service, including any credit card or bank account number,
 
	of a subscriber to or customer of such service when the law enforcement agency obtains a grand jury or trial subpoena or when the State Commission of Investigation issues a subpoena.
 
	g.	Upon the request of a law enforcement agency, a provider of wire or electronic communication service or a remote computing service shall take all necessary steps to preserve, for a period of 90 days, records and other evidence in its possession pending the issuance of a court order or other legal process.  The preservation period shall be extended for an additional 90 days upon the request of the law enforcement agency.
 
	L.1993, c.29, s.23; amended 1994, c.55, s.2; 1999, c.151, s.6; 2005, c.58, s.7; 2005, c.270; 2009, c.184, s.2.

2A:156A-30.  Backup preservation  
    24.  Backup preservation.

  

   a.  (1) A law enforcement agency acting pursuant to section 23 of P.L.1993, c.29 (C.2A:156A-29) may include in a court order a requirement that the service provider to whom the request is directed create a backup copy of the contents of the electronic communication sought in order to preserve those communications. Without notifying the subscriber or customer of the court order, the service provider shall create the backup copy as soon as practicable, consistent with its regular business practices, but in no event later than within two business days after receipt by the provider of the court order and shall confirm to the law enforcement agency that the backup copy has been made.  

   (2)  Notice to the subscriber or customer shall be made by the law enforcement agency within three days after receipt of confirmation that the backup copy has been made.  

   (3)  The service provider shall not destroy or permit the destruction of the backup copy until either the delivery of the information or the resolution of all proceedings, including any appeals, concerning the court order, whichever is later.  

   (4)  The service provider shall release the backup copy to the requesting law enforcement agency if, 14 days after the agency's notice to the subscriber or customer, the provider has not received written notice from the subscriber or customer that the subscriber or customer has filed a motion to vacate the order pursuant to subsection b. of this section or the provider has not initiated proceedings to challenge the request of the agency.  

   b.   Within 14 days after notice by the law enforcement agency to the subscriber or customer under paragraph (2) of subsection a. of this section the subscriber or customer may file a motion to vacate the court order, copies to be served upon the agency and written notice of the challenge to be given to the service provider.  A motion to vacate a court order shall be filed in the court which issued the order.  The motion or application shall contain an affidavit or sworn statement stating that the applicant is a customer of or subscriber to the service from which the contents of electronic communications maintained for the applicant have been sought and shall contain the applicant's reasons for believing that the records sought are not relevant to a legitimate law enforcement inquiry or that there has not been substantial compliance with the provisions of sections 21 through 26 of P.L.1993, c.29 (C.2A:156A-27 through C.2A:156A-32).  

   c.   Service shall be made upon the law enforcement agency by delivering or mailing by registered or certified mail a copy of the papers to the person, office or department specified in the notice which the customer received pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection a. of this section.  

   d.   If the court finds that the subscriber or customer has properly complied with subsections b. and c. of this section, the court shall order the law enforcement agency to file a sworn response, which may be filed in camera if it includes the reasons which make in camera review appropriate.  If the court is unable to determine the motion or application on the basis of the initial allegations and responses, the court may conduct such additional proceedings as it deems appropriate. All such proceedings shall be completed and the motion or application decided as soon as practicable after the filing of the agency's response.  

   e.   If the court finds that the applicant is not the subscriber or customer for whom the communications sought by the law enforcement agency are maintained, or that there is reason to believe that the law enforcement inquiry is legitimate and that the communications sought are relevant to that inquiry, it shall deny the motion or application and order the process enforced.  If the court finds that the applicant is the subscriber or customer for whom the communications sought are maintained, and that there is no reason to believe that the communications sought are relevant to a legitimate law enforcement inquiry, or that there has not been substantial compliance with the provisions of sections 21 through 26 of P.L.1993, c.29 (C.2A:156A-27 through C.2A:156A-32), it shall order the process quashed.  

   L.1993,c.29,s.24.  

2A:156A-31.  Cost reimbursement  
    25.  Cost reimbursement.

  

   a.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection c. of this section, a law enforcement agency obtaining the contents of communications, records or other information under section 22, 23 or 24 of P.L.1993, c.29 (C.2A:156A-28, C.2A:156A-29 or C.2A:156A-30) shall reimburse the person or provider for such costs as are reasonably necessary and which have been directly incurred in searching for, assembling, reproducing and otherwise providing the information.  Reimbursable costs shall include, but shall not be limited to, any costs due to necessary disruption of normal operations of any electronic communication service or remote computing service in which the information may be stored.  

   b.   The amount of the reimbursement provided for in subsection a. of this section shall be as mutually agreed upon by a  law enforcement agency and the service provider.  In the absence of agreement, reimbursement shall be determined by the court which issued the order for production of the information or, if no court order was issued, then by the court before which a criminal prosecution relating to the information would be brought.  

   c.   The requirement of subsection a. of this section does not apply with respect to records or other information maintained by a provider of wire or electronic communication service which relates to telephone toll records and telephone listings obtained under section 23 of P.L.1993, c.29 (C.2A:156A-29). The court may, however, order reimbursement as described in subsection a. of this section if the court determines the information required is voluminous or otherwise causes an undue burden on the provider.  

   L.1993,c.29,s.25.  

2A:156A-32.    Civil action  
  26.    Civil action.

  

 a.     Except as provided in subsection d. of section 23 of P.L.1993, c.29 (C.2A:156A-29), any service provider, subscriber or customer aggrieved by any violation of sections 21, 22, 23, or 24 of P.L.1993, c.29 (C.2A:156A-27, C.2A:156A-28, C.2A:156A-29 or C.2A:156A-30) may recover, in a civil action, such relief as may be appropriate from the person or entity which knowingly or purposefully engaged in the conduct constituting the violation.  

 b.     In a civil action under this section, appropriate relief may include:

 (1)    such preliminary and other equitable or declaratory relief as may be appropriate;  

 (2)    damages under subsection c. of this section; and

  

 (3)    reasonable attorney's fees and other litigation costs reasonably incurred.  

 c.     The court may assess as damages in a civil action under this section the sum of the actual damages suffered by the plaintiff and any profits made by the violator as a result of the violation, but in no case shall a person entitled to recover receive less than the sum of $1,000.  

 d.     A civil action under this section may not be commenced later than two years after the date upon which the claimant first discovered or had a reasonable opportunity to discover the violation.  

 L.1993,c.29,s.26.  

2A:156A-33.    Defense to civil, criminal action  
  27.    It shall be a complete defense to any civil or criminal action brought pursuant to sections 21, 22, 23, 24 and 26 of P.L.1993, c.29 (C.2A:156A-27, C.2A:156A-28, C.2A:156A-29, C.2A:156A-30 and C.2A:156A-32) that the person made good faith reliance on:  

 a.     a court warrant or order, a legislative authorization or a statutory authorization;  

 b.     a request of an investigative or law enforcement officer under section 13 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-13); or  

 c.     a good faith determination that section 4 of P.L.1968, c.409 (C.2A:156A-4) permitted the conduct which is the subject of the complaint.  

 L.1993,c.29,s.27.  

2A:156A-34.    Exclusivity of remedies  
  28.    Exclusivity of remedies.

  

 The remedies and sanctions described in sections 21 and 26 of P.L.1993, c.29 (C.2A:156A-27 and C.2A:156A-32) are the only judicial remedies and sanctions for nonconstitutional violations of sections 21, 22, 23 and 24 of P.L.1993, c.29 (C.2A:156A-27, C.2A:156A-28, C.2A:156A-29, and C.2A:156A-30).  

 L.1993,c.29,s.28.  

2A:156A-35  Definitions relative to certain counter-terrorism investigations.
  
	1. a. For the purposes of this act:

	"Member of a New Jersey law enforcement agency" means any sworn or civilian employee of a law enforcement agency operating under the authority of the laws of the State of New Jersey;
 
	"Out-of-State law enforcement agency" means any law enforcement agency or officer operating under the authority of the laws of another State; "Out-of-State law enforcement agency" shall not include a federal law enforcement agency, or task force operating under the auspices of a federal law enforcement agency;
 
	"Law enforcement activity" means investigations, operations and intelligence gathering activity conducted by a law enforcement agency or officer; "law enforcement activity" shall not encompass non-investigatory conduct, including but not limited to participation in training classes or exercises, execution of child-support warrants, or transportation of incarcerated persons to and from this State;
 
	"Counter-terrorism activity" means any activity undertaken by a law enforcement agency to investigate, detect, deter, or prevent the crime of terrorism as defined under the "September 11th, 2001 Anti-Terrorism Act," P.L.2002, c.26 (C.2C:38-1 et seq.), or any other offense defined under chapter 38 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes, or for an offense of a substantially similar nature committed in another jurisdiction, without regard to whether such crime is committed or intended to be committed in this State;
 
	"Counter-terrorism watch" means a counter terrorism entity within the New Jersey State Police Regional Operations Intelligence Center.
 
	b.	Any local, municipal, or county law enforcement agency or officer shall promptly notify the county prosecutor, or the county prosecutor's designee, when a law enforcement officer learns of, or acquires knowledge of, an out-of-State law enforcement agency that intends to enter, or has entered, the borders which are under the jurisdiction of the State of New Jersey for the purpose of conducting law enforcement activities in this State.  Notification required pursuant to this act shall include, but not be limited to:
 
	(1)	the date and time that the out-of-State agency's activity is discovered;
 
	(2)	the nature, purpose, and scope of the out-of-State law enforcement agency's activities in this State;
 
	(3)	the out-of-State law enforcement agency's name and contact information; and
 
	(4)	the name and contact information of the law enforcement agency operating in the State of New Jersey.
 
	The notification shall be given as soon as practicable, but in no event shall notification be provided later than 24 hours after learning of, or acquiring information concerning, the out-of-State agency's law enforcement activity in this State.
 
	c.	All county prosecutors shall promptly notify the counter-terrorism watch within the New Jersey State Police when a law enforcement officer learns of, or acquires knowledge of, an out-of-State law enforcement agency that intends to enter, or has entered, the borders which are under the jurisdiction of this State for the purpose of conducting counter-terrorism activities in this State.  Notifications shall be provided in a manner and within the time limitations set forth under subsection b. of this section.  
 
	d.	Upon receiving information that an out-of-State law enforcement agency intends to enter, or has entered, the borders which are under the jurisdiction of the State of New Jersey for the purpose of conducting counter-terrorism activities in this State, the counter-terrorism watch shall notify the Superintendent of State Police, or the Superintendent's designee, and the Director of the New Jersey Office of Homeland Security and Preparedness.  The counter-terrorism watch shall communicate such information provided by the county prosecutor to the designated staff of the joint terrorism task force within the New Jersey State Police.
 
	e.	The Attorney General may promulgate rules and regulations, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act.
 
	L.2013, c.156, s.1.

2A:156A-36  Notification required relative to certain counter-terrorism activities.
  
	2. a. Any out-of-State law enforcement agency as defined under section 1 of P.L.2013, c.156 (C.2A:156A-35) that intends to enter the borders which are under the jurisdiction of this State for the purpose of conducting counter-terrorism activities in this State shall, no later than 24 hours prior to entering New Jersey State borders, inform the county prosecutor, or the county prosecutor's designee of the county in which the counter-terrorism activity is to take place. Notification required pursuant to this act shall include, but not be limited to:
 
	(1)	the date and time that the out-of-State agency intends to conduct the counter-terrorism activity;
 
	(2)	the nature, purpose, and scope of the counter-terrorism activity that the out-of-State law enforcement agency intends to undertake in this State; and
 
	(3)	the out-of-State law enforcement agency's name and contact information.
 
	Such notification shall be given as soon as practicable, but in no event shall notification be provided later than 24 hours prior to the counter-terrorism activities being carried out in this State.
 
	b.	All county prosecutors shall promptly notify the counter-terrorism watch within the New Jersey State Police upon receiving notification from an out-of-State law enforcement agency provided under subsection a. of this section.
 
	c.	Upon receiving information that an out-of-State law enforcement agency intends to enter the borders which are under the jurisdiction of the State of New Jersey for the purpose of conducting counter-terrorism activities in this State, the counter-terrorism watch shall notify the Superintendent of the New Jersey State Police, or the Superintendent's designee, and the Director of the New Jersey Office of Homeland Security and Preparedness.  The counter-terrorism watch shall communicate such information provided by the county prosecutor to the designated staff of the Joint Terrorism Task Force within the New Jersey State Police.
 
	d.	The Attorney General may promulgate rules and regulations, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act.
 
	L.2013, c.155, s.2.

2A:156A-37  Violation of notification requirement; injunction.
  
	3.	Whenever, on the basis of available information, the Attorney General or a county prosecutor, or his designee finds that an out-of-State law enforcement agency as defined under section 1 of P.L.2013, c.156 (C.2A:156A-35) has violated the provisions of this act, by failing to adhere to the notification requirements pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2013, c.156 (C.2A:156A-36) or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this act, the Attorney General or a county prosecutor, or his designee, may seek and obtain in a summary proceeding in the Superior Court a temporary or permanent injunction prohibiting that out-of-State law enforcement agency from conducting counter-terrorism activity within the borders of this State.  In such a proceeding, the court may enter such orders as is necessary to prevent the performance of counter-terrorism activity in violation of the reporting requirement under this act, or may require compliance with the reporting requirements provided under the provisions of this act.
 
	L.2013, c.155, s.3.

2A:157-1.  Short title
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the  "County Detectives and  County Investigators Act (Revision of 1951)."

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:157-2.  County detectives generally;  appointment;  salary;  duties
    The prosecutor in each of the several counties of this State may appoint such number of suitable persons, not in excess of the number, and at salaries not less than the minimum amounts, in this chapter provided, to be known as county detectives, to assist the prosecutor in the detection, apprehension, arrest and conviction of offenders against the law.  Persons so appointed shall  be in the classified service of the civil service and shall possess all the  powers and rights and be subject to all the obligations of police officers,  constables and special deputy sheriffs in criminal matters.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:157-2.1.  Power of arrest for crime committed in presence of officer within territorial limits of state
    Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, any full-time, permanently appointed county detective, sheriff's officer and investigator sheriff's office shall have full power of arrest for any crime committed in his presence anywhere within the territorial limits of the State of New Jersey.

     L.1977, c. 438, s. 2, eff. March 2, 1978.

2A:157-3.  County detectives in first-class counties
    In counties of the first class there may be appointed not in excess of 50 county detectives, of whom one may be designated chief of county detectives, two deputy chiefs of county detectives, four captains of county detectives, and  not more than 12 lieutenants of county detectives;  their annual salaries shall  be fixed as follows:  chief of county detectives, not less than $11,500.00;   deputy chiefs of county detectives, not less than $11,000.00; captains of  county detectives, not less than $9,500.00; lieutenants of county detectives,  not less than $7,500.00;  and other county detectives, not less than  $6,500.00.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1959, c. 161, p. 635, s. 1;  L.1966, c. 266, s. 1, eff. Sept. 6,  1966;  L.1974, c. 171, s. 1, eff. Dec. 10, 1974.

2A:157-4.  County detectives in second-class counties;  appointment; minimum compensation
    a.  In counties of the second class having a population in excess of 580,000  there may be appointed not in excess of 40 county detectives, of whom one may  be designated chief of county detectives, one deputy chief of county detectives, one captain of county detectives, six lieutenants of county detectives and four sergeants of county detectives.

    b.  In counties of the second class having a population between 500,000 and  580,000 there may be appointed not in excess of 28 county detectives, of whom  one may be designated chief of county detectives, one deputy chief of county  detectives, one captain of county detectives, six lieutenants of county  detectives and four sergeants of county detectives.

    c. In counties of the second class having a population between 440,000 and 500,000, there may be appointed not in excess of 28 county detectives, of whom one may be designated chief of county detectives, one deputy chief of county detectives, four captains of county detectives and six lieutenants of county detectives.

    d. In the counties of the second class having a population between 400,000 and 440,000, there may be appointed not in excess of 24 county detectives of whom one may be designated chief of county detectives, one captain of county detectives, four lieutenants of county detectives and two sergeants of county detectives.

    e.  In the counties of the second class having a population of 400,000 or under, there may be appointed not in excess of 12 county detectives of whom one  may be designated chief of county detectives, one captain of county detectives,  and three lieutenants of county detectives.

    f.  Their annual salaries shall be fixed as follows:  chief of county detectives, not less than $9,500.00;  deputy chief of county detectives, not less than $9,000.00;  captain of county detectives, not less than $8,000.00; lieutenant of county detectives, not less than $7,000.00;  sergeant of county detectives, not less than $6,500.00;  and other county detectives, not less than $6,000.00.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1959, c. 161, s. 2;  L.1961, c. 97, p. 665, s. 1;  L.1967, c. 210, s. 1, eff. Sept. 25, 1967;  L.1970, c. 260, s. 1, eff. Nov. 2, 1970; L.1973, c. 203, s. 1, eff. July 31, 1973;  L.1977, c. 79, s. 1, eff. May 2, 1977;  L.1978, c. 164, s. 1, eff. Dec. 7, 1978;  L.1980, c. 42, s. 1, eff. June 20, 1980;  L.1981, c. 462, s. 8;  L.1982, c. 142, s. 1, eff. Sept. 20, 1982; L.1983, c. 433, s. 1, eff. Jan. 5, 1984.

2A:157-5.  County detectives in third-class counties of over 75,000 population
    In counties of the third class now or hereafter having a population in excess of 75,000 there may be appointed not in excess of 9 county detectives, of whom 1 may be designated chief of county detectives, 1 captain of county detectives;  and 1 lieutenant of county detectives; their annual salaries shall be fixed as follows:  chief of county detectives, not less than $7,500.00;  captain of county detectives, not less than $7,000.00;  lieutenant of county detectives, not less than $6,000.00;  and other county detectives, not less than $5,500.00

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1959, c. 161, p. 636, s. 3.

2A:157-6.  County detectives in third-class counties of less than 75,000 population
    In counties of the third class now or hereafter having a population of less  than 75,000 there may be appointed not in excess of five county detectives, of  whom one may be designated chief of county detectives and of whom one may be  designated as lieutenant of county detectives;  their annual salaries shall be  fixed as follows:  chief of county detectives, not less than $6,500.00;   lieutenant of county detectives, not less than $6,000.00; and other county  detectives, not less than $5,500.00.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1959, c. 161, p. 636, s. 4;  L.1973, c. 278, s. 1, eff. Nov. 29,  1973.

2A:157-8.    County detectives 
     2A:157-8.  In counties of the fifth class with a population of 400,000 or less there may be appointed not in excess of 12 county detectives, and in counties of the fifth class with a population in excess of 400,000 there may be appointed not in excess of 15 county detectives, of whom one may be designated chief of county detectives, two captains of county detectives, and four lieutenants of county detectives. 

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1974, c.5; 1975, c.234; 1982,c.187; 1988, c. 65. 

2A:157-9.  County detectives in sixth-class counties
    In counties of the sixth class there may be appointed not in excess of six county detectives, of whom one may be designated chief of county detectives and  one captain of county detectives;  their annual salaries shall be fixed as  follows:  chief of county detectives, not less than $7,500.00;  captain of county detectives, not less than $6,500.00;  and other county detectives, not less than $5,500.00.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1959, c. 161, p. 637, s. 6, eff. Sept. 17, 1959;  L.1975, c. 280, s. 1, eff. Jan. 12, 1976.

2A:157-10  County investigators generally; appointment, salary, duties.

	2A:157-10.  In addition to the office of county detective, there is created in the office of the prosecutor, the office or position of county investigator which shall be in the unclassified service of the civil service.  The prosecutor of each of the several counties of this State may appoint such number of suitable persons, not in excess of the number, and at salaries not less than the minimum amounts, in this act provided, to be known as county investigators, and to assist the prosecutor in the detection, apprehension, arrest and conviction of offenders against the law.  Persons so appointed shall possess all the powers and rights and be subject to all the obligations of police officers, constables and special deputy sheriffs, in criminal matters.

	Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, a single probationary or temporary appointment as a county investigator may be made for a total period not exceeding one year. 

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 2003, c.173, s.1.

2A:157-10.1  Causes for removal of county investigator.

	2.	Except as otherwise provided by law, a county investigator employed by the county prosecutor shall not be removed from office, employment or position for political reasons or for any cause other than incapacity, misconduct, or disobedience of rules and regulations established by the prosecutor, nor shall such investigator be suspended, removed, fined or reduced in rank from or in office, employment, or position therein, except for just cause as hereinbefore provided and then only upon a written complaint setting forth the charge or charges against such investigator.  The chief investigator and deputy chief investigator, however, may be removed or demoted by the prosecutor.  The complaint shall be filed in the office having charge of the office wherein the complaint is made and a copy shall be served upon the investigator so charged, with notice of a designated hearing thereon by the proper authorities, which shall be not less than 10 or more than 30 days from the date of service of the complaint.

	A complaint charging a violation of the internal rules and regulations established for the conduct of a prosecutor's office shall be filed no later than the 45th day after the date on which the person filing the complaint obtained sufficient information to file the matter upon which the complaint is based.  The 45-day time limit shall not apply if an investigation of an investigator for a violation of the internal rules or regulations of the office is included directly or indirectly within a concurrent investigation of that office for a violation of the criminal laws of this State.  The 45-day limit shall begin on the day after the disposition of the criminal investigation.  The 45-day requirement of this paragraph for the filing of a complaint against an investigator shall not apply to a filing of a complaint by a private individual.

	A failure to comply with these provisions as to the service of the complaint and the time within which a complaint is to be filed shall require a dismissal of the complaint.

	The investigator may waive the right to a hearing and may appeal the charges directly to any available authority specified by law or regulation, or follow any other procedure recognized by a contract, as permitted by law.

	For the purposes of this section, the transfer of an investigator from one section or unit to another section or unit within the office of the prosecutor shall not constitute a demotion, and the transferred investigator shall retain his rank, seniority, seniority-related privileges and salary.

	L.2003,c.173,s.2.

2A:157-10.2  Subpoena power of those hearing charges.

	3.	Except as otherwise provided by the law, the officer, board or authority empowered to hear and determine the charge or charges made against a county investigator shall have the power to subpoena witnesses and documentary evidence.  The Superior Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce any such subpoena.

	L.2003,c.173,s.3.

2A:157-10.3  Suspension pending hearing.

	4. 	If any county investigator shall be suspended pending a hearing as a result of charges made against him, such hearing, except as otherwise provided by law, shall be commenced within 30 days from the date of the service of the copy of the complaint upon him, in default of which the charges shall be dismissed and the investigator may be returned to duty.

	L.2003,c.173,s.4.

2A:157-10.4  Charges, suspension, with or without pay.

	5.	Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, whenever a county investigator is charged with an offense, under the laws of this State, another state, or the United States, the investigator may be suspended from performing his duties, with pay, until the case against the investigator is disposed of at trial, the complaint is dismissed, or the prosecution is terminated; provided, however, that if a grand jury returns an indictment against the investigator, or the investigator is charged with a crime of the first, second or third degree or which involves moral turpitude or dishonesty, the investigator may be suspended from his duties, without pay, until the case against him is disposed of at trial, the complaint is dismissed, or the prosecution is terminated.

	L.2003,c.173,s.5.

2A:157-10.5  Reinstatement, recovery of pay.

	6.	If a suspended county investigator is found not guilty at trial, the charges are dismissed or the prosecution is terminated, the investigator shall be reinstated to his position and shall be entitled to recover all pay withheld during the period of suspension subject to any disciplinary proceedings or administrative action.

	L.2003,c.173,s.6.

2A:157-10.6  Recovery of salary for unlawful suspension.

	7.	Whenever any county investigator shall be suspended or dismissed from his office, employment or position and that suspension or dismissal shall be judicially determined to be illegal, the investigator shall be entitled to recover his salary from the date of such suspension or dismissal, provided a written application therefor shall be filed with the prosecutor's office within 30 days after such judicial determination.

	L.2003,c.173,s.7.

2A:157-10.7  Review by Superior Court.

	8.	Any county investigator who has been tried and convicted of any charge or charges, and is employed by a prosecutor in a county where Title 11A (Civil Service) of the New Jersey Statutes is not in operation, may obtain a review thereof by the Superior Court.  Such review shall be obtained by serving a written notice of an application therefor upon the party or board whose action is to be reviewed within 10 days after written notice to the investigator of the conviction.  The party or board shall transmit to the court a copy of the record of such conviction, and of the charge or charges for which the applicant was tried.  The court shall hear the cause de novo on the record below and may either affirm, reverse or modify such conviction.  If the applicant was removed from his office, employment or position, the court may direct that he be restored to such office, employment or position, and to all his rights pertaining thereto, and may take such other order or judgement as the court deems proper.  Either party may supplement the record with additional testimony subject to the rules of evidence.

	L.2003,c.173,s.8.

2A:157-10.8  Provision of means for defense, reimbursement.

	9. 	Whenever a county investigator is a defendant in any action or legal proceeding arising out of and directly related to the lawful exercise of police powers in the furtherance of his official duties, the prosecutor shall provide the investigator with the necessary means for the defense of such action or proceeding, but not for his defense in a disciplinary proceeding instituted against him by the prosecutor or in a criminal proceeding instituted as a result of a complaint on behalf of the prosecutor.  If any such disciplinary or criminal proceeding instituted by or on complaint of the prosecutor shall be dismissed or finally determined in favor of the investigator, he shall be reimbursed for the expense of his defense.

	L.2003,c.173,s.9.

2A:157-11.  County investigators in first-class counties
    In counties of the first class there may be appointed not in excess of 30 county investigators, who shall be paid annual salaries of not less than $6,500.00.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1959, c. 161, s.7, p. 637,   L.1966, c. 265, s. 1, eff. Sept. 6, 1966.

2A:157-12.  County investigators in second-class counties
    In counties of the second class there may be appointed not in excess of 9 county investigators, who shall be paid annual salaries of not less than $6,500.00.

    Not more than 6 county investigators in counties of the second class with populations of 400,000 inhabitants or less, and not more than 21 county investigators in counties of the second class with populations in excess of 400,000 inhabitants, in addition to those provided for in this section may be appointed by the county prosecutor where there appears to be a reasonable necessity therefor, if approved by resolution of the board of chosen freeholders of the county.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1959, c. 161, p. 637, s. 8;  L.1966, c. 308, s. 1, eff. Dec. 29,  1966;  L.1970, c. 259, s. 1, eff. Nov. 2, 1970.

2A:157-13.  County investigators in third-class counties
    In counties of the third class there may be appointed not in excess of 2 county investigators who shall be paid annual salaries of not less than $5,500.00.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1959, c. 161, p. 637, s. 9.

2A:157-15.  County investigators in counties of fifth class; compensation
    In counties of the fifth class there may be appointed not in excess of 12 county investigators, who shall be paid annual salaries of not less than $5,500.00.

     	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1959, c. 161, p. 637, s. 11;  L.1981, c. 462, s. 9.

2A:157-16.  County investigators in sixth-class counties
    In counties of the sixth class there may be appointed not in excess of six county investigators, who shall be paid annual salaries of not less than $5,000.00.

     	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1959, c. 161, p. 638, s. 12;  L.1975, c. 280, s. 2, eff. Jan. 12,  1976.

2A:157-17.  Service of process;  fees
    County detectives and county investigators may serve or execute for the sheriff any process or writ in any criminal proceeding and make return thereof.   For every process or writ so served or executed by a county detective or  county investigator, the sheriff shall be entitled to collect and receive the  same fees, and to tax such fees in the bills of costs, as if the process or  writ had been served by him.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:157-18.  Payment of salaries;  fixing salaries over minimum
    Annual salaries of county detectives and county investigators shall be paid  by the county treasurer upon the certification of the prosecutor out of funds  of the county, in the same manner as other salaries are paid, and shall be not  less than the minimum amounts in this act fixed.  The prosecutor may, with the  approval of the board of chosen freeholders, fix the salaries of county  detectives and county investigators at amounts in excess of the minimum amounts  in this chapter provided.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:157-19.  Power of prosecutor to incur expenses
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the power of any prosecutor, duly conferred upon him by law, to incur expenses in the detection,  arrest, indictment and conviction of offenders against the criminal laws of  this state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:157-20.  County detectives and special officers;  status
    L.1951, c. 274, p. 946, section 20 of an act entitled  "An Act to revise the  law concerning county detectives and county investigators, and repealing sundry  acts."   (C. 2:181-51) saved from repeal.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:157-21.  Saving clause
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, nothing herein shall be  construed to require an increase in any salaries heretofore paid or to be paid  in any county, unless and until the salary schedules herein provided shall be  adopted by resolution of the county board of chosen freeholders. Nothing in  this chapter provided shall be construed to reduce the amount of salary now  being paid to any person, to affect the pension rights of any person, to effect  the transfer of the holder of any office or position from the classified to the  unclassified service of the civil service, or to terminate tenure rights  vested, by the provisions of any law repealed by this chapter, in any person  continued in office or position in the unclassified service.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:157-22.  Limitation on number
    In any county in which the total number of county detectives and county investigators authorized by this chapter exceeds the total number of officers employed in the prosecutor's office of such county for the detection, apprehension, arrest, indictment and conviction of offenders against the law, as of the effective date of this chapter, no new appointments as county detective or county investigator shall be made, other than to fill vacancies hereafter occurring, without prior approval as to the number and salary thereof  by the board of chosen freeholders or, in counties of the first class having a  population of less than eight hundred thousand inhabitants, by order of the  Superior Court Assignment Judge of the county.

  	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1953, c. 385, p. 2004, s. 1, eff. Aug. 14, 1953.

2A:157-23.  Construction;   "special officer"  discontinued
    It is the intention that this chapter be so construed as to make consistent  throughout the state the law as it applies to the office or position of county  detective and county investigator, to provide that county detectives shall be  in the classified service of the civil service, and county investigators in the  unclassified service and to discontinue the term "special officer"  as the  title of any office in the offices of prosecutors.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:158-1.  Appointment of county prosecutor;  general duties
    There shall be appointed, for each county, by the governor with the advice and consent of the senate to serve for a term of 5 years and until the appointment and qualification of his successor, some fit person who shall have been admitted to the practice of law in this state for at least 5 years, who shall be known as the county prosecutor and who, except as otherwise provided by law, shall prosecute the pleas of the state in such county and shall have all of the powers and perform all of the duties formerly had and performed by the prosecutor of the pleas of such county. As the term of the prosecutor of the pleas of any county shall expire there shall be appointed in his place and stead such county prosecutor.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:158-1a  Preparation of annual budget request by county prosecutor.
 	10. A county prosecutor shall prepare the annual budget request for the county prosecutor's office pursuant to the requirements of section 3 of P.L.2015, c.249 (C.40A:4-45.45b).
 
	L.2015, c.249, s.10.

2A:158-1.1.  Other gainful employment by prosecutor;  prohibition; exception
    Any person appointed to the office of county prosecutor shall devote his entire time to the duties of his office and shall not engage in the practice of  law or other gainful employment, except those appointed to that office in counties of the third class having a population between 65,000 and 85,000.  No exception to the requirement that a prosecutor serve on a full-time basis shall  be permitted on or after April 14, 1986.

     L.1970, c. 6, s. 1, eff. Feb. 9, 1970.  Amended by L.1972, c. 33, s. 1, eff. May 25, 1972;  L.1975, c. 149, s. 1, eff. July 9, 1975;  L.1976, c. 15, s. 1, eff. April 5, 1976;  L.1976, c. 118, s. 1, eff. Nov. 16, 1976;  L.1978, c. 6, s. 1, eff. March 17, 1978;  L.1978, c. 24, s. 1, eff. May 23, 1978; L.1980, c. 43, s. 1, eff. June 23, 1980;  L.1981, c. 462, s. 10;  L.1983, c. 288, s. 2; L.1983, c. 300, s. 1.

2A:158-2.  County prosecutor substituted for prosecutor of the pleas
    In any statute in which the designation  "prosecutor of the pleas"  is used,  it shall be construed to mean the county prosecutor.  Until the term of any  existing prosecutor of the pleas shall expire and a county prosecutor be appointed to succeed him as provided in this article, such prosecutor of the pleas shall have all of the powers, perform all of the duties and be entitled to the compensation of a county prosecutor for such county.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:158-3.    Oath of prosecutors  
     2A:158-3. Every person appointed county prosecutor shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe before the clerk of the county for which he has been appointed, or before a judge of the Superior Court, the following oath:  

    "I, .................. , do solemnly promise and swear (or affirm), that I will faithfully, justly and impartially execute the duties of county prosecutor of this State, in and for the county of .................... , to the best of my abilities and understanding. So help me God."  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.125.  

2A:158-4.  Exclusive jurisdiction of prosecutors over criminal business; exceptions
    The criminal business of the State shall be prosecuted by the Attorney General and the county prosecutors.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1970, c. 74, s. 20, eff. May 21, 1970.

2A:158-5.  Powers, duties and liabilities of prosecutors
    Each prosecutor shall be vested with the same powers and be subject to the same penalties, within his county, as the attorney general shall by law be vested with or subject to, and he shall use all reasonable and lawful diligence  for the detection, arrest, indictment and conviction of offenders against the  laws.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:158-6.  Fees of prosecutors
    The same fees shall be payable for the services of prosecutors as are by law  made payable for similar services of the attorney general.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:158-7  Expenses of prosecutor in enforcement of laws.
 	2A:158-7.  Except as provided in section 2 of P.L.2019, c.233 (C.2A:158-7.1), all necessary expenses incurred by the prosecutor for each county in the detection, arrest, indictment and conviction of offenders against the laws shall, upon being certified to by the prosecutor and approved, under his hand, by a judge of the Superior Court, be paid by the county treasurer whenever the same shall be approved by the board of chosen freeholders of such county.  The amount or amounts to be expended shall not exceed the amount fixed by the board of chosen freeholders in its regular or emergency appropriation, unless such expenditure is specifically authorized by order of the assignment judge of the Superior Court for such county; however, the assignment judge shall consider the financial impact of such an order on the governing body of the county, its residents, the limitations imposed upon the local unit's property tax levy pursuant to subsection b. of section 10 of P.L.2007, c.62 (C.40A:4-45.45), and county taxpayers.
 
	amended 1991, c.91, s.126; 2015, c.249, s.1; 2019, c.233, s.1.

2A:158-7.1  Reimbursement for certain expenses of office of county prosecutor.
  	2.	The State Treasurer shall reimburse the county treasurer for expenses incurred prior to and following the effective date of P.L.2019, c.233 (C.2A:158-7.1 et al.) by the office of the county prosecutor for the oversight of the operations of a State or interstate law enforcement agency. The provisions of this section shall apply to any expenses incurred beginning January 1, 2017 until the date on which the county prosecutor is no longer required to oversee the operations of the State or interstate law enforcement agency.
 
	The reimbursement for expenses incurred prior to the effective date of this act shall be paid upon the submission by the county treasurer to the Department of the Treasury any documentation as the State Treasurer may require.
 
	The reimbursement for expenses incurred following the effective date of this act shall be paid on a quarterly basis until the county prosecutor is no longer required to oversee the operations of the State or interstate law enforcement agency. The county treasurer shall transfer the payments made pursuant to this section to the office of the county prosecutor to be used to carry out the functions of that office.
 
	L.2019, c.233, s.2.

2A:158-8.    Expenses of prosecutors in enjoining nuisances under federal law  
     2A:158-8. Whenever the prosecutor of any county shall bring an action, as authorized by the laws of the United States, to enjoin a nuisance as defined by the laws of the United States, all necessary expenses incurred thereby, certified to and approved under his hand by a judge of the Superior Court shall be paid by the county treasurer whenever the same shall be approved by the board of chosen freeholders of such county.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.127.  

2A:158-9.    Temporary prosecutors; appointment by court; powers; compensation  
     2A:158-9. In the absence of the attorney general and of the county prosecutor, at any session of the Superior Court, the Assignment Judge of the Superior Court may appoint a fit person to prosecute the pleas of the State during that session. The person so appointed, on taking the oath or affirmation prescribed by N.J.S.2A:158-3, shall be vested, during such session, with the powers of a prosecutor, and be entitled to the same compensation and subject to the same penalties.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.128.  

2A:158-10  Salaries of county prosecutors.
	2A:158-10.  County prosecutors shall receive annual salaries to be fixed by the governing body of the county at $204,166.50 beginning on January 1, 2024 and thereafter.  
 
	Beginning on January 1, 2025 and on January 1 of each year for two years thereafter, the amount of the annual salary determined for the prior calendar year shall be adjusted annually by the State Treasurer in direct proportion to the percent change in the Consumer Price Index over a 12-month period beginning November 1 and ending October 31.  For the purpose of this section, "Consumer Price Index" means the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, New York-Northern New Jersey-Long Island Metropolitan Area, All Items (1982-84=100), as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics in the United States Department of Labor.  The State Treasurer shall determine the amount of the adjustment by December 1 of each year and the adjustment shall become effective for payments to be made during the calendar year following the determination, beginning with payments made on or after January 1 of each calendar year.  An adjustment in the annual payment shall be made only if the percent change in the Consumer Price Index for the period specified is greater than zero.  Such an annual adjustment shall in no event be greater than 2 percent.  If the reference base of the index is changed, the index used to determine the Consumer Price Index shall be the index converted to the new base by standard statistical methods.  The first adjustment determination shall be made by December 1, 2024 and applicable to payments commencing on January 1, 2025.  The final adjustment shall be made on December 1, 2026 and be applicable for payments commencing on January 1, 2027.  No further adjustments shall be made thereafter.
 
	There shall be appropriated annually to the Department of Community Affairs for payment to each county for additional salary costs resulting from the increase in the salary of county prosecutors an amount equal to the amount by which the annual salary paid to the county prosecutor under this section exceeds $100,000.00.
 
	amended 1952, c.263, s.1; 1961, c.41, s.1; 1968, c.145, s.1; 1980, c.45; 1981, c.462, s.11; 1983, c.288, s.1; 1995, c.424, s.2; 1996, c.99, s.1; 1999, c.380, s.5; 2007, c.350, s.2; 2018, c.14, s.4; 2024, c.56, s.3.

2A:158-13.  Payment of salaries of prosecutors;  fees and costs paid to county
    The salaries of prosecutors shall be paid at the same times and in the same  manner as other county salaries are paid, and shall be in lieu of all fees and  costs or other compensation or allowances whatsoever.

    All fees and costs allowed by law to the respective prosecutors shall be taxed in the bills of costs in the manner provided by law, and when collected in the manner provided by law, shall be paid into the treasury of the respective counties for the use thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:158-15.  Assistant prosecutors;  number;  appointment;  designation; terms of office;  oath of office
    Assistant prosecutors in and for the respective counties may be appointed by  the prosecutors of such counties as hereinafter provided, who shall hold their  appointments at the pleasure of the respective prosecutors, and shall, before  entering upon the performance of the duties of their appointments, take, before  a judge of the Superior Court or the Clerk of the Superior Court of the county  in and for which they are appointed, an oath or affirmation to faithfully  perform the duties of the office to the best of their ability.

    a.  In counties of the first class, the county prosecutor may appoint 15 assistant prosecutors, one of whom shall be designated as first assistant prosecutor.

    b.  In counties of the second class, the county prosecutor may appoint six assistant prosecutors, one of whom shall be designated as first assistant prosecutor.

    c.  In counties of the fifth class and counties of the third class having a  population in excess of 120,000, the county prosecutor may appoint three assistant prosecutors, one of whom may be designated as first assistant prosecutor.

    d.  In all other counties the prosecutor may appoint one assistant prosecutor who may be designated first assistant prosecutor.

    Creation of new or additional positions of assistant prosecutor as authorized by paragraphs a. through d. of this section, as hereby amended, shall require authorization by the governing body of the county.

    Assistant prosecutors in addition to those provided for in paragraphs a. through d. of this section may be appointed by the county prosecutor in any county of the State where there appears to be a reasonable necessity therefor, if approved by order of the assignment judge and by resolution of the governing  body of the county.

  	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1961, c. 41, p. 413, s. 2;  L.1981, c. 462, s. 12.

2A:158-15.1b  Regulations relative to employment of assistant prosecutors.
 
	3. a. Except as provided in subsection b. of this section, assistant prosecutors shall devote their entire time to the duties of their office and shall not engage in the practice of law or other gainful employment.
 
	b.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection a. of this section, an assistant prosecutor may engage in limited outside employment or provide services as an independent contractor, under such terms and conditions as the county prosecutor deems appropriate, if:
 
	(1)	the county prosecutor has deemed the employment or services as not inconsistent with the duties of the office of assistant prosecutor; 
 
	(2)	the employment or services do not involve the private practice of law or the provision of other legal services; and
 
	(3)	the employment or services do not qualify the assistant prosecutor for membership in any State-administered pension system.
 
	c.	Nothing in subsection b. of this section shall be construed to:
 
	(1)	limit the discretion of the county prosecutor to disapprove a request from an assistant prosecutor to engage in employment or services or to require an assistant prosecutor to terminate employment or services otherwise authorized under this section; or 
 
	(2)	create an affirmative right for any assistant prosecutor to engage in employment or services without the approval of the county prosecutor.
 
	L.2009, c.285, s.3.

2A:158-15.3.  Salaries of first assistant, principal assistant, assistant prosecutors
	2.  a.  The annual salary of a first assistant prosecutor, a county prosecutor's principal assistant or an assistant prosecutor shall be determined by the board of chosen freeholders on recommendation of the county prosecutor.

	b.  The salary of any person serving as a first assistant prosecutor, a county prosecutor's principal assistant or an assistant prosecutor prior to the effective date of P.L.1996, c.99 (C.2A:158-15.3 et al.) may not be reduced pursuant to the provisions of subsection a. of this section.

	L.1996,c.99,s.2.

2A:158-18.  Powers and duties of assistant prosecutors
    In any county any of the assistant prosecutors of such county may attend the  sessions of the grand jury of such county, and render therein any service or  perform any duty that might be rendered or performed by the prosecutor of such  county if he were present.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:158-18.1.  Legal assistant to county prosecutor in first class counties of 800,000 or less
    In counties of the first class having a population not in excess of eight hundred thousand there is created in the office of the county prosecutor, the office or position of legal assistant to the county prosecutor which shall be in the unclassified service of the civil service. The prosecutor of each of the said counties may appoint, subject to the approval hereinafter required, suitable persons to said office or position, not in excess of twelve and at salaries not less than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) nor more than nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00) annually. Every such legal assistant shall serve at the pleasure of the county prosecutor and be subject to removal by such prosecutor.  Before entering upon the performance of his duties every such legal assistant shall take and subscribe, before the county clerk of the county  in and for which he is appointed, an oath to perform the duties of his office  faithfully, impartially and justly to the best of his ability.

     L.1953, c. 307, p. 1848, s. 1, eff. July 28, 1953.

2A:158-18.2.  Approval of appointment of legal assistant
    Every appointment of such a legal assistant and the amount of his salary shall be made subject to the approval of the board of chosen freeholders or the  Superior Court assignment judge of the county.  Such approval shall not be  required in the filling of vacancies.

     L.1953, c. 307, p. 1848, s. 2.

2A:158-19.  Tenure of office of secretaries and stenographers in office of county prosecutor and office of county detective in certain counties
    L.1939, c. 271, p. 694, section 1 of an act entitled  "An Act providing for  and regulating tenure of office and service for persons holding secretarial and  stenographic positions in the office of the prosecutor of the pleas and the  office of county detectives in counties having a population of not less than  eighty-two thousand nor more than one hundred and seventy-five thousand."  saved from repeal.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:158-20.  Suspension, discharge or decrease of compensation of secretaries  and stenographers
    L.1939, c. 271, p. 694, section 2 of an act entitled  "An Act providing for  and regulating tenure of office and service for persons holding secretarial and  stenographic positions in the office of the prosecutor of the pleas and the  office of county detectives in counties having a population of not less than  eighty-two thousand nor more than one hundred and seventy-five thousand."  saved from repeal.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:158-21.  Prohibited political activity of county prosecutors, assistant prosecutors or legal assistants
    No county prosecutor, assistant prosecutor or legal assistant to a prosecutor, while holding any such office or position, shall (1) be a candidate  for election to, or hold, any elective public office or any office or position  with any political party or club, or (2) in connection with the candidacy of  any person for public office, sign or authorize the use of his name in  connection with political or campaign literature or material, or print or  publish in order to distribute such political or campaign literature or  material;  provided, however, that the prohibition against holding office contained in this act shall not prevent any individual, holding or filling any such office as of the effective date of this act, from completing any term of office for which he has heretofore been elected or chosen;  and provided further that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit any such prosecutor, assistant prosecutor or legal assistant from being a candidate for election to, or from holding, the office or position of delegate or alternate to the national convention of any political party.

     L.1964, c. 168, s. 1.

2A:158-22  Removal of certain information from websites concerning prosecutions by county prosecutors.
 	2. a. For all indictments and prosecutions by the county prosecutor of persons who were thereafter acquitted of all criminal charges against them arising from the indictment or prosecution or persons who had all criminal charges against them dismissed with prejudice, if the county prosecutor published on its website a press release or information, other than information required to be made available to the public under section 3 of P.L.1963, c.73 (C.47:1A-3), concerning the indictment or prosecution which identified the person by name, upon written request of that person, the county prosecutor shall cause that press release or information to be removed from its website or inform the public on its website that the person who was indicted or prosecuted was acquitted of the criminal charges or that the criminal charges were dismissed.
 
	b.	Upon written request, the county prosecutor shall provide a letter to any person who was indicted or prosecuted by the county prosecutor and was thereafter acquitted of all criminal charges arising from the indictment or prosecution or who had all criminal charges against him dismissed with prejudice, indicating that the person was acquitted of, or that there was a dismissal with prejudice of, all criminal charges arising from the indictment or prosecution.
 
	L.2017, c.18, s.2.

2A:158A-1.  Declaration of state policy
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of this State to provide for the realization of the constitutional guarantees of counsel in criminal cases for indigent defendants by means of the system and program established and authorized by this act to the end that no innocent person shall be convicted, and that the guilty, when convicted, shall be convicted only after a fair trial  according to the due process of the law.

     L.1967, c. 43, s. 1, eff. July 1, 1967.

2A:158A-2.   "Indigent defendant" defined 
    As used herein "indigent defendant" means a person who is formally charged with the commission of an indictable offense, and who does not have the present financial ability to secure competent legal representation, as determined by the factors in section 14 of P.L. 1967, c. 43 (C. 2A:158A-14), and to provide all other necessary expenses of representation. 

   Amended by L. 1987, c. 170, s. 1. 

2A:158A-3 Establishment of the Office of the Public Defender.
 
	3.	There is hereby established in the Executive Branch of the State Government the Office of the Public Defender. For the purpose of complying with the provisions of Article V, Section IV, paragraph 1 of the New Jersey Constitution, the Office of the Public Defender is hereby allocated within the Department of the Treasury, but, notwithstanding said allocation, the office shall be independent of any supervision or control by the department or by any board or officer thereof. 
 
	L.1967, c.43, s.3; amended 1974, c.27, s.9; 1994, c.58, s.7; 2010, c.34, s.2.

2A:158A-4.  Public defender;  appointment;  term;  salary;  vacancy
    The head of the office shall be the Public Defender, who shall be an attorney-at-law of this State and experienced in the practice of law in this State.  He shall be appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate for a term of 5 years and until the appointment and qualification of  his successor.  He shall devote his entire time to the duties of his office and  shall receive such salary as shall be provided by law.  Any vacancy occurring  in the office of the Public Defender shall be filled in the same manner as the  original appointment, but for the unexpired term only.

     L.1967, c. 43, s. 4, eff. July 1, 1967.

2A:158A-5  Duties of public defender.
	5.	It shall be the duty of the Public Defender to provide for the legal representation of any indigent defendant who is formally charged with the commission of an indictable offense without expense to the defendant.
 
	All necessary services and facilities of representation (including investigation and other preparation) shall be provided in every case.  The factors of need and real value to a defense may be weighed against the financial constraints of the Public Defender's office in determining what are the necessary services and facilities of representation.
 
	Representation as herein provided for shall include any direct appeal from conviction and such post-conviction proceedings as would warrant the assignment of counsel pursuant to the court rules.
 
	Representation for indigent defendants (a) may be provided in any federal court in any matter arising out of or relating to an action pending or recently pending in a court of criminal jurisdiction of this State and (b) may be provided in any federal court in this State where indigent defendants are charged with the commission of a federal criminal offense and where the representation is under a plan adopted pursuant to the Criminal Justice Act of 1964 (18 U.S.C. s. 3006A).
 
	The Public Defender also shall provide for the legal representation of any eligible inmate who is serving a custodial prison sentence and requests assistance in petitioning the Superior Court for compassionate release in accordance with section 1 of P.L.2020, c.106 (C.30:4-123.51e).
 
	L.1967, c.43, s.5; amended 1987, c.170, s.2; 2020, c.106, s.2; 2023, c.69, s.1.

2A:158A-5.2.  Offenses and violations;  legal representation
    The Public Defender shall in the manner prescribed by P.L.1967, c. 43 (C. 2A:158A-1 et seq.) provide for the legal representation of any person charged with a disorderly persons offense or with the violation of any law, ordinance or regulation of a penal nature where there is a likelihood that the persons so  charged, if convicted, will be subject to imprisonment or, in the opinion of  the court, any other consequence of magnitude.

     L.1974, c. 33, s. 3.

2A:158A-5.3  Office of the Public Defender, unit established, representation, parole revocation, violation.
	1.	There is hereby established, within the Office of the Public Defender, a unit which shall provide for the legal representation of any person on parole from a correctional institution of this State or otherwise under the parole supervision of this State who is charged with violation of that parole or who is under consideration for revocation of parole.
 
L.2023, c.157.

2A:158A-6.  Deputy and assistant public defenders;  appointment; salary
    The Public Defender shall appoint deputy public defenders and assistant deputy public defenders in such number as he shall require to assist him in the  performance of the duties of his office.  Deputies and assistant deputies shall  be attorneys-at-law of this State, shall serve at the pleasure of the Public  Defender and shall receive such salaries as he shall from time to time designate.

     L.1967, c. 43, s. 6, eff. July 1, 1967.

2A:158A-7.   Powers, responsibilities of public defender  
    7.   The Public Defender shall:

  

   (a)  Appoint such investigators, stenographic and clerical assistants and other personnel as may be required for the conduct of the office, subject to the provisions of Title 11A, Civil Service, of the New Jersey Statutes, and other applicable statutes;  

   (b)  Establish and maintain suitable headquarters for the office and such regional quarters within the State as the Public Defender shall deem necessary for the proper functioning of the office;  

   (c)  Maintain one or more trial pools of lawyers who shall be available to serve as counsel on a case basis as needed;  

   (d)  Engage counsel from said trial pools on a case basis as may be necessary for the proper performance of the duties of the office and compensate them for their services;  

   (e)  Accept the services of volunteer workers or consultants at no compensation or at nominal or token compensation and reimburse them for their proper and necessary expenses;  

   (f)  (Deleted by amendment, P.L.1972, c.168);

  

   (g)  Keep and maintain proper financial records and records in respect to particular cases handled and develop records for use in the calculation of direct and indirect costs of all or any aspect of the operation of the office;

   (h)  On the basis of available data or estimates to prepare schedules of rates from time to time of amounts to be paid for services rendered other than by the staff, taking into account the nature of the services, the time involved, trouble and risk, the skill and experience required, and other pertinent factors;  

   (i)  Have a general responsibility for the operation of the office;  

   (j)  Formulate and adopt rules and regulations as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act and for the efficient conduct of the work and general administration of the office, its professional staff and other employees;  

   (k)  Be the request officer of the office within the meaning of such term as defined in P.L.1944, c. 112;  

   (l)  Have the authority to make all necessary arrangements to coordinate services to the office with any federal program to provide counsel to the indigent, and to arrange for the receipt by the office, wherever possible, of sums allowable under such federal program, whether by direct allowance, by assignment or transfer, or otherwise;  

   (m)  Have the authority to solicit, apply for and expend grants, donations, or other funds available from the federal government or private foundations as may be available to support the programs of the office; and  

   (n)  Assume responsibility for representation in litigation formerly handled by the Office of Inmate Advocacy in the Department of the Public Advocate that is pending on the effective date of P.L.1994, c.58 (C.52:27E-50 et al.).  

   L.1967,c.43,s.7; amended 1970,c.308; 1972,c.168; 1994,c.58,s.9.  

2A:158A-8.  Lawyers to represent defendants on case basis;  selection
    In selecting deputy public defenders and assistant deputy public defenders or lawyers to be available to represent defendants on a case basis, the Public Defender shall make his selections on a basis calculated to provide the respective defendants with competent counsel in the light of the nature, complexity and other characteristics of the cases, the services to be performed, the status of the matters, and other relevant factors.

     L.1967, c. 43, s. 8, eff. July 1, 1967.

2A:158A-9.  Case workload;  division;  employment of counsel
    To achieve a proper balance between the services to be provided pursuant to  this act and the efficiency of the operation as a whole, as well as to stimulate the continual development of professional experience and interest in the administration of criminal justice, the Public Defender shall divide the case workload of the office between the professional staff and the trial pool or pools.  In any case where the matter involved requires some special experience or skill not available on the professional staff, the Public Defender shall engage counsel on a case basis, and shall assign a suitable member of the staff to the extent feasible to assist counsel so engaged. Counsel shall also be engaged on a case basis whenever needed to meet case load demands, or to provide independent counsel to multiple defendants whose interests may be in conflict.

     L.1967, c. 43, s. 9, eff. July 1, 1967.

2A:158A-10.  Contracts authorizing private or public organizations to execute functions of public defender
    The Public Defender is authorized to enter into contracts from time to time  with private or public organizations that are equipped to provide legal services for indigent defendants or to execute any lawful functions of the office of the Public Defender, as occasion may require.  Every such contract shall require that the level and quality of the work shall be at least equal to  that of the office of the Public Defender, and that all services rendered thereunder shall be under the control and supervision of the Public Defender.

     L.1967, c. 43, s. 10, eff. July 1, 1967.

2A:158A-11.  Duties of staff members and others engaged on case basis
    The primary duty of all members of staff and of others engaged on a case basis shall be to the individual defendant, with like effect and to the same purpose as though privately engaged by him and without regard to the use of public funds to provide the service.  This shall not preclude the designation or assignment of different individuals to perform various parts of the service from time to time, the duty in such cases to be the same as would exist in the case of a privately engaged law firm.

     L.1967, c. 43, s. 11, eff. July 1, 1967.

2A:158A-12.  Attorney-client privilege
    All communications between the individual defendant and any person in or engaged by the Office of the Public Defender whether on a case basis or by contract shall be fully protected by the attorney-client privilege to the same extent and degree as though counsel has been privately engaged.  This shall in no way preclude the use by the office of material in its files, otherwise privileged, for the preparation and disclosure of statistical, case study and other sociological data, provided always that in any such use there shall be no  disclosure of identity or of means for discovery of identity of particular defendants.

     L.1967, c. 43, s. 12, eff. July 1, 1967.

2A:158A-13.  Standards and level of performance of attorneys providing legal  services
    In providing legal services to defendants pursuant to this act, the Office of the Public Defender and every attorney actually engaged in the performance of the same, whether as a member of the staff or engaged on a case basis or otherwise, shall adhere at all times to the standards and level of performance established from time to time by the Supreme Court of New Jersey in the execution of its duty to supervise the practice of law; and the office shall furnish to such court materials and data as may be requisite to the measurement  of the adequacy of the performance hereunder.

     L.1967, c. 43, s. 13, eff. July 1, 1967.

2A:158A-14.  Determination of need 
    Eligibility for the services of the Office of the Public Defender shall be determined on the basis of the need of the defendant.  Need shall be measured according to: 

   a.   The financial ability of the defendant to engage and compensate competent private counsel; 

   b.   The current employment, salary and income of the defendant including prospects for continued employment if admitted to bail; 

   c.   The liquid assets of the defendant, including all real and personal property and bank accounts; 

   d.   The ability of the defendant to make bail and the source of bail posted; 

   e.   Where appropriate the willingness and ability of the defendant's immediate family, friends or employer to assist the defendant in meeting defense costs; 

   f.   Where appropriate an assessment of the probable and reasonable costs of providing a private defense, based upon the status of the defendant, the nature and extent of the charges and the likely issues; 

   g.   Where appropriate, the ability of the defendant to demonstrate convincingly that he has consulted at least three private attorneys, none of whom would accept the case for a fee within his ability to pay; and 

   h.   The ability of the defendant to provide all other necessary expenses of representation. 

   In the event that a determination of eligibility cannot be made before the time when the first services are to be rendered, or if an initial determination is found to be erroneous, the office shall undertake the same provisionally, and if it shall subsequently be determined that the defendant is ineligible it shall so inform the defendant, and the defendant shall thereupon be obliged to engage his own counsel and to reimburse the office for the cost of the services rendered to that time. 

   Amended by L. 1987, c. 170, s. 3. 

2A:158A-15.1  Investigation of finances of indigent defendants.

	4.	In each county, the Assignment Judge shall designate a judge or court support office who shall make an investigation of the financial status of each defendant requesting the services of the Office of the Public Defender and make a determination whether to grant the request for an appointed attorney.  A determination to grant or deny the services of the Public Defender shall be subject to final review by the Assignment Judge or his designated judge.  The court, or a designated court support office shall make an investigation of the financial status of each defendant requesting an appointed attorney, which investigation shall include the factors enumerated in section 14 of P.L. 1967, c. 43 (C. 2A:158A-14).  The court, in its discretion, may ask for the assistance of the Public Defender in conducting the investigation. 

	The judge or court support office is authorized to obtain information from any public record office of the State or of any subdivision or agency thereof on request and without payment of the fees ordinarily required by law. 

	L.1987,c.170,s.4;  amended 1998, c.77, s.1.

2A:158A-15.2.   Pilot project 
    Within 30 days of the effective date of this section, the Administrative Office of the Courts shall establish a system in one or more counties and the Assignment Judge, through a designated judge or court support office shall be responsible for making eligibility determinations for the services of the Office of the Public Defender in that county.  The purpose of the pilot project is to enable the Judiciary to develop a program for Statewide implementation and to gauge the fiscal impact of assuming responsibility for making eligibility determinations. 

   L. 1987, c. 170, s. 5. 

2A:158A-21.1  Unpaid outstanding balance, services rendered, Public Defender, unenforceable, uncollectable.
	2.	On or after the effective date of P.L.2023 c.69 (C.2A:158A-21.1 et al.): 
 
	a.	Any unpaid outstanding balance of court-ordered fees for services rendered by the Office of the Public Defender shall be unenforceable and uncollectable and any portion of a judgement that imposes fees shall be vacated.
 
	b.	All unsatisfied civil judgements based on court-ordered fees for services rendered by the Office of the Public Defender are deemed to be null and void and shall be vacated and discharged.
 
	c.	All warrants issued solely based on the alleged failure to pay or to appear on a court date set for the sole purpose of payment of statutory or court-ordered fines, fees, costs, or other monetary penalties previously assessed or imposed for services rendered by the Office of the Public Defender shall be reviewed and vacated consistent with the provisions of P.L.2023 c.69 (C.2A:158A-21.1 et al.).
 
	d.	Any outstanding liens entered, in accordance with the provisions of sections 17 and 18 of P.L.1967, c.43 (C.2A:158A-17 and C.2A:158A-18), on any and all property to which the defendant shall have or acquire an interest, are deemed to be null and void and shall be vacated and discharged by the Office of the Public Defender, pursuant to the provisions of section 30 of P.L.1993, c.318 (C.2A:44A-30).
 
L.2023, c.69, s.2.

2A:158A-22.  Annual report
    The Office of the Public Defender shall report annually to the Legislature,  the Governor and the Supreme Court.  Such report may be combined with that of  any other body, agency or study group engaged in reviewing the administration  of criminal justice.  The report shall include all pertinent data on the  operations of the office, the costs, projected needs, and to the extent  experience may indicate, recommendations for statutory changes, including  changes in the criminal law or changes in court rules, all as may be  appropriate to the improvement of the system of criminal justice, the control  of crime, the rehabilitation of offenders, and other related objectives.

     L.1967, c. 43, s. 22, eff. July 1, 1967.

2A:158A-23.  Oaths and affirmations
    The Public Defender, the deputy public defender, the assistant deputy public  defenders and investigators attached to the Office of the Public Defender shall  have the power to administer oaths and affirmations in relation to any matter  within the jurisdiction of the Office of the Public Defender.

     L.1968, c. 371, s. 2, eff. Dec. 27, 1968.

2A:158A-24.  Juvenile delinquent or juvenile in need of supervision; legal representation
    Except as hereinafter provided, the Public Defender shall in the manner prescribed by P.L.1967, c. 43 (C. 2A:158A-1 et seq.) provide for the legal representation of any person who is charged as a juvenile delinquent or as a juvenile in need of supervision and where in the opinion of the juvenile judge the prosecution of the complaint may result in the institutional commitment of such person.

     L.1968, c. 371, s. 3.  Amended by L.1974, c. 33, s. 1, eff. May 31, 1974.

2A:158A-26  Eligibility for representation by Public Defender, certain juveniles.
	1.	 Any person under the age of 18 years arrested or charged with an indictable offense or act of delinquency shall automatically be eligible, at no expense to that person, for representation by the Office of the Public Defender.

	L.2021, c.383, s.1.

2A:159A-1.  Agreement on detainers;  findings of party states;  purpose
    The agreement on detainers is hereby enacted into law and entered into by this State with all other jurisdictions legally joining therein in the form substantially as follows:

     AGREEMENT ON DETAINERS

     The contracting States solemnly agree that:

     ARTICLE I

     The party States find that charges outstanding against a prisoner, detainers  based on untried indictments, informations or complaints, and difficulties in  securing speedy trial of persons already incarcerated in other jurisdictions,  produce uncertainties which obstruct programs of prisoner treatment and  rehabilitation.  Accordingly, it is the policy of the party States and the  purpose of this agreement to encourage the expeditious and orderly disposition  of such charges and determination of the proper status of any and all detainers  based on untried indictments, informations or complaints.  The party States  also find that proceedings with reference to such charges and detainers, when  emanating from another jurisdiction, cannot properly be had in the absence of  cooperative procedures.  It is the further purpose of this agreement to provide  such cooperative procedures.

     L.1958, c. 12, p. 33, s. 1 (Art. I), eff. April 18, 1958.

2A:159A-2.  Definitions
     ARTICLE II

     As used in this agreement:

    (a)  "State"  shall mean a State of the United States;  the United States of  America;  a territory or possession of the United States;  the District of Columbia;  the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.

    (b)  "Sending State"  shall mean a State in which a prisoner is incarcerated  at the time that he initiates a request for final disposition pursuant to  Article III hereof or at the time that a request for custody or availability is  initiated pursuant to Article IV hereof.

    (c)  "Receiving State"  shall mean the State in which trial is to be had on  an indictment, information or complaint pursuant to Article III or Article IV  hereof.

     L.1958, c. 12, p. 33, s. 1 (Art. II).

2A:159A-3.  Request for final disposition of pending indictment, information  or complaint;  certificate of officer having custody; procedure; failure to  commence trial;  dismissal;  waiver of extradition; escape
     ARTICLE III

     (a) Whenever a person has entered upon a term of imprisonment in a penal or  correctional institution of a party State, and whenever during the continuance  of the term of imprisonment there is pending in any other party State any  untried indictment, information or complaint on the basis of which a detainer  has been lodged against the prisoner, he shall be brought to trial within 180  days after he shall have caused to be delivered to the prosecuting officer and  the appropriate court of the prosecuting officer's jurisdiction written notice  of the place of his imprisonment and his request for a final disposition to be  made of the indictment, information or complaint:  provided that for good cause  shown in open court, the prisoner or his counsel being present, the court  having jurisdiction of the matter may grant any necessary or reasonable  continuance.  The request of the prisoner shall be accompanied by a certificate  of the appropriate official having custody of the prisoner, stating the term of  commitment under which the prisoner is being held, the time already served, the  time remaining to be served on the sentence, the amount of good time earned,  the time of parole eligibility of the prisoner, and any decisions of the State parole agency relating to the prisoner.

    (b) The written notice and request for final disposition referred to in paragraph (a) hereof shall be given or sent by the prisoner to the warden, commissioner of corrections or other official having custody of him, who shall promptly forward it together with the certificate to the appropriate prosecuting official and court by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested.

    (c) The warden, commissioner of corrections or other official having custody  of the prisoner shall promptly inform him of the source and contents of any  detainer lodged against him and shall also inform him of his right to make a  request for final disposition of the indictment, information or complaint on  which the detainer is based.

    (d) Any request for final disposition made by a prisoner pursuant to paragraph (a) hereof shall operate as a request for final disposition of all untried indictments, informations or complaints on the basis of which detainers  have been lodged against the prisoner from the State to whose prosecuting  official the request for final disposition is specifically directed.  The  warden, commissioner of corrections or other official having custody of the  prisoner shall forthwith notify all appropriate prosecuting officers and courts  in the several jurisdictions within the State to which the prisoner's request  for final disposition is being sent of the proceeding being initiated by the  prisoner.  Any notification sent pursuant to this paragraph shall be  accompanied by copies of the prisoner's written notice, request, and the  certificate.  If trial is not had on any indictment, information or complaint  contemplated hereby prior to the return of the prisoner to the original place  of imprisonment, such indictment, information or complaint shall not be of any  further force or effect, and the court shall enter an order dismissing the same  with prejudice.

    (e) Any request for final disposition made by a prisoner pursuant to paragraph (a) hereof shall also be deemed to be a waiver of extradition with respect to any charge or proceeding contemplated thereby or included therein by  reason of paragraph (d) hereof, and a waiver of extradition to the receiving  State to serve any sentence there imposed upon him, after completion of his  term of imprisonment in the sending State.  The request for final disposition  shall also constitute a consent by the prisoner to the production of his body  in any court where his presence may be required in order to effectuate the  purposes of this agreement and a further consent voluntarily to be returned to  the original place of imprisonment in accordance with the provisions of this  agreement.  Nothing in this paragraph shall prevent the imposition of a  concurrent sentence if otherwise permitted by law.

    (f) Escape from custody by the prisoner subsequent to his execution of the request for final disposition referred to in paragraph (a) hereof shall void the request.

     L.1958, c. 12, p. 33, s. 1 (Art. III).

2A:159A-4.  Request for temporary custody or availability of prisoner; procedure;  time for commencing trial;  failure to try;  dismissal
     ARTICLE IV

     (a) The appropriate officer of the jurisdiction in which an untried indictment, information or complaint is pending shall be entitled to have a prisoner against whom he has lodged a detainer and who is serving a term of imprisonment in any party State made available in accordance with Article V(a) hereof upon presentation of a written request for temporary custody or availability to the appropriate authorities of the State in which the prisoner is incarcerated:  provided that the court having jurisdiction of such indictment, information or complaint shall have duly approved, recorded and transmitted the request:  and provided further that there shall be a period of 30 days after receipt by the appropriate authorities before the request be honored, within which period the Governor of the sending State may disapprove the request for temporary custody or availability, either upon his own motion or upon motion of the prisoner.

    (b) Upon receipt of the officer's written request as provided in paragraph (a) hereof, the appropriate authorities having the prisoner in custody shall furnish the officer with a certificate stating the term of commitment under which the prisoner is being held, the time already served, the time remaining to be served on the sentence, the amount of good time earned, the time of parole eligibility of the prisoner, and any decisions of the State parole agency relating to the prisoner.  Said authorities simultaneously shall furnish  all other officers and appropriate courts in the receiving State who have  lodged detainers against the prisoner with similar certificates and with notices informing them of the request for custody or availability and of the reasons therefor.

    (c) In respect of any proceeding made possible by this Article, trial shall  be commenced within 120 days of the arrival of the prisoner in the receiving  State, but for good cause shown in open court, the prisoner or his counsel  being present, the court having jurisdiction of the matter may grant any  necessary or reasonable continuance.

    (d) Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed to deprive any prisoner of any right which he may have to contest the legality of his delivery  as provided in paragraph (a) hereof, but such delivery may not be opposed or  denied on the ground that the executive authority of the sending State has not  affirmatively consented to or ordered such delivery.

    (e) If trial is not had on any indictment, information or complaint contemplated hereby prior to the prisoner's being returned to the original place of imprisonment pursuant to Article V(e) hereof, such indictment, information or complaint shall not be of any further force or effect, and the court shall enter an order dismissing the same with prejudice.

     L.1958, c. 12, p. 33, s. 1 (Art. IV).

2A:159A-5.  Offer of temporary custody;  procedure;  duty of receiving state;  nature of temporary custody;  return of prisoner;  running of sentence;   custody of sending state;  costs
     ARTICLE V

     (a) In response to a request made under Article III or Article IV hereof, the appropriate authority in a sending State shall offer to deliver temporary custody of such prisoner to the appropriate authority in the State where such indictment, information or complaint is pending against such person in order that speedy and efficient prosecution may be had.  If the request for final disposition is made by the prisoner, the offer of temporary custody shall accompany the written notice provided for in Article III of this agreement. In  the case of a Federal prisoner, the appropriate authority in the receiving State shall be entitled to temporary custody as provided by this agreement or to the prisoner's presence in Federal custody at the place for trial, whichever  custodial arrangement may be approved by the custodian.

    (b) The officer or other representative of a State accepting an offer of temporary custody shall present the following upon demand:

    (1) Proper identification and evidence of his authority to act for the State  into whose temporary custody the prisoner is to be given.

    (2) A duly certified copy of the indictment, information or complaint on the  basis of which the detainer has been lodged and on the basis of which the request for temporary custody of the prisoner has been made.

    (c) If the appropriate authority shall refuse or fail to accept temporary custody of said person, or in the event that an action on the indictment, information or complaint on the basis of which the detainer has been lodged is not brought to trial within the period provided in Article III or Article IV hereof, the appropriate court of the jurisdiction where the indictment, information or complaint has been pending shall enter an order dismissing the same with prejudice, and any detainer based thereon shall cease to be of any force or effect.

    (d) The temporary custody referred to in this agreement shall be only for the purpose of permitting prosecution on the charge or charges contained in 1 or more untried indictments, informations or complaints which form the basis of  the detainer or detainers or for prosecution on any other charge or charges  arising out of the same transaction.  Except for his attendance at court and  while being transported to or from any place at which his presence may be  required, the prisoner shall be held in a suitable jail or other facility  regularly used for persons awaiting prosecution.

    (e) At the earliest practicable time consonant with the purposes of this agreement, the prisoner shall be returned to the sending State.

    (f) During the continuance of temporary custody or while the prisoner is otherwise being made available for trial as required by this agreement, time being served on the sentence shall continue to run but good time shall be earned by the prisoner only if, and to the extent that, the law and practice of  the jurisdiction which imposed the sentence may allow.

    (g) For all purposes other than that for which temporary custody as provided  in this agreement is exercised, the prisoner shall be deemed to remain in the  custody of and subject to the jurisdiction of the sending State and any escape  from temporary custody may be dealt with in the same manner as an escape from  the original place of imprisonment or in any other manner permitted by law.

    (h) From the time that a party State receives custody of a prisoner pursuant  to this agreement until such prisoner is returned to the territory and custody  of the sending State, the State in which the 1 or more untried indictments,  informations or complaints are pending or in which trial is being had shall be  responsible for the prisoner and shall also pay all costs of transporting,  caring for, keeping and returning the prisoner.  The provisions of this  paragraph shall govern unless the States concerned shall have entered into a  supplementary agreement providing for a different allocation of costs and  responsibilities as between or among themselves. Nothing herein contained  shall be construed to alter or affect any internal relationship among the  departments, agencies and officers of and in the government of a party State,  or between a party State and its subdivisions, as to the payment of costs, or  responsibilities therefor.

     L.1958, c. 12, p. 33, s. 1 (Art. V).

2A:159A-6.  Inability of prisoner to stand trial;  tolling of time periods;   inapplicability of agreement to mentally ill persons
     ARTICLE VI

     (a) In determining the duration and expiration dates of the time periods provided in Articles III and IV of this agreement, the running of said time periods shall be tolled whenever and for as long as the prisoner is unable to stand trial, as determined by the court having jurisdiction of the matter.

    (b) No provision of this agreement, and no remedy made available by this agreement, shall apply to any person who is adjudged to be mentally ill.

     L.1958, c. 12, p. 33, s. 1 (Art. VI).

2A:159A-7.  Rules and regulations
     ARTICLE VII

     Each State party to this agreement shall designate an officer who, acting jointly with like officers of other party States, shall promulgate rules and regulations to carry out more effectively the terms and provisions of this agreement, and who shall provide, within and without the State, information necessary to the effective operation of this agreement.

     L.1958, c. 12, p. 33, s. 1 (Art. VII).

2A:159A-8.  Effective date of agreement;  withdrawal of state;  effect on status of proceedings
     ARTICLE VIII

     This agreement shall enter into full force and effect as to a party State when such State has enacted the same into law.  A State party to this agreement  may withdraw herefrom by enacting a statute repealing the same. However, the  withdrawal of any State shall not affect the status of any proceedings already  initiated by inmates or by State officers at the time such withdrawal takes  effect, nor shall it affect their rights in respect thereof.

     L.1958, c. 12, p. 33, s. 1 (Art. VIII).

2A:159A-9.  Liberal construction;  severability of provisions
     ARTICLE IX

     This agreement shall be liberally construed so as to effectuate its purposes.  The provisions of this agreement shall be severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence or provision of this agreement is declared to be contrary to the Constitution of any party State or of the United States or the applicability thereof to any government, agency, person or circumstance is held  invalid, the validity of the remainder of this agreement and the applicability  thereof to any government, agency, person or circumstance shall not be affected  thereby.  If this agreement shall be held contrary to the Constitution of any  State party hereto, the agreement shall remain in full force and effect as to  the remaining States and in full force and effect as to the State affected as  to all severable matters.

     L.1958, c. 12, p. 33, s. 1 (Art. IX).

2A:159A-10.   "Appropriate court,"  definition
    The phrase  "appropriate court"  as used in the agreement on detainers shall, with reference to the courts of this State, mean any court with criminal  jurisdiction.

     L.1958, c. 12, p. 42, s. 2.

2A:159A-11.  Enforcement of agreement;  co-operation
    All courts, departments, agencies, officers and employees of this State and  its political subdivisions are hereby directed to enforce the agreement on  detainers and to co-operate with one another and with the other party States in  enforcing the agreement and effectuating its purposes.

     L.1958, c. 12, p. 42, s. 3.

2A:159A-12.  Delivery of prisoner
    The warden or other official in charge of any penal or correctional institution in this State shall give over the person of any inmate thereof whenever so required by the operation of the agreement on detainers.

     L.1958, c. 12, p. 42, s. 4.

2A:159A-13.  Escape from custody;  offense;  punishment
    Escape from custody while in another State pursuant to the agreement on detainers shall constitute an offense against the laws of this State to the same extent and degree as an escape from the institution in which the prisoner was confined immediately prior to having been sent to another State pursuant to  the provisions of the agreement on detainers and shall be punishable in the  same manner as an escape from said institution.

     L.1958, c. 12, p. 42, s. 5.

2A:159A-14.  Central administrator and information officer; designation; powers;  tenure
    Pursuant to said agreement, the Governor is hereby authorized and empowered  to designate an officer or alternate who shall be the central administrator of  and the information agent for the agreement on detainers and who, acting  jointly with like officers of other party States, shall have power to formulate  rules and regulations to carry out more effectively the terms of the agreement,  and shall serve subject to the pleasure of the Governor.

     L.1958, c. 12, p. 42, s. 6.

2A:159A-15.  Transmittal of copies of act
    Duly authenticated copies of this act shall, upon its approval, be transmitted by the Secretary of State to the Governor of each State, the Attorney-General and the Administrator of the General Services Administration of the United States, and the Council of State Governments.

     L.1958, c. 12, p. 43, s. 7.

2A:160-1.  Persons taken out of state to answer criminal charge; warrant of  governor or waiver of extradition
    It shall be unlawful to take, or cause or procure to be taken, or aid or abet in taking any person from out of this state, for the purpose of answering any criminal charge that may have been preferred against such person in any other state, except in the manner prescribed in this chapter, unless such person consents to his removal from this state by waiving extradition in the manner provided by section 2A:160-30 of this title.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-2.    Expenses of returning fugitives from justice  
     2A:160-2. Whenever any person charged in this State with any crime shall flee from justice and be found in another state, territory or district, and the attorney general or the prosecutor for any county where such person is so charged shall recommend to the governor or person administering the government of this State that he demand the fugitive, so that he may be brought into this State for trial, and the fugitive shall, on the demand of the executive authority of this State, be delivered up for removal to this State, the expense of such removal, being first ascertained to the satisfaction of the prosecutor of the county where such person is so charged, and being approved by a judge of the Superior Court, shall be paid by the county treasurer out of the funds of such county.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.129.  

2A:160-3.    Advance of money to prosecutor for expenses of extradition; statement filed and approved by court  
     2A:160-3. The county treasurer of any county may advance to the prosecutor of the county, or to such person as the prosecutor shall designate, from the funds of such county appropriated, set aside and available for court expenses, money necessary to defray the expenses of the prosecutor or such person as he shall designate, to be used for the arrest, extradition and return from foreign jurisdictions of persons charged with violating the criminal laws of this State, and who are fugitives from justice. No such money shall be advanced by the county treasurer, except upon written order of the prosecutor with the approval of the Assignment Judge in such county indorsed thereon, and unless the prosecutor shall file with the county treasurer a statement of the purposes for which the money is to be used and an estimate, in reasonable detail, of the anticipated expenses.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.130.  

2A:160-4.    Accounting of expenditures; excess returned  
     2A:160-4. Immediately after the person to whom the money has been advanced by the county treasurer, as provided by N.J.S.2A:160-3, shall have completed the duties for which such money was advanced, he shall file with the county treasurer an itemized statement or account of the necessary expenses incurred in the performance of such duties, duly verified, certified to and approved under the hand of the prosecutor, and with the written approval of the Assignment Judge in such county. If the itemized statement or account so rendered and approved, as aforesaid, should exceed the sum of money so advanced to such person, the balance thereof shall be paid to such person by the county treasurer; and if the sum of money advanced to such person shall exceed the amount of his itemized statement or account of expenses, as the same shall be so certified and approved, such person shall forthwith return the excess money to the county treasurer.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.131.  

2A:160-5.  Return of person extradited from and imprisoned in another state  to such state in certain cases
    If any person charged with the crime of murder in this state is undergoing imprisonment in any other state, territory or district of the United States for  a term less than imprisonment for life, and the governor of this state shall  make demand for the return to this state of the person so charged, the governor  may agree with the executive authority of such state, territory or district  that, if the person so charged shall, on his trial in this state, be acquitted,  or shall be convicted of the crime of manslaughter, or any degree of murder the  punishment for which is less than death or imprisonment for life, such person  shall be returned immediately to such other state, territory or district, at  the expense of this state. The costs incident to the return of such person  shall be borne by the county in which such person was tried for the crime of  murder.

    This section shall be subject to the provisions of the constitution of the United States controlling, and the acts of congress enacted in pursuance thereof.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-6.  Definitions
    As used in this article, the term  "governor"  includes any person performing the functions of governor by authority of the law of this state. The term  "executive authority"  includes the governor and any person performing the functions of governor in a state other than this state.  The term  "state" , referring to a state other than this state, includes any other state, territory or district, organized or unorganized, of the United States of  America.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-7.  Construction of article
    The provisions of this article shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purposes to make uniform the law of those states which enact it.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-8.  Effect of article as to waivers by and rights, powers and privileges of this state
    Nothing in this article contained shall be deemed to constitute a waiver by  this state of its right, power or privilege to try such demanded person for  crime committed within this state, or of its right, power or privilege to regain custody of such person by extradition proceedings or otherwise for the purpose of trial, sentence or punishment for any crime committed within this state, nor shall any proceedings had under this article which result in, or fail to result in, extradition be deemed a waiver by this state of any of its rights, privileges or jurisdiction in any way whatsoever.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-9.  Short title of article
    This article may be cited as the  "uniform criminal extradition law" .

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-10.  Fugitives from justice found in this state;  arrest and delivery  to demanding state;  person charged with murder in demanding state and  imprisoned in this state for term less than life;  warrant of governor
    Subject to the provisions of this article, the provisions of the constitution of the United States controlling, and any and all acts of congress  enacted in pursuance thereof, it is the duty of the governor of this state to  have arrested and delivered up to the executive authority of any other state of  the United States any person charged in that state with treason, felony or  other crime, who has fled from justice and is found in this state;  provided,  if the executive authority of any other state or district requests the  extradition of any person charged in that state with murder, and that person is  imprisoned in a penal institution or jail of this state for a term less than  imprisonment for life, the governor of this state may deliver him or her up to  the executive authority of the demanding state or district for the purpose of  trial in said state or district; provided, however, that prior to the removal  of the person from this state, the executive authority of the demanding state  or district shall have agreed that the person so delivered up is to be returned  immediately to this state, at the cost of the demanding state or district, to  serve the balance of his or her term of imprisonment in the event of his or her acquittal in the demanding state, or in the event of his or her conviction in  such state of manslaughter or any degree of murder the punishment for which is  less than death or imprisonment for life.

    The warrant of the governor of this state shall be sufficient authority to the keeper of the New Jersey state prison or officer of any other institution to surrender the person named therein and for whom extradition is sought.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-11.  Demand for extradition;  form and contents;  affidavit; copy of  indictment or information;  statement by executive authority of demanding state
    No demand for the extradition of a person charged with crime in another state shall be recognized by the governor unless in writing alleging that the accused was present in the demanding state at the time of the commission of the  alleged crime, and that thereafter he fled from the state, except in cases  arising under section 2A:160-14 of this title, and accompanied by a copy of an  indictment found or by information supported by affidavit in the state having  jurisdiction of the crime, or by a copy of an affidavit made before a  magistrate there, together with a copy of any warrant which was issued thereon;   or by a copy of a judgment of conviction or of a sentence imposed in execution  thereof, together with a statement by the executive authority of the demanding  state that the person claimed has escaped from confinement or has broken the  terms of his bail, probation or parole.  The indictment, information, or  affidavit made before the magistrate must substantially charge the person  demanded with having committed a crime under the law of that state;  and the  copy of the indictment, information, affidavit, judgment of conviction or  sentence must be authenticated by the executive authority making the demand.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-12.  Investigation by governor;  duty of attorney general and prosecuting officers
    When a demand shall be made upon the governor of this state by the executive  authority of another state for the surrender of a person so charged with crime,  the governor may call upon the attorney general or any prosecuting officer in  this state to investigate or assist in investigating the demand, and to report  to him the situation and circumstances of the person so demanded, and whether  he ought to be surrendered.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-13.  Extradition of person leaving demanding state involuntarily
    The governor of this state may also surrender on demand of the executive authority of any other state any person in this state who is charged in the manner provided in section 2A:160-32 of this title with having violated the laws of the state whose executive authority is making the demand, even though such person left the demanding state involuntarily.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-14.  Extradition of persons not present in demanding state at time of  commission of crime
    The governor of this state may also surrender, on demand of the executive authority of any other state, any person in this state charged in such other state in the manner provided in section 2A:160-11 of this title with committing  an act in this state, or in a third state, intentionally resulting in a crime  in the state whose executive authority is making the demand, and the provisions  of this article not otherwise inconsistent shall apply to such cases, even  though the accused was not in that state at the time of the commission of the  crime, and has not fled therefrom.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-14.1  Surrender of individuals seeking reproductive health care services lawful in New Jersey, prohibited.
	1.	Notwithstanding the provisions of N.J.S.2A:160-14, the Governor shall not surrender, on demand of the executive authority of any other state, any person who:
 
	a.	is found in this State;
 
	b.	was not in the state whose executive authority is making the demand at the time of the commission of the alleged crime and has not fled therefrom; and
 
	c.	is charged in the state whose executive authority is making the demand with providing, receiving, assisting in providing or receiving, providing material support for, or traveling to obtain reproductive health care services that are permitted under the laws of this State, including on any theory of vicarious, joint, several or conspiracy liability.
 
	As used in this section, "reproductive health care services" means all medical, surgical, counseling, or referral services relating to the human reproductive system including, but not limited to, services relating to pregnancy, contraception, or termination of a pregnancy.

	L.2022, c.50.

2A:160-15.  Warrant of arrest;  issue by governor;  recitals
    If the governor decides that the demand should be complied with, he shall sign a warrant of arrest, which shall be sealed with the state seal, and be directed to any peace officer or other person whom he may think fit to entrust with the execution thereof.  The warrant must substantially recite the facts necessary to the validity of its issuance.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-16.  Execution of warrant of arrest
    Such warrant shall authorize the peace officer or other person to whom directed to arrest the accused at any time and any place where he may be found within the state and to command the aid of all peace officers or other persons in the execution of the warrant, and to deliver the accused, subject to the provisions of this article, to the duly authorized agent of the demanding state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-17.  Authority of officer making arrest;  assistance given
    Every such peace officer or other person empowered to make the arrest, shall  have the same authority, in arresting the accused, to command assistance  therein, as peace officers have by law in the execution of any criminal process  directed to them, with like penalties against those who refuse their  assistance.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-18.  Rights of persons arrested;  appearance before criminal court; habeas corpus;  notice of and hearing on
    No person arrested upon such warrant shall be delivered over to the agent whom the executive authority demanding him shall have appointed to receive him,  unless he shall first be taken forthwith before a judge of a criminal court of  record in this state, who shall inform him of the demand made for his surrender  and of the crime with which he is charged, and that he has the right to demand  and procure legal counsel;  and if the prisoner or his counsel shall state that  he or they desire to test the legality of his arrest, the judge of such  criminal court of record shall fix a reasonable time to be allowed him within  which to apply for a writ of habeas corpus. When such writ is applied for,  notice thereof, and of the time and place of hearing thereon, shall be given to  the prosecuting officer of the county in which the arrest is made and in which  the accused is in custody, and to the said agent of the demanding state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-19.  Noncompliance with section 2A:160-18 a misdemeanor; punishment
    Any officer who shall deliver to the agent for extradition of the demanding  state a person in his custody under the governor's warrant, in willful  disobedience to section 2A:160-18 of this title, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, on conviction, shall be fined not more than $1,000 or be imprisoned not more than 6 months, or both.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-20.  Temporary confinement of persons arrested in county or municipal  jail in this state;  procedure;  new requisition
    The officer or persons executing the governor's warrant of arrest, or the agent of the demanding state to whom the prisoner may have been delivered may, when necessary, confine the prisoner in the jail of any county or municipality through which he may pass;  and the keeper of such jail must receive and safely  keep the prisoner until the officer or person having charge of him is ready to  proceed on his route, such officer or person, however, being chargeable with  the expense of keeping.

    The officer or agent of a demanding state to whom a prisoner may have been delivered following extradition proceedings in another state, or to whom a prisoner may have been delivered after waiving extradition in such other state,  and who is passing through this state with such a prisoner for the purpose of  immediately returning such prisoner to the demanding state may, when necessary,  confine the prisoner in the jail of any county or municipality through which he  may pass;  and the keeper of such jail must receive and safely keep the  prisoner until the officer or agent having charge of him is ready to proceed on  his route, such officer or agent, however, being chargeable with the expense of  keeping;  but such officer or agent shall produce and show to the keeper of  such jail satisfactory written evidence of the fact that he is actually  transporting such prisoner to the demanding state after a requisition by the  executive authority of such demanding state.  Such prisoner shall not be  entitled to demand a new requisition while in this state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-21.  Arrest of accused before requisition made;  warrant for arrest
    Whenever any person within this state shall be charged on the oath of any credible person before any judge or magistrate of this state with the commission of any crime in any other state, and, except in cases arising under section 2A:160-14 of this title, with having fled from justice, or with having been convicted of a crime in that state and having escaped from confinement, or  having broken the terms of his bail, probation or parole, or whenever complaint  shall have been made before any judge or magistrate in this state setting forth  on the affidavit of any credible person in another state that a crime has been  committed in such other state and that the accused has been charged in such  state with the commission of the crime, and, except in cases arising under said  section 2A:160-14, has fled from justice, or with having been convicted of a  crime in that state and having escaped from confinement, or having broken the  terms of his bail, probation or parole, and is believed to be in this state,  the judge or magistrate shall issue a warrant directed to any peace officer  commanding him to apprehend the person named therein, wherever he may be found  in this state, and to bring him before the same or any other judge, magistrate  or court who or which may be available in or convenient of access to the place where the arrest may be made, to answer the charge or complaint and affidavit,  and a certified copy of the sworn charge or complaint and affidavit upon which  the warrant is issued shall be attached to the warrant.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-22.  Arrest of accused without warrant
    The arrest of a person may be lawfully made also by any peace officer or a private person, without a warrant, upon reasonable information that the accused  stands charged in the courts of a state with a crime punishable by death or  imprisonment for a term exceeding 1 year, but when so arrested the accused must  be taken before a judge or magistrate with all practicable speed and complaint  must be made against him under oath setting forth the ground for the arrest as  in section 2A:160-21 of this title;  and thereafter his answer shall be heard  as if he had been arrested on a warrant.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-23.  Commitment to jail of person arrested before requisition made, to await requisition;  bail
    If from the examination before the judge or magistrate it appears that the person held is the person charged with having committed the crime alleged, and,  except in cases arising under section 2A:160-14 of this title, that he has fled  from justice, the judge or magistrate must, by a warrant reciting the  accusation, commit him to the county jail for such a time not exceeding 30 days  and specified in the warrant, as will enable the arrest of the accused to be  made under a warrant of the governor on a requisition of the executive  authority of the state having jurisdiction of the offense, unless the accused  give bail as provided in section 2A:160-24 of this title, or until he shall be  legally discharged.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-24.  Bail of accused for appearance, when authorized;  bond or undertaking;  surrender of accused to be arrested on warrant
    Unless the offense with which the prisoner is charged is shown to be an offense punishable by death or life imprisonment under the laws of the state in  which it was committed, a judge or magistrate in this state may admit the person arrested to bail by bond or undertaking, with sufficient sureties, and in such sum as he deems proper, conditioned for his appearance before him at a time specified in such bond or undertaking, and for his surrender, to be arrested upon the warrant of the governor of this state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-25.   Discharge of accused; extension of time of commitment of accused; new bail for appearance  
     2A:160-25. If the accused is not arrested under warrant of the governor by the expiration of the time specified in the warrant, bond or undertaking, a judge may discharge him or may recommit him for a further period of 60 days, or a judge of the Superior Court may again take bail for his appearance and surrender, as provided in N.J.S.2A:160-24, but within a period not to exceed 60 days after the date of such new bond or undertaking.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.132.  

2A:160-26.  Forfeiture of bail;  arrest of accused without warrant; recovery on bail bond
    If the prisoner is admitted to bail and fails to appear and surrender himself according to the conditions of his bond, the judge or magistrate, by proper order, shall declare the bond forfeited and order his immediate arrest without warrant if he be within this state.  Recovery may be had on such bond in the name of the state as in the case of other bonds or undertakings given by  the accused in criminal proceedings within this state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-27.  Extradition of persons pending outcome of criminal prosecution in this state
    If a criminal prosecution has been instituted against such person under the  laws of this state and is still pending, the governor, in his discretion, either may surrender him on demand of the executive authority of another state or hold him until he has been tried and discharged or convicted and punished in  this state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-28.  Inquiry into guilt or innocence of accused
    The guilt or innocence of the accused as to the crime of which he is charged  may not be inquired into by the governor or in any proceeding after the demand  for extradition, accompanied by a charge of crime in legal form as above  provided, shall have been presented to the governor, except as it may be  involved in identifying the person held as the person charged with the crime.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-29.  Recall of warrant of arrest;  alias warrant
    The governor may recall his warrant of arrest or may issue another warrant whenever he deems proper.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-30.  Waiver of extradition proceedings;  procedure;  effect
    Any person arrested in this state charged with having committed any crime in  another state or alleged to have escaped from confinement, or broken the terms  of his bail, probation or parole, may waive the issuance and service of the  warrant provided for in sections 2A:160-15 and 2A:160-16 of this title and all  other procedure incidental to extradition proceedings, by executing or  subscribing in the presence of a judge of any criminal court of record within  this state a writing which states that he consents to return to the demanding  state.  Before such waiver shall be executed or subscribed by such person it  shall be the duty of such judge to inform such person of his rights to the  issuance and service of a warrant of extradition and to obtain a writ of habeas  corpus as provided for in section 2A:160-18 of this title.

    If and when such consent has been duly executed it shall forthwith be forwarded to the office of the governor of this state and filed therein. The judge shall direct the officer having such person in custody to deliver forthwith such person to the duly accredited agent or agents of the demanding state, and shall deliver or cause to be delivered to such agent or agents a copy of such consent.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit the rights of the accused person to return voluntarily and without formality to the  demanding state, nor shall this waiver procedure be deemed to be an exclusive  procedure or to limit the powers, rights or duties of the officers of the  demanding state or of this state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-31.  Demand for extradition;  issue of warrant by governor
    Whenever the governor of this state shall demand a person charged with crime  or with escaping from confinement or breaking the terms of his bail, probation  or parole in this state, from the executive authority of any other state, or  from the chief justice or a judge of the district court of the United States  for the District of Columbia authorized to receive such demand under the laws  of the United States, he shall issue a warrant under the seal of this state, to  some agent, commanding him to receive the person so charged if delivered to him  and convey him to the proper officer of the county in this state in which the  offense was committed.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-32.  Application to governor for requisition;  by whom made; contents;  verification of application;  execution in duplicate;  certified copies of indictment, information and affidavit filed, or complaint to accompany application;  copy filed with secretary of state;  copy forwarded with requisition
    1.  When the return to this state of a person charged with crime in this state is required, the prosecuting attorney shall present to the governor his written application for a requisition for the return of the person charged, in which application shall be stated the name of the person so charged, the crime charged against him, the approximate time, place and circumstances of its commission, the state in which he is believed to be, including the location of the accused therein at the time the application is made and certifying that, in  the opinion of the said prosecuting attorney, the ends of justice require the  arrest and return of the accused to this state for trial and that the proceeding is not instituted to enforce a private claim.

    2.  When the return to this state is required of a person who has been convicted of a crime in this state and has escaped from confinement or broken the terms of his bail, probation or parole, the prosecuting attorney of the county in which the offense was committed, the parole board, or the warden of the institution or sheriff of the county from which escape was made, shall present to the governor a written application for a requisition for the return of such person, in which application shall be stated the name of the person, the crime of which he was convicted, the circumstances of his escape from confinement or of the breach of the terms of his bail, probation or parole, the  state in which he is believed to be, including the location of the person therein at the time application is made.

    3.  The application shall be verified by affidavit, shall be executed in duplicate and shall be accompanied by 2 certified copies of the indictment returned, or information and affidavit filed, or of the complaint made to the judge or magistrate, stating the offense with which the accused is charged, or of the judgment of conviction or of the sentence.  The prosecuting officer, parole board, warden or sheriff may also attach such further affidavits and other documents in duplicate as he or it shall deem proper to be submitted with  such application.  One copy of the application, with the action of the governor  indicated by indorsement thereon, and 1 of the certified copies of the  indictment, complaint, information, and affidavits, or of the judgment of conviction or of the sentence shall be filed in the office of the secretary of state to remain of record in that office.  The other copies of all papers shall  be forwarded with the governor's requisition.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-33.  Extradition of persons imprisoned or awaiting trial in another state;  agreement to return to state from which extradited
    When it is desired to have returned to this state a person charged in this state with a crime, and such person is imprisoned or is held under criminal proceedings then pending against him in another state, the governor of this state may agree with the executive authority of such other state for the extradition of such person before the conclusion of such proceedings or his term of sentence in such other state, upon condition that such person be returned to such other state at the expense of this state as soon as the prosecution in this state is terminated.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-34.  Immunity from service of process in certain civil actions
    A person brought into this state on, or after waiver of, extradition based on a criminal charge shall not be subject to service of personal process in civil actions arising out of the same facts as the criminal proceeding to answer which he is being or has been returned, until he has been convicted in the criminal proceeding, or, if acquitted, until he has had reasonable opportunity to return to the state from which he was extradited.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:160-35.  No immunity from other criminal prosecution while in this state
    After a person has been brought back to this state by extradition proceedings, he may be tried in this state for other crimes which he may be charged with having committed here as well as that specified in the requisition  for his extradition.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:161-1.    Appointment of citizen to make immediate arrest  
	2A:161-1.	In all criminal complaints before a judge of the Superior Court or a municipal court, where in the opinion of such judge, public justice shall require that a warrant for the arrest of the alleged offender issue and be executed immediately, and no person authorized to make an arrest can be had in time, such judge may, by writing, under his hand and seal, appoint some fit person, who shall be a citizen of this State, to execute the warrant, who shall have the same authority in the premises in all respects and be subject to liability.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.133; 2023, c.250, s.9.

2A:161A-1.   Strip searches restricted  
     1.   A person who has been detained or arrested for commission of an offense other than a crime shall not be subjected to a strip search unless:  

    a.   The search is authorized by a warrant or consent;

  

    b.   The search is  based on probable cause that a weapon, controlled dangerous substance, as defined by the "Comprehensive Drug Reform Act of 1987," N.J.S.2C:35-1 et al., or evidence of a crime will be found and a recognized exception to the warrant requirement exists; or  

    c.   The person is lawfully confined in a municipal detention facility or an adult county correctional facility and the search is based on a reasonable suspicion that a weapon, controlled dangerous substance, as defined by the "Comprehensive Drug Reform Act of 1987," N.J.S.2C:35-1 et al., or contraband, as defined by the Department of Corrections, will be found, and the search is authorized pursuant to regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of the Department of Corrections.  

    L.1985,c.70,s.1; amended 1991,c.305,s.1.  

2A:161A-2.   Body cavity searches restricted  
     2.   A person who has been detained or arrested for commission of an offense other than a crime shall not be subjected to a body cavity search unless:  

    a.   The search is authorized by a warrant or consent; or

  

    b.   The person is lawfully confined in an adult county correctional facility and the search is based on a reasonable suspicion that a weapon, controlled dangerous substance, as defined by the "Comprehensive Drug Reform Act of 1987," N.J.S.2C:35-1 et al., or contraband, as defined by the Commissioner of the Department of Corrections, will be found, and the search is authorized pursuant to the regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of the Department of Corrections.  

    L.1985,c.70,s.2; amended 1991,c.305,s.2.  

2A:161A-3  Definitions.
 	3. a. For purposes of this act, a "strip search" means the removal or rearrangement of clothing for the purpose of visual inspection of the person's undergarments, buttocks, anus, genitals or breasts.  The term does not include the use of body imaging scanning equipment pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2015, c.213 (C.30:4-91.3e) or any removal or rearrangement of clothing reasonably required to render medical treatment or assistance or the removal of articles of outer-clothing such as coats, ties, belts or shoelaces.
 
	b.	For purposes of this act, a "body cavity search" means the visual inspection or manual search of a person's anal or vaginal cavity.
 
	L.1985, c.70, s.3; amended 1991, c.305, s.3; 2015, c.213, s.2.

2A:161A-4.   Conduct; reports  
     4.  a.  Any strip search or body cavity search conducted under this act shall be performed by persons of the same sex as the arrested person and at a location where the search cannot be observed by persons not physically conducting the search.  The law enforcement officer or other person authorized to conduct a strip search or body cavity search shall obtain permission of the officer in charge of the station house to conduct the search and shall report the reason for the search on the record of arrest.  Where emergency conditions require immediate action to prevent bodily harm to the officer or others, the requirements of this section shall not apply.  In all cases where a strip search is conducted as an exception to the requirements of this section, the officer conducting the search shall file a separate written report setting forth the emergency conditions which required the immediate action.  This written report shall be filed with and reviewed by the officer in charge who had the authority to authorize a strip search.  

    b.   Reports required pursuant to this section shall not be deemed public records within the meaning of P.L.1963, c.73 (C.47:1A-1 et seq.) but, upon request, shall be made available to the person searched, the county prosecutor, the Attorney General or the Commissioner of the Department of Corrections.  

    c.   Nothing in this section is intended to preclude lawful use of the report of a strip search or body cavity search by law enforcement officials, the county prosecutor or officials responsible for the administration of a county or State correctional facility.  

    L.1985,c.70,s.4; amended 1991,c.305,s.4.  

2A:161A-5.   Civil, criminal immunity 
    a.   Where it is determined that a strip search or body cavity search is necessary, it shall be performed under sanitary conditions.  A body cavity search, pursuant to section 2 of this act, shall be conducted by a licensed physician or registered professional nurse. 

   b.   A physician or nurse who conducts a body cavity search pursuant to the requirements of this act and in a medically accepted manner shall be immune from civil or criminal liability for so acting, provided the skill and care given are those ordinarily required and exercised by others in the profession.  Immunity from civil or criminal liability shall extend to the hospital or other medical facility on whose premises or under whose auspices the body cavity search is conducted, provided the skill, care and facilities provided are those ordinarily provided by similar medical facilities. 

   c.   Any person conducting a body cavity search pursuant to this act shall, upon request, furnish to any law enforcement agency a certificate stating that the body cavity search was pursuant to the requirements of this act and performed in a medically acceptable manner.  The certificate shall be signed under oath before a notary public or other person empowered to take oaths and shall be admissible in any proceeding as evidence of the statements contained therein. 

   d.   No person may claim the physician and patient privilege under section 2 of P.L.  1968, c. 185 (C. 2A:84A-22.2) with respect to the conducting of a body cavity search pursuant to this act. 

   L. 1985, c. 70, s. 5. 

2A:161A-6.   Disciplinary action 
    Failure to comply with any provisions of this act shall subject the law enforcement officer or other authorized person to administrative disciplinary action.  Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting such person's criminal liability pursuant to the laws of this State. 

   L. 1985, c. 70, s. 6. 

2A:161A-7.   Other rights not abrogated 
    Nothing in this act shall be construed as limiting any statutory or common law rights of any person for purposes of any civil action or injunctive relief. 

   L. 1985, c. 70, s. 7. 

2A:161A-8.   Regulations; confinement, bail schedule  
     8.  a.  The Commissioner of the Department of Corrections, after consultation with the Attorney General, pursuant to authority granted in sections 6 and 10 of P.L.1976, c.98 (C.30:1B-6 and 30:1B-10) and this section shall promulgate regulations governing strip and body cavity searches of persons detained in municipal detention or adult county correctional facilities.  These regulations shall give full recognition to the rights of persons confined granted under the constitutions of the United States and this State.  

    b.   The Attorney General shall issue guidelines or directives for police officers governing the release and confinement of persons who have been arrested for commission of an offense other than a crime and such guidelines governing the performance of strip and body cavity searches as he deems necessary to promote compliance with this act, the regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of the Department of Corrections, and with the constitutions of the United States and this State.  The Attorney General may require law enforcement agencies to submit periodic reports providing data on all strip searches and body cavity searches conducted.  

    c.   The Administrative Office of the Courts shall promulgate a bail schedule for all offenses other than crimes, and bail for a person arrested or detained on a warrant may be fixed and accepted by the law enforcement officer in charge of the station house.  

    L.1985,c.70,s.8; amended 1991,c.305,s.5.  

2A:161A-9.   Not applicable to penal institutions 
    Notwithstanding any law, rule or regulation to the contrary, no procedures as set forth in this act shall supersede any procedures of the State's penal institutions. 

   L. 1985, c. 70, s. 9. 

2A:161A-10.  Admissibility of evidence seized 
    A violation of the provisions of sections 4 and 5 of this act shall not affect the admissibility of evidence seized pursuant to a strip search or body cavity search. 

   L. 1985, c. 70, s. 10. 

2A:162-1.  Record of recognizances in counties other than where taken; lien  thereof
    When the real estate of the surety in a recognizance of bail is situate in a  county other than the county where the recognizance is taken, the clerk of the  court in which the bail is taken shall forthwith make and certify a copy of the  recognizance and send the same to the county clerk or register of deeds of the  county in which such real estate is situate, who shall record such certified  copy in the same manner as if the recognizance had been taken in his county,  and thereupon such recognizance shall constitute a lien upon such real estate  and have the same force and effect as if taken in such county.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:162-5.  Duration of lien, upon any property, of forfeited recognizances not prosecuted to judgment;  time limit after effective date for enforcement
    All recognizances of bail made or entered into before any court, judge or magistrate having criminal jurisdiction, which have been or shall be forfeited,  but upon which no writ of scire facias or other process to enforce or collect  the same shall have been issued and prosecuted to final judgment within a  period of 6 years after the same shall have been filed and recorded in the  clerk's office, and all recognizances of bail which have not been forfeited,  shall, after 6 years from the date of the filing and recording of any such  recognizances of bail in the clerk's office, no longer be enforceable as a  claim or as a lien or charge upon or against any property of which any  principal or surety named in any such recognizance was or shall have been  seized at the time of his entering into such recognizance or at any time  thereafter;  provided that any claim, lien, or charge against personal property  affected by any of the provisions of this act may be prosecuted or enforced  within 6 months from the effective date hereof.

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1954, c. 233, p. 863, s. 1, eff. Dec. 8, 1954.

2A:162-6.  Revival of judgment on forfeited recognizances;  limitation
    Judgments in any court of record, entered upon forfeited recognizances in criminal cases, may be revived by scire facias, or a civil action may be brought thereon within 6 years next after the date of such judgment and not after.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:162-7.  Money collected on forfeited recognizances paid to county treasurer
    Every sheriff, prosecutor or clerk of any court who shall collect or receive  any money on any forfeited recognizance, whether before or after execution, or  from any amercement awarded by any court against any offender, shall, within 10  days after collecting or receiving the same, pay over the same to the treasurer  of the county wherein such forfeiture was had or amercement awarded, for the  use of the county.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:162-7.1.    Disposition of forfeited bail, interest  
  22.  a.  If any bail deposited with a county clerk prior to January 1, 1995 shall be forfeited such forfeited bail and any interest thereon shall remain with the county.  

 b.     If any bail deposited on or after January 1, 1995 shall be forfeited, 50% of such bail and any interest thereon shall be paid to the county in which the bail was deposited.  

 L.1993,c.275,s.22.  

2A:162-8.  Return of amounts paid on forfeited recognizances
    When any court which has ordered or shall order the forfeiture of a recognizance, the amount whereof has been or shall be paid into the county treasury of any county in accordance with law, shall thereafter, in its discretion, order the return of the moneys so paid upon the forfeited recognizance, the treasurer of the county shall thereupon repay the amount of such recognizance, less the taxed costs on the proceedings to forfeit the same,  to the recognizor or recognizors or the personal representatives of any deceased recognizor, who shall have paid the same into the county treasury. Application for a return of moneys so paid shall be made to the court within 4 years after the recognizance shall have been declared forfeited.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:162-9.  Cash deposit;  affidavit as to ownership
    Whenever cash money is deposited in any criminal case in lieu of bail and recognizance, the court accepting such deposit, or the judge or clerk of said court, shall require the person claiming the deposit to swear to and subscribe an affidavit as to the ownership of the said cash money, which affidavit shall become a part of the record of the case wherein the deposit is made.  The form of such affidavits and the proceedings pertaining thereto shall be subject to the rules of the Supreme Court governing said courts.

     L.1952, c. 163, p. 532, s. 1, eff. May 1, 1952.

2A:162-10.  Effective date
    This act shall take effect May first, one thousand nine hundred and fifty-two.

     L.1952, c. 163, p. 533, s. 2, eff. May 1, 1952.

2A:162-11.   Disorderly persons; continuance of bail or recognizance on appeal  
     1.   In every case where a person has been convicted in a municipal court of a disorderly persons violation, and he has not violated or forfeited his bail or recognizance, such bail or recognizance shall continue in the same terms and effect pending appeal to the Superior Court in lieu of posting a new bond in connection with the appeal, or in the alternative the judge of the municipal court may discharge any such bail or recognizance and release the person on his own recognizance.  

    L.1974,c.93,s.1; amended 1991,c.91,s.134.  

2A:162-12  Crimes with bail restriction; posting of bail.
  
	1. a. As used in this section:

	"Crime with bail restrictions" means a crime of the first or second degree charged under any of the following sections:
 
	(1)	Murder						2C:11-3.
 
	(2)	Manslaughter					2C:11-4.
 
	(3)	Kidnapping					2C:13-1.
 
	(4)	Sexual Assault					2C:14-2.
 
	(5)	Robbery					2C:15-1.
 
	(6)	Carjacking		P.L.1993, c.221, s.1 (C.2C:15-2).
 
	(7)	Arson and Related Offenses			2C:17-1.
 
	(8)	Causing or Risking Widespread 
 		Injury or Damage				2C:17-2.
 
	(9)	Burglary					2C:18-2.
 
	(10) Theft by Extortion				2C:20-5.
 
	(11) Endangering the Welfare of Children		2C:24-4.
 
	(12) Resisting Arrest; Eluding Officer		2C:29-2.
 
	(13) Escape						2C:29-5.
 
	(14) Corrupting or Influencing a Jury			2C:29-8.
 
	(15) Possession of Weapons for Unlawful Purposes	2C:39-4.
 
	(16) Weapons Training for Illegal Activities
 
					P.L.1983, c.229, s.1 (C.2C:39-14).
 
	(17) Soliciting or Recruiting Gang Members
 
					P.L.1999, c.160, s.1 (C.2C:33-28).
 
	(18) Human Trafficking	P.L.2005, c.77, s.1 (C.2C:13-8).
 
	"Crime with bail restrictions" also includes any first or second degree drug-related crimes under chapter 35 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes and any first or second degree racketeering crimes under chapter 41 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes.
 
	"Crime with bail restrictions" also includes any crime or offense involving domestic violence, as defined in subsection a. of section 3 of P.L.1991, c.261 (C.2C:25-19), where the defendant was subject to a temporary or permanent restraining order issued pursuant to the provisions of the "Prevention of Domestic Violence Act of 1991," P.L.1991, c.261 (C.2C:25-17 et al.) and is charged with a crime committed against a person protected under the order or where the defendant is charged with contempt pursuant to N.J.S.2C:29-9. 
 
	b.	Subject to the provisions of subsection c. of this section, a person charged with a crime with bail restrictions may post the required amount of bail only in the form of:
 
	(1)	Full cash;
 
	(2)	A surety bond executed by a corporation authorized under chapter 31 of Title 17 of the Revised Statutes; or
 
	(3)	A bail bond secured by real property situated in this State with an unencumbered equity equal to the amount of bail undertaken plus $20,000.
 
	c.	There shall be a presumption in favor of the court designating the posting of full United States currency cash bail to the exclusion of other forms of bail when a defendant is charged with an offense as set forth in subsection a. of this section and:
 
	(1)	has two other indictable cases pending at the time of the arrest; or
 
	(2)	has two prior convictions for a first or second degree crime or for a violation of section 1 of P.L.1987, c.101 (C.2C:35-7) or any combination thereof; or
 
	(3)	has one prior conviction for murder, aggravated manslaughter, aggravated sexual assault, kidnapping or bail jumping; or
 
	(4)	was on parole at the time of the arrest; or
 
	(5)	was subject to a temporary or permanent restraining order issued pursuant to the provisions of the "Prevention of Domestic Violence Act of 1991," P.L.1991, c.261 (C.2C:25-17 et al.), was charged with a crime committed against a person protected under that order, including a charge of contempt pursuant to N.J.S.2C:29-9, and either: (a) is charged with commission of a domestic violence crime that resulted in serious bodily injury to the victim; or (b) has at least one prior conviction for a crime or offense involving domestic violence against the same victim or has previously violated a final restraining order protecting the same victim, 
 
	unless the court finds on the record that another form of bail authorized in subsection b. of this section will ensure the defendant's presence in court when required.
 
	d.	When bail is posted in the form of a bail bond secured by real property, the owner of the real property, whether the person is admitted to bail or a surety, shall also file an affidavit containing:
 
	(1)	A legal description of the real property;
 
	(2)	A description of each encumbrance on the real property;
 
	(3)	The market value of the unencumbered equity owned by the affiant as determined in a full appraisal conducted by an appraiser licensed by the State of New Jersey; and
 
	(4)	A statement that the affiant is the sole owner of the unencumbered equity.
 
	e.	Nothing herein is intended to preclude a court from releasing a person on the person's own recognizance when the court determines that such person is deserving.
 
	L.1994, c.144,s .1; amended 2003, c.177; 2007, c.46, s.1; 2011, c.138, s.1; 2013, c.51, s.15.

2A:162-13  Source of bail information required under penalty of law; bail sufficiency hearings.
 	1. a. When a person charged with  a crime with bail restrictions, as defined in subsection a. of section 1 of P.L.1994, c.144 (C.2A:162-12), posts cash bail or secures a bail bond, the person, no later than the time of posting bail or proffering the surety or bail bond, shall provide to the prosecutor, on a form promulgated by the Attorney General, relevant information under penalty of perjury about the obligor, indemnifier or person posting cash bail, the security offered, and the source of any money or property used to post the cash bail or secure the surety or bail bond, as the case may be.  This required information shall include, but not be limited to, the defendant's employment history, the names and addresses of any persons who contributed money or pledged security for the proffered bail or toward a surety bond, the amount, nature and timing of such contributions, and the relationship to the defendant of any such persons contributing resources.  Bail may not be accepted from a person subject to the requirements of this subsection until the prosecutor is provided the completed form required by this subsection.

	b.	When a person charged with an offense posts cash bail or secures a bail bond in any amount, the court may, upon the request of the prosecutor,  conduct an inquiry to determine the reliability of the obligor or person posting cash bail, the value and sufficiency of any security offered, the relationship of the obligor or person posting cash bail to the defendant and the defendant's interest in ensuring that the bail is not forfeited, and whether the funds used to post the cash bail or secure the bail bond were acquired as a result of criminal or unlawful conduct.  When the offense charged against such person is a crime with bail restrictions as defined in subsection a. of section 1 of P.L.1994, c.144 (C.2A:162-12), the court shall, upon the request of the prosecutor, conduct an inquiry pursuant to the provisions of this subsection.  The court may examine, under oath or otherwise, any person who may possess relevant information, and may inquire into any matter appropriate to its determination, including, but not limited to, the following:

	(1)	The character, background and reputation of the person posting cash bail;

	(2)	The relationship of the person posting cash bail or securing a bail bond to the defendant;

	(3)	The source of any money posted as cash bail and whether any such money constitutes the fruits of criminal or unlawful conduct;

	(4)	The character, background and reputation of any person who has indemnified or agreed to indemnify an obligor on the bond;

	(5)	The character, background and reputation of any obligor, or, in the case of a surety bond, the qualifications of the surety and its executing agent;

	(6)	The source of any money or property deposited by any obligor as security and whether such money or property constitutes the fruits of criminal or unlawful conduct; and

	(7)	The source of any money or property delivered or agreed to be delivered by any obligor as indemnification on the bond and whether such money or property constitutes the fruits of criminal or unlawful conduct.

	At the conclusion of the inquiry, the court shall issue an order either approving or disapproving the bail.  The court shall not issue an order approving the bail unless it is satisfied that the evidence adduced in the inquiry establishes the reliability of the source of the funds used to post bail or security offered, that the relationship of the obligor or person posting cash bail is sufficient to ensure the defendant's presence in court when required, and that the funds used to post cash bail or secure a bail bond were not acquired as a result of criminal or unlawful conduct.

	L.2003,c.213,s.1; amended 2007, c.46, s.2.

2A:162-14  Procedure; governed by court rules.

	2.	The procedure to determine the sufficiency of bail shall be governed by rules adopted by the Supreme Court.

	L.2003,c.213,s.2.

2A:162-15  Liberal construction.
  
	1.	The provisions of sections 1 through 11 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-15 et seq.) shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purpose of primarily relying upon pretrial release by non-monetary means to reasonably assure an eligible defendant's appearance in court when required, the protection of the safety of any other person or the community, that the eligible defendant will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process, and that the eligible defendant will comply with all conditions of release, while authorizing the court, upon motion of a prosecutor, to order pretrial detention of the eligible defendant when it finds clear and convincing evidence that no condition or combination of conditions can reasonably assure the effectuation of these goals. Monetary bail may be set for an eligible defendant only when it is determined that no other conditions of release will reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required. 
 
	For the purposes of sections 1 through 11 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-15 et seq.), "eligible defendant" shall mean a person for whom a complaint-warrant is issued for an initial charge involving an indictable offense or a disorderly persons offense unless otherwise provided in sections 1 through 11 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-15 et seq.).
 
	L.2014, c.31, s.1.

2A:162-16  Detaining eligible defendant during preparation of risk assessment prior to trial.
	2. a. An eligible defendant, following the issuance of a complaint-warrant pursuant to the conditions set forth under subsection c. of this section, shall be temporarily detained to allow the Pretrial Services Program to prepare a risk assessment with recommendations on conditions of release pursuant to section 11 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-25) and for the court to issue a pretrial release decision.
 
	b. (1) Except as otherwise provided under sections 4 and 5 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-18 and C.2A:162-19) the court, pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-17), shall make a pretrial release decision for the eligible defendant without unnecessary delay, but in no case later than 48 hours after the eligible defendant's commitment to jail.  The court shall consider the Pretrial Services Program's risk assessment and recommendations on conditions of release before making any pretrial release decision for the eligible defendant, provided, however, that upon request of the prosecutor, the court may take additional time than established pursuant to this section if the eligible defendant is charged with any crime or offense involving the use or possession of a firearm, but the additional time provided for shall not exceed such time as is reasonably necessary for a firearms ballistic analysis to be conducted and immediately provided to the court and in no event shall exceed seven days.
 
	(2)	After considering all the circumstances, the Pretrial Services Program's risk assessment and recommendations on conditions of release, and any information that may be provided by a prosecutor or the eligible defendant, the court shall order that the eligible defendant be: 
 
	(a)	released on the eligible defendant's own recognizance or on execution of an unsecured appearance bond; or 
 
	(b)	released on a non-monetary condition or conditions, with the condition or conditions being the least restrictive condition or combination of conditions that the court determines will reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required, the protection of the safety of any other person or the community, or that the eligible defendant will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process; or 
 
	(c)	released on monetary bail, other than an unsecured appearance bond, to reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required, or a combination of monetary bail and non-monetary conditions, to reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required, the protection of the safety of any other person or the community, or that the eligible defendant will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process; or
 
	(d)	detained in jail, upon motion of the prosecutor, pending a pretrial detention hearing pursuant to sections 4 and 5 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-18 and C.2A:162-19).
 
	c.	A law enforcement officer shall not apply for a complaint-warrant except in accordance with guidelines issued by the Attorney General, and a court may not issue a complaint-warrant except as may be authorized by the Rules of Court.
 
	d. (1) A defendant who is charged on a complaint-summons shall be released from custody and shall not be subject to the provisions of sections 1 through 11 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-15 et seq.).
 
	(2) (a) If a defendant who was released from custody after being charged on a complaint-summons pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection is subsequently arrested on a warrant for failure to appear in court when required, that defendant shall be eligible for release on personal recognizance or release on bail by sufficient sureties at the discretion of the court.  If monetary bail was not set when an arrest warrant for the defendant was issued, the defendant shall have monetary bail set without unnecessary delay, but in no case later than 12 hours after arrest.  Pursuant to the Rules of Court, if the defendant is unable to post monetary bail, the defendant shall have that bail reviewed promptly and may file an application with the court seeking a bail reduction, which shall be heard in an expedited manner.
 
	(b)	If the defendant fails to post the required monetary bail set by the court pursuant to this paragraph, the defendant may not be detained on the charge or charges contained in the complaint-summons beyond the maximum term of incarceration or term of probation supervision for the offense or offenses charged.
 
	L.2014, c.31, s.2; amended 2025, c.256, s.1.

2A:162-17  Consideration for pretrial release.
	3.	Except as otherwise provided under sections 4 and 5 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-18 and C.2A:162-19) concerning a hearing on pretrial detention, a court shall make, pursuant to this section, a pretrial release decision for an eligible defendant without unnecessary delay, but in no case later than 48 hours after the eligible defendant's commitment to jail, provided, however, that upon request of the prosecutor, the court may take additional time than established pursuant to this section if the eligible defendant is charged with any crime or offense involving the use or possession of a firearm, but the additional time provided for shall not exceed such time as is reasonably necessary for a firearms ballistic analysis to be conducted and immediately provided to the court and in no event shall exceed seven days.
 
	a.	Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the court shall order the pretrial release of the eligible defendant on personal recognizance or on the execution of an unsecured appearance bond when, after considering all the circumstances, the Pretrial Services Program's risk assessment and recommendations on conditions of release prepared pursuant to section 11 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-25), and any information that may be provided by a prosecutor or the eligible defendant, the court finds that the release would reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required, the protection of the safety of any other person or the community, and that the eligible defendant will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process.  The presumption of pretrial release pursuant to this subsection shall not apply to an eligible defendant charged with theft of or unlawful taking of a motor vehicle or receiving stolen property where the property involved is a motor vehicle if on one or more prior and separate occasions within the 90-day-period preceding the charge, the defendant was arrested for or convicted of theft of or unlawful taking of a motor vehicle; receiving stolen property where the property involved is a motor vehicle; or a crime under any statute of the United States, this State, or any other state that is substantially equivalent to any of the crimes enumerated in this subsection.
 
	b. (1) If the court does not find, after consideration, that the release described in subsection a. of this section will reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required, the protection of the safety of any other person or the community, and that the eligible defendant will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process, the court may order the pretrial release of the eligible defendant subject to the following: 
 
	(a) the eligible defendant shall not commit any offense during the period of release; 
 
	(b) the eligible defendant shall avoid all contact with an alleged victim of the crime; 
 
	(c) the eligible defendant shall avoid all contact with all witnesses who may testify concerning the offense that are named in the document authorizing the eligible defendant's release or in a subsequent court order; and
 
	(d) any one or more non-monetary conditions as set forth in paragraph (2) of this subsection.
 
	(2) The non-monetary condition or conditions of a pretrial release ordered by the court pursuant to this paragraph shall be the least restrictive condition, or combination of conditions, that the court determines will reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required, the protection of the safety of any other person or the community, and that the eligible defendant will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process, which may include that the eligible defendant:
 
	(a) remain in the custody of a designated person, who agrees to assume supervision and to report any violation of a release condition to the court, if the designated person is able to reasonably assure the court that the eligible defendant will appear in court when required, will not pose a danger to the safety of any other person or the community and will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process;
 
	(b) maintain employment or, if unemployed, actively seek employment;
 
	(c) maintain or commence an educational program;
 
	(d) abide by specified restrictions on personal associations, place of abode, or travel;
 
	(e) report on a regular basis to a designated law enforcement agency, or other agency, or pretrial services program;
 
	(f) comply with a specified curfew;
 
	(g) refrain from possessing a firearm, destructive device, or other dangerous weapon;
 
	(h) refrain from excessive use of alcohol or any unlawful use of a narcotic drug or other controlled substance without a prescription by a licensed medical practitioner;
 
	(i) undergo available medical, psychological, or psychiatric treatment, including treatment for drug or alcohol dependency, and remain in a specified institution if required for that purpose;
 
	(j) return to custody for specified hours following release for employment, schooling, or other limited purposes; 
 
	(k) be placed in a pretrial home supervision capacity with or without the use of an approved electronic monitoring device.  The court may order the eligible defendant to pay all or a portion of the costs of the electronic monitoring, but the court may waive the payment for an eligible defendant who is indigent and who has demonstrated to the court an inability to pay all or a portion of the costs; or
 
	(l) satisfy any other condition that is necessary to reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required, the protection of the safety of any other person or the community, and that the eligible defendant will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process, which shall not include any prohibition or restriction concerning manufacturing, distributing, or dispensing, or possessing or having under control with intent to manufacture, distribute, or dispense, marijuana or hashish in violation of paragraph (12) of subsection b. of N.J.S.2C:35-5, or possession of marijuana or hashish in violation of paragraph (3) of subsection a. of N.J.S.2C:35-10.
 
	c. (1) If the court does not find, after consideration, that the release described in subsection a. or b. of this section will reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required, the court may order the pretrial release of the eligible defendant on monetary bail, other than an unsecured appearance bond.  The court may only impose monetary bail pursuant to this subsection to reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance.  The court shall not impose the monetary bail to reasonably assure the protection of the safety of any other person or the community or that the eligible defendant will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process or for the purpose of preventing the release of the eligible defendant.
 
	(2) If the eligible defendant is unable to post the monetary bail imposed by the court pursuant to this subsection, and for that reason remains detained in jail, the provisions of section 8 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-22) shall apply to the eligible defendant.
 
	d. (1) If the court does not find, after consideration, that the release described in subsection a., b., or c. will reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required, the protection of the safety of any other person or the community, and that the eligible defendant will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process, the court may order the pretrial release of the eligible defendant using a combination of non-monetary conditions as set forth in subsection b. of this section, and monetary bail as set forth in subsection c. of this section.
 
	(2) If the eligible defendant is unable to post the monetary bail imposed by the court in combination with non-monetary conditions pursuant to this subsection, and for that reason remains detained in jail, the provisions of section 8 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-22) shall apply to the eligible defendant.
 
	e.	For purposes of the court's consideration for pretrial release described in this section, with respect to whether the particular method of release will reasonably assure that the eligible defendant will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process, this reasonable assurance may be deemed to exist if the prosecutor does not provide the court with information relevant to the risk of whether the eligible defendant will obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process.
 
	L.2014, c.31, s.3; amended 2021, c.19, s.7; 2023, c.103; 2025, c.256, s.2.

2A:162-18 Pretrial detention for certain eligible defendants ordered by court; appeal.
 
 	4. a. (1) The court may order, before trial, the detention of an eligible defendant charged with any crime, or any offense involving domestic violence as defined in subsection a. of section 3 of P.L.1991, c.261 (C.2C:25-19), enumerated in subsection a. of section 5 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-19), if the prosecutor seeks the pretrial detention of the eligible defendant under section 5 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-19) and after a hearing pursuant to  that section the court finds clear and convincing evidence that no amount of monetary bail, non-monetary conditions of pretrial release or combination of monetary bail and conditions would reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required, the protection of the safety of any other person or the community, and that the eligible defendant will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process. The court may also order the pretrial detention of an eligible defendant when the prosecutor moves for a pretrial detention hearing and the eligible defendant fails to rebut a presumption of pretrial detention that may be established for the crimes enumerated under subsection b. of section 5 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-19).
 
	(2)	For purposes of ordering the pretrial detention of an eligible defendant pursuant to this section and section 5 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-19) or pursuant to section 10 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-24), when determining whether no amount of monetary bail, non-monetary conditions or combination of monetary bail and conditions would reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required, the protection of the safety of any other person or the community, or that the eligible defendant will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process, the court may consider the amount of monetary bail only with respect to whether it will, by itself or in combination with non-monetary conditions, reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required.
 
	b.	Regarding the pretrial detention hearing moved for by the prosecutor, except for when an eligible defendant is charged with a crime set forth under paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection b. of section 5 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-19), there shall be a rebuttable presumption that some amount of monetary bail, non-monetary conditions of pretrial release or combination of monetary bail and conditions would reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required, the protection of the safety of any other person or the community, and that the eligible defendant will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process. 
 
	c.	An eligible defendant may appeal an order of pretrial detention pursuant to the Rules of Court.  The appeal shall be heard in an expedited manner.  The eligible defendant shall be detained pending the disposition of the appeal.
 
	d.	If the court does not order the pretrial detention of an eligible defendant at the conclusion of the pretrial detention hearing under this section and section 5 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-19), the court shall order the release of the eligible defendant pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-17).
 
	L.2014, c.31, s.4.

2A:162-19  Pretrial detention for certain eligible defendants requested by prosecutor.
	5. a. A prosecutor may file a motion with the court at any time, including any time before or after an eligible defendant's release pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-17), seeking the pretrial detention of an eligible defendant for:
 
	(1) any crime of the first or second degree enumerated under subsection d. of section 2 of P.L.1997, c.117 (C.2C:43-7.2);
 
	(2) any crime for which the eligible defendant would be subject to an ordinary or extended term of life imprisonment;
 
	(3) any crime if the eligible defendant has been convicted of two or more offenses under paragraph (1) or (2) of this subsection;
 
	(4) any crime enumerated under paragraph (2) of subsection b. of section 2 of P.L.1994, c.133 (C.2C:7-2) or crime involving human trafficking pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2005, c.77 (C.2C:13-8) or P.L.2013, c.51 (C.52:17B-237 et al.) when the victim is a minor, or the crime of endangering the welfare of a child under N.J.S.2C:24-4;
 
	(5) any crime enumerated under subsection c. of N.J.S.2C:43-6;
 
	(6) any crime or offense involving domestic violence as defined in subsection a. of section 3 of P.L.1991, c.261 (C.2C:25-19); or
 
	(7) any other crime for which the prosecutor believes there is a serious risk that:
 
	(a) the eligible defendant will not appear in court as required;
 
	(b) the eligible defendant will pose a danger to any other person or the community; or
 
	(c) the eligible defendant will obstruct or attempt to obstruct justice, or threaten, injure, or intimidate, or attempt to threaten, injure or intimidate, a prospective witness or juror.
 
	b.	When a motion for pretrial detention is filed pursuant to subsection a. of this section, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the eligible defendant shall be detained pending trial because no amount of monetary bail, non-monetary condition or combination of monetary bail and conditions would reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required, the protection of the safety of any other person or the community, and that the eligible defendant will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process, if the court finds probable cause that the eligible defendant:
 
	(1) committed murder pursuant to N.J.S.2C:11-3; or
 
	(2) committed any crime for which the eligible defendant would be subject to an ordinary or extended term of life imprisonment.
 
	c.	A court shall hold a hearing to determine whether any amount of monetary bail or non-monetary conditions or combination of monetary bail and conditions, including those set forth under subsection b. of section 3 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-17) will reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required, the protection of the safety of any other person or the community, and that the eligible defendant will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process.
 
	d. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the pretrial detention hearing shall be held no later than the eligible defendant's first appearance unless the eligible defendant, or the prosecutor, seeks a continuance.  If a prosecutor files a motion for pretrial detention after the eligible defendant's first appearance has taken place or if no first appearance is required, the court shall schedule the pretrial detention hearing to take place within three working days of the date on which the prosecutor's motion was filed, unless the prosecutor or the eligible defendant seeks a continuance.  Except for good cause, a continuance on motion of the eligible defendant may not exceed five days, not including any intermediate Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.  Except for good cause, a continuance on motion of the prosecutor may not exceed three days, not including any intermediate Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
 
	(2) Upon the filing of a motion by the prosecutor seeking the pretrial detention of the eligible defendant and during any continuance that may be granted by the court, the eligible defendant shall be detained in jail, unless the eligible defendant was previously released from custody before trial, in which case the court shall issue a notice to appear to compel the appearance of the eligible defendant at the detention hearing.  The court, on motion of the prosecutor or sua sponte, may order that, while in custody, an eligible defendant who appears to be a drug-dependent person receive an assessment to determine whether that eligible defendant is drug-dependent.
 
	e. (1) At the pretrial detention hearing, the eligible defendant has the right to be represented by counsel, and, if financially unable to obtain adequate representation, to have counsel appointed.  The eligible defendant shall be afforded an opportunity to testify, to present witnesses, to cross-examine witnesses who appear at the hearing, and to present information by proffer or otherwise.  The rules concerning admissibility of evidence in criminal trials shall not apply to the presentation and consideration of information at the hearing.
 
	(2) In pretrial detention proceedings for which there is no indictment, the prosecutor shall establish probable cause that the eligible defendant committed the predicate offense.  A presumption of pretrial detention as provided in subsection b. of this section may be rebutted by proof provided by the eligible defendant, the prosecutor, or from other materials submitted to the court.  The standard of proof for a rebuttal of the presumption of pretrial detention shall be a preponderance of the evidence.  If proof cannot be established to rebut the presumption, the court may order the eligible defendant's pretrial detention.  If the presumption is rebutted by sufficient proof, the prosecutor shall have the opportunity to establish that the grounds for pretrial detention exist pursuant to this section.
 
	(3) Except when an eligible defendant has failed to rebut a presumption of pretrial detention pursuant to subsection b. of this section, the court's finding to support an order of pretrial detention pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-18) that no amount of monetary bail, non-monetary conditions or combination of monetary bail and conditions will reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required, the protection of the safety of any other person or the community, and that the eligible defendant will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process shall be supported by clear and convincing evidence.
 
	f.	The hearing may be reopened, before or after a determination by the court, at any time before trial, if the court finds that information exists that was not known to the prosecutor or the eligible defendant at the time of the hearing and that has a material bearing on the issue of whether there are conditions of release that will reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required, the protection of the safety of any other person or the community, or that the eligible defendant will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process.
 
	g.	When a motion for pretrial detention is filed pursuant to subsection a. of this section, a pretrial recommendation of no release pursuant to subsection f. of section 6 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-20) may constitute prima facie evidence to overcome the presumption of release as set forth in subsection b. of section 4 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-18), if the court finds probable cause that the eligible defendant committed any crime for which the eligible defendant would be subject to a mandatory term of imprisonment pursuant to subsection c. of N.J.S.2C:43-6 for a crime involving the use or possession of a firearm other than a violation of:
 
	(1) subsection a. or d. of N.J.S.2C:39-3;
 
	(2) paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection a. of N.J.S.2C:39-4;
 
	(3) subsection a. of section 1 of P.L. 1998, c.26 (C.2C:39-4.1); or
 
	(4) paragraph (1) of subsection b. or paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection c. of N.J.S.2C:39-5.
 
	L.2014, c.31, s.5; amended 2022, c.43, s.1.

2A:162-20  Information considered in determination of pretrial detention.
	6.	In determining in a pretrial detention hearing whether no amount of monetary bail, non-monetary conditions or combination of monetary bail and conditions would reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required, the protection of the safety of any other person or the community, or that the eligible defendant will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process, the court may take into account information concerning:
 
	a.	The nature and circumstances of the offense charged;
 
	b.	The weight of the evidence against the eligible defendant, except that the court may consider the admissibility of any evidence sought to be excluded;
 
	c.	The history and characteristics of the eligible defendant, including:
 
	(1) the eligible defendant's character, physical and mental condition, family ties, employment, financial resources, length of residence in the community, community ties, past conduct, history relating to drug or alcohol abuse, criminal history, and record concerning appearances at court proceedings, except with respect to these factors, the court shall not consider manufacturing, distributing, or dispensing, or possessing or having under control with intent to manufacture, distribute, or dispense, marijuana or hashish in violation of paragraph (12) of subsection b. of N.J.S.2C:35-5, or possession of marijuana or hashish in violation of paragraph (3) of subsection a. of N.J.S.2C:35-10; and
 
	(2) whether, at the time of the current offense or arrest, the eligible defendant was on probation, parole, or on other release pending trial, sentencing, appeal, or completion of sentence for an offense under federal law, or the law of this or any other state;
 
	d.	The nature and seriousness of the danger to any other person or the community that would be posed by the eligible defendant's release, if applicable;
 
	e.	The nature and seriousness of the risk of obstructing or attempting to obstruct the criminal justice process that would be posed by the eligible defendant's release, if applicable; and
 
	f.	The release recommendation of the pretrial services program obtained using a risk assessment instrument under section 11 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-25).  Pretrial services shall recommend no release when a defendant has been charged with any crime for which the eligible defendant would be subject to a mandatory term of imprisonment pursuant to subsection c. of N.J.S.2C:43-6 for a crime involving the use or possession of a firearm other than a violation of:
 
	(1) subsection a. or d. of N.J.S.2C:39-3;
 
	(2) paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection a. of N.J.S.2C:39-4;
 
	(3) subsection a. of section 1 of P.L. 1998, c.26 (C.2C:39-4.1); or
 
	(4) paragraph (1) of subsection b. or paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection c. of N.J.S.2C:39-5.
 
	L.2014, c.31, s.6; amended 2021, c.19, s.8; 2022, c.43, s.2.

2A:162-21  Contents of pretrial detention order; temporary release.
 
 	7. a. In a pretrial detention order issued pursuant to sections 4 and 5 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-18 and C.2A:162-19), the court shall:
 
	(1)	include written findings of fact and a written statement of the reasons for the detention; and
 
	(2)	direct that the eligible defendant be afforded reasonable opportunity for private consultation with counsel.
 
	b.	The court may, by subsequent order, permit the temporary release of the eligible defendant subject to appropriate restrictive conditions, which may include but shall not be limited to pretrial supervision, to the extent that the court determines the release to be necessary for preparation of the eligible defendant's defense or for another compelling reason.
 
	L.2014, c.31, s.7.

2A:162-22  Eligible defendant subject to pretrial detention, release; conditions.
  
	8. a. Concerning an eligible defendant subject to pretrial detention as ordered by a court pursuant to sections 4 and 5 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-18 and C.2A:162-19) or an eligible defendant who is detained in jail due to the inability to post the monetary bail imposed by the court pursuant to subsection c. or d. of section 3 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-17):
 
	(1) (a) The eligible defendant shall not remain detained in jail for more than 90 days, not counting excludable time for reasonable delays as set forth in subsection b. of this section, prior to the return of an indictment.  If the eligible defendant is not indicted within that period of time, the eligible defendant shall be released from jail unless, on motion of the prosecutor, the court finds that a substantial and unjustifiable risk to the safety of any other person or the community or the obstruction of the criminal justice process would result from the eligible defendant's release from custody, so that no appropriate conditions for the eligible defendant's release could reasonably address that risk, and also finds that the failure to indict the eligible defendant in accordance with the time requirement set forth in this subparagraph was not due to unreasonable delay by the prosecutor.  If the court finds that a substantial and unjustifiable risk to the safety of any other person or the community or the obstruction of the criminal justice process would result, and also finds that the failure to indict the eligible defendant in accordance with the time requirement set forth in this subparagraph was not due to unreasonable delay by the prosecutor, the court may allocate an additional period of time, not to exceed 45 days, in which the return of an indictment shall occur.  Notwithstanding the court's previous findings for ordering the eligible defendant's pretrial detention, or if the court currently does not find a substantial and unjustifiable risk or finds unreasonable delay by the prosecutor as described in this subparagraph, the court shall order the release of the eligible defendant pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-17). 
 
	(b)	If the eligible defendant is charged or indicted on another matter resulting in the eligible defendant's pretrial detention, the time calculations set forth in subparagraph (a) of this paragraph for each matter shall run independently.
 
	(2) (a) An eligible defendant who has been indicted shall not remain detained in jail for more than 180 days on that charge following the return or unsealing of the indictment, whichever is later, not counting excludable time for reasonable delays as set forth in subsection b. of this section, before commencement of the trial.  If the trial does not commence within that period of time, the eligible defendant shall be released from jail unless, on motion of the prosecutor, the court finds that a substantial and unjustifiable risk to the safety of any other person or the community or the obstruction of the criminal justice process would result from the eligible defendant's release from custody, so that no appropriate conditions for the eligible defendant's release could reasonably address that risk, and also finds that the failure to commence trial in accordance with the time requirement set forth in this subparagraph was not due to unreasonable delay by the prosecutor.  If the court finds that a substantial and unjustifiable risk to the safety of any other person or the community or the obstruction of the criminal justice process would result, and also finds that the failure to commence trial in accordance with the time requirement set forth in this subparagraph was not due to unreasonable delay by the prosecutor, the court may allocate an additional period of time in which the eligible defendant's trial shall commence. Notwithstanding the court's previous findings for ordering the eligible defendant's pretrial detention, or if the court currently does not find a substantial and unjustifiable risk or finds unreasonable delay by the prosecutor as described in this subparagraph, the court shall order the release of the eligible defendant pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-17).  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, an eligible defendant shall be released from jail pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-17) after a release hearing if, two years after the court's issuance of the pretrial detention order for the eligible defendant, excluding any delays attributable to the eligible defendant, the prosecutor is not ready to proceed to voir dire or to opening argument, or to the hearing of any motions that had been reserved for the time of trial.
 
	(b) (i) For the purposes of this paragraph, a trial is considered to have commenced when the court determines that the parties are present and directs them to proceed to voir dire or to opening argument, or to the hearing of any motions that had been reserved for the time of trial. 
 
	(ii)	The return of a superseding indictment against the eligible defendant shall extend the time for the trial to commence.
 
	(iii) If an indictment is dismissed without prejudice upon motion of the eligible defendant for any reason, and a subsequent indictment is returned, the time for trial shall begin running from the date of the return of the subsequent indictment.
 
	(iv)	A trial ordered after a mistrial or upon a motion for a new trial shall commence within 120 days of the entry of the order of the court.  A trial ordered upon the reversal of a judgment by any appellate court shall commence within 120 days of the service of that court's trial mandate. 
 
	(c)	If the eligible defendant is indicted on another matter resulting in the eligible defendant's pretrial detention, the time calculations set forth in this paragraph for each matter shall run independently.
 
	b. (1) The following periods shall be excluded in computing the time in which a case shall be indicted or tried:
 
	(a)	The time resulting from an examination and hearing on competency and the period during which the eligible defendant is incompetent to stand trial or incapacitated;
 
	(b)	The time from the filing to the disposition of an eligible defendant's application for supervisory treatment pursuant to N.J.S.2C:36A-1 or N.J.S.2C:43-12 et seq., special probation pursuant to N.J.S.2C:35-14, drug or alcohol treatment as a condition of probation pursuant to N.J.S.2C:45-1, or other pretrial treatment or supervisory program;
 
	(c)	The time from the filing to the final disposition of a motion made before trial by the prosecutor or the eligible defendant;
 
	(d)	The time resulting from a continuance granted, in the court's discretion, at the eligible defendant's request or at the request of both the eligible defendant and the prosecutor;
 
	(e)	The time resulting from the detention of an eligible defendant in another jurisdiction provided the prosecutor has been diligent and has made reasonable efforts to obtain the eligible defendant's presence;
 
	(f)	The time resulting from exceptional circumstances including, but not limited to, a natural disaster, the unavoidable unavailability of an eligible defendant, material witness or other evidence, when there is a reasonable expectation that the eligible defendant, witness or evidence will become available in the near future;
 
	(g)	On motion of the prosecutor, the delay resulting when the court finds that the case is complex due to the number of defendants or the nature of the prosecution;
 
	(h)	The time resulting from a severance of codefendants when that severance permits only one trial to commence within the time period for trial set forth in this section;
 
	(i)	The time resulting from an eligible defendant's failure to appear for a court proceeding;
 
	(j)	The time resulting from a disqualification or recusal of a judge;
 
	(k)	The time resulting from a failure by the eligible defendant to provide timely and complete discovery;
 
	(l) The time for other periods of delay not specifically enumerated if the court finds good cause for the delay; and
 
	(m)	Any other time otherwise required by statute.
 
	(2)	The failure by the prosecutor to provide timely and complete discovery shall not be considered excludable time unless the discovery only became available after the time set for discovery.
 
	L.2014, c.31, s.8.

2A:162-23  Notification to eligible defendant by court, conditions of release.
 
 	9. a. (1) If an eligible defendant is released from jail pursuant to section 3 or 8 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-17 or C.2A:162-22), the court shall, in the document authorizing the eligible defendant's release, notify the eligible defendant of: 
 
	(a)	all the conditions, if any, to which the release is subject, in a manner sufficiently clear and specific to serve as a guide for the eligible defendant's conduct; and
 
	(b)	the penalties for and other consequences of violating a condition of release, which may include the immediate issuance of a warrant for the eligible defendant's arrest.
 
	The failure of the court to notify the eligible defendant of any penalty or consequence for violating a condition of release as required by this subparagraph shall not preclude any remedy authorized under the law for any violation committed by the eligible defendant.
 
	(2)	If the court enters an order that is contrary to a recommendation made in a risk assessment when determining a method of release or setting release conditions, the court shall provide an explanation in the document that authorizes the eligible defendant's release.
 
	b.	Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, an eligible defendant who is released from jail on personal recognizance or subject only to non-monetary conditions pursuant to section 3 or 8 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-17 or C.2A:162-22) shall not be assessed any fee or other monetary assessment related to processing the eligible defendant's release.
 
	L.2014, c.31, s.9.

2A:162-24  Violation of condition of release, motion by prosecutor.
 	10. a. Upon motion of a prosecutor, when an eligible defendant is released from custody before trial pursuant to section 3 or 8 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-17 or C.2A:162-22), the court, upon a finding that the eligible defendant while on release has violated a restraining order or condition of release, or upon a finding of probable cause to believe that the eligible defendant has committed a new crime while on release, may not revoke the eligible defendant's release and order that the eligible defendant be detained pending trial unless the court, after considering all relevant circumstances including but not limited to the nature and seriousness of the violation or criminal act committed, finds clear and convincing evidence that no monetary bail, non-monetary conditions of release or combination of monetary bail and conditions would reasonably assure the eligible defendant's appearance in court when required, the protection of the safety of any other person or the community, or that the eligible defendant will not obstruct or attempt to obstruct the criminal justice process.
 
	b.	A court shall not revoke an eligible defendant's release and order that the eligible defendant be detained pending trial based on manufacturing, distributing, or dispensing, or possessing or having under control with intent to manufacture, distribute, or dispense, marijuana or hashish in violation of paragraph (12) of subsection b. of N.J.S.2C:35-5, or possession of marijuana or hashish in violation of paragraph (3) of subsection a. of N.J.S.2C:35-10.
 
	L.2014, c.31, s.10; amended 2021, c.19, s.9.

2A:162-25  Statewide Pretrial Services Program; risk assessment instrument.
  	11. a. The Administrative Director of the Courts shall establish and maintain a Statewide Pretrial Services Program which shall provide pretrial services to effectuate the purposes of sections 1 through 11 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-15 et seq.).
 
	b.	The Pretrial Services Program shall, after an eligible defendant is temporarily detained pursuant to subsection a. of section 2 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-16) following the issuance of a complaint-warrant, conduct a risk assessment on that eligible defendant for the purpose of making recommendations to the court concerning an appropriate pretrial release decision, including whether the eligible defendant shall be: released on the eligible defendant's own personal recognizance or on execution of an unsecured appearance bond; released on a non-monetary condition or conditions as set forth under subsection b. of section 3 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-17); released on monetary bail, other than an unsecured appearance bond; released on a combination of monetary bail and non-monetary conditions set forth under section 3 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-17); or any other conditions necessary to effectuate the purposes of sections 1 through 11 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-15 et seq.).  The risk assessment shall be completed and presented to the court so that the court can, without unnecessary delay, but in no case later than 48 hours after the eligible defendant's commitment to jail, make a pretrial release decision on the eligible defendant pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-17). 
 
	c.	The pretrial risk assessment shall be conducted using a risk assessment instrument approved by the Administrative Director of the Courts that meets the requirements of this subsection.
 
	(1) (a) The approved risk assessment instrument shall be objective, standardized, and developed based on analysis of empirical data and risk factors relevant to the risk of failure to appear in court when required and the danger to the community while on pretrial release.  The risk assessment instrument shall not be required to include factors specifically pertaining to the risk for obstructing or attempting to obstruct the criminal justice process.
 
	(b)	The approved risk assessment instrument shall not consider a charge, including any charge of delinquency, conviction, or adjudication of delinquency, or civil penalty if the act was an unlawful act and not a crime or offense, based on a violation of any of the following, as risk factors relevant to the risk of failure to appear in court when required and the danger to the community while on pretrial release: manufacturing, distributing, or dispensing, or possessing or having under control with intent to manufacture, distribute, or dispense, marijuana or hashish in violation of paragraph (11) of subsection b. of N.J.S.2C:35-5,or a lesser amount of marijuana or hashish in violation of paragraph (12) of subsection b. of that section; or a violation of either of those paragraphs and a violation of subsection a. of section 1 of P.L.1987, c.101 (C.2C:35-7) or subsection a. of section 1 of P.L.1997, c.327 (C.2C:35-7.1) for distributing, dispensing, or possessing with intent to distribute or dispense, on or within 1,000 feet of any school property, or on or within 500 feet of the real property comprising a public housing facility, public park, or public building; or obtaining, possessing, using, being under the influence of, or failing to make lawful disposition of marijuana or hashish in violation of paragraph (3) or (4) of subsection a., or subsection b., or subsection c. of N.J.S.2C:35-10; or a violation involving marijuana or hashish as described herein and a violation of N.J.S.2C:36-2 for using or possessing with intent to use drug paraphernalia with that marijuana or hashish.
 
	(2)	The approved risk assessment instrument shall gather demographic information about the eligible defendant including, but not limited to, race, ethnicity, gender, financial resources, and socio-economic status.  Recommendations for pretrial release shall not be discriminatory based on race, ethnicity, gender, or socio-economic status.
 
	d.	In addition to the pretrial risk assessments made pursuant to this section, the Pretrial Services Program shall monitor appropriate eligible defendants released on conditions as ordered by the court.
 
	L.2014, c.31, s.11; amended 2021, c.19, s.10.

2A:162-26  Pretrial Services Program Review Commission.
 
 	20. a. There is hereby created, in but not of the Department of Law and Public Safety, a commission to be known as the Pretrial Services Program Review Commission, consisting of 17 members as follows: the Attorney General, or his designee; two members of the Senate, who shall each be of different political parties, appointed by the Senate President; two members of the General Assembly, who shall each be of different political parties, appointed by the Speaker of the General Assembly; the Administrative Director of the Courts, or his designee; two county prosecutors, appointed by the Governor based upon the recommendation of the County Prosecutors Association of the State of New Jersey; the Public Defender, or his designee; the following ex-officio public members: the President of the New Jersey State Conference of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the President of the Latino Action Network, the Executive Director of the American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey, the New Jersey State Director of the Drug Policy Alliance, and the President and Chief Executive Officer of the New Jersey Institute for Social Justice; and the following appointed public members: a county or municipal law enforcement officer appointed by the Governor, and two additional members having experience with, possessing a background in, or demonstrating a specialized knowledge of, the legal, policy, or social aspects of criminal justice pretrial release and detention programs, one appointed by the Governor upon the recommendation of the President of the Senate, and one appointed by the Governor upon the recommendation of the Speaker of the General Assembly.
 
	b. (1) The members' terms shall be as follows:
 
	(a)	The State and county ex-officio members shall serve during their elective or appointed term of office;
 
	(b)	The ex-officio public members shall serve during their term of office; and
 
	(c)	(i) The appointed public members shall each be appointed for a term of three years, except that of the two members with experience, background, or specialized knowledge of criminal justice pretrial release and detention programs first appointed, the member appointed by the Governor upon the recommendation of the Speaker of the General Assembly shall serve for a term of two years, and the member appointed by the Governor upon the recommendation of the Senate President shall serve for a term of three years.
 
	(ii) Each member appointed shall hold office for the term of appointment and until a successor shall have been appointed and qualified.
 
	(iii) Any vacancy in the appointed membership of the commission shall be filled by appointment in the same manner as the original appointment was made. 
 
	c. (1) The commission shall organize as soon as may be practicable upon the ex-officio designation and appointment of a majority of its authorized membership.  The members shall elect one of the members to serve as chair, and one to serve as vice-chair, and the chair may appoint a secretary, who need not be a member of the commission.
 
	(2)	The commission shall meet at the call of the chair, or when requested by a majority of its members, at those times and places within the State of New Jersey as the chair shall determine.  A majority of the commission's authorized membership shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business, including the adoption of any commission recommendations.
 
	d.	The members of the commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be eligible for reimbursement for necessary and reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties within the limits of funds appropriated or otherwise made available to the commission for its purposes.
 
	e.	The Division of Criminal Justice in the Department of Law and Public Safety shall, at the direction of the Attorney General, provide legal, stenographic, technical, clerical, and other staff and resource assistance to the commission, and additionally the commission may incur expenses as may be necessary in order to perform its duties within the limits of funds appropriated or otherwise made available to it for its purposes.
 
	f.	It shall be the duty of the commission to:
 
	(1)	Review the annual report of the Administrative Director of the Courts concerning the development and administration of the Statewide Pretrial Services Program that is submitted to the commission pursuant to subsection b. of section 17 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2B:1-11);
 
	(2)	Examine the existing law concerning pretrial release and detention established by sections 1 through 11 of P.L.2014, c.31 (C.2A:162-15 et seq.); 
 
	(3)	Research criminal justice pretrial release and detention programs from other states and jurisdictions; and 
 
	(4)	Make recommendations for legislation related to paragraphs (1) through (3) of this subsection.
 
	g.	The commission shall report annually to the Governor, to the Legislature pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), and to the Supreme Court, its activities, as well as its findings and recommendations, if any, for legislation.
 
	L.2014, c.31, s.20.
 
2A:163-1.  Compensation of counsel assigned in murder cases
    Where counsel assigned by the court to represent a defendant in a murder case has been allowed compensation by the court for his services, the sum so fixed shall be paid by the county treasurer of the county where the indictment was found, upon presentation of a certificate of the judge, fixing and allowing  such compensation.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:163-4.    Definitions 
    As used in this act: 

   a.   "Child" means a person 13 years of age or younger at the time a crime was committed against the child. 

   b.   "Victim" means a child who suffers personal, physical, or psychological injury as a result of a crime committed against that child. 

   L. 1987, c. 148, s. 1. 

2A:163-5.    Speedy trials 
    In all criminal cases involving a child victim, the court shall take appropriate action to ensure a speedy trial in order to minimize the length of time the child must endure the stress of involvement in the proceedings. In ruling on any motion or other request for a delay or continuance of proceedings, the court shall consider and give weight to any adverse impact the delay or continuance may have on the well-being of a child victim. 

   L. 1987, c. 148, s. 2. 

2A:164-1.    Clinics to study mental and physical conditions before sentence of convicted persons; organization; personnel; rules for conduct of; expenses  
     2A:164-1. In order that judges conducting courts for the trial of criminal cases may have complete information for use in determining sentences to be imposed, there may be organized and operated in each county a clinic for the study of the mental and physical conditions of defendants to be sentenced and their environments.  

    Each assignment judge of the Superior Court shall have authority to organize a clinic in the county or counties in which he presides.  

    A clinic shall consist of any number of qualified persons, more than three, as shall seem proper to the assignment judge organizing the same, one of which number shall be the county probation officer, one a physician licensed to practice in this State and one a psychologist.  

    Every clinic shall be conducted in accordance with rules prescribed by the courts which it shall serve and shall be operated without expense to the county in which it is organized unless the board of chosen freeholders thereof shall appropriate money to defray such expenses, which they are hereby authorized to do.  

  	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.135.  

2A:164-24.  Remission of sentence of prisoners confined in county jail or penitentiary for good conduct
    The board of chosen freeholders of any county, or the committee on the discharge of prisoners of such board, may, upon the recommendation of the sheriff or jail warden of the county jail or penitentiary in whose custody any prisoner may be, remit for good conduct from the sentence of any person committed to such county jail or penitentiary, a term not exceeding 1 day for every 6 days of such sentence.  If any such person shall be again convicted and  sentenced to imprisonment in such county jail or penitentiary, he may, in addition to such new sentence, be required at the discretion of the court to serve out the number of days remitted to him on the previous term.

  	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1968, c. 255, s. 1, eff. Sept. 4, 1968.

2A:166-8.  Fees of witnesses and constables on acquittals;  payment by and reimbursement of sheriff
    Whenever, on any indictment or accusation, there is an acquittal, the sheriff of the county in which the trial was had shall pay the fees of the witnesses and constables, taking receipts from them for such payments.  On the production of such receipts, or upon the oath of the sheriff, the amounts so paid shall, on demand, be repaid to the sheriff by the county treasurer from any moneys in his hand belonging to the county, and such payments shall be allowed to the county treasurer in the settlement of his accounts.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:166-9.  Fees of clerk and sheriff on acquittals;  payment by county
    On the acquittal of any person indicted for crime the fees of the clerk and  the sheriff shall be paid by the county treasurer, upon the taxed bill of costs, duly verified by the clerk and the sheriff, and certified to be correct by the prosecutor.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:166-12.  Execution against municipality for fines and costs returned unsatisfied
    When any execution, issued against any municipality, for the amount of any fine and costs as provided in this subtitle shall be returned by the sheriff or  other proper officer unsatisfied for want of goods and chattels or real estate  of such municipality, the clerk of the court out of which the same issued shall  make a copy thereof, with the indorsements thereon, and the return of the  sheriff or other proper officer thereto, having added to the costs indorsed  thereon $1, the fee of the clerk for the copy and a certificate thereof, and  $2, the fee of the sheriff for the services hereinafter required of him, and  certify the same under his hand and seal of office, and deliver it to the  sheriff or other proper officer.  Upon receiving such certified copy of the  execution and return, the sheriff or other proper officer shall present the  same to the county treasurer, who shall pay to the sheriff or other proper  officer the amount of the costs indorsed, together with the interest due  thereon, taking a receipt from the sheriff or other proper officer therefor,  which certified copy and receipt shall be a sufficient voucher for the payment  thereof, in the settlement of the accounts of the treasurer.  The county  treasurer, having paid the costs, shall thereupon charge the same, together  with the amount of the fine, to the municipality against which such execution  was issued, adding thereto interest up to the 15th day of December following  the next annual levy of taxes in the county, and shall transmit a statement of  the same to the county board of taxation on or before March 1st preceding such  annual levy.  Such sum shall be added to the proportion or quota of the tax  next to be levied and collected in such municipality, and shall be assessed, levied, collected and paid over in the same manner and under the same penalties  as the proportion or quota of tax is by law directed to be assessed, levied,  collected and paid for.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:166-13.  Return of fine on reversal
    When a defendant has paid a fine upon being found guilty of an offense and has taken an appeal and obtained a decision in his favor terminating the case of the State against him, the treasury of the governmental entity which received the fine shall return to such person the amount of the fine so paid.

  	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1979, c. 396, s. 1, eff. Feb. 6, 1980.

2A:166-17.  No fees or costs payable to judge or officer receiving salary
    No fees or costs shall be paid by the county treasurer for the services of any judge, magistrate or officer of any criminal court, where such judge, magistrate or officer receives a salary.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:166-18.  No fees from parties applying to magistrate for services in criminal cases;  payment by county
    In criminal cases no fees shall be demanded from parties applying to magistrates or constables for their services.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:166A-1.  Maximum amount of reimbursement
    Any county which incurs expense in connection with the prosecution and defense of a defendant charged with commission of a capital offense while confined to a State penal or correctional institution located in the county shall be entitled to reimbursement therefor by the State in amounts not to exceed the following:

    a.  $500.00 for any case, whether or not the same is brought to trial, plus

     b.  $750.00 for each trial day, plus

     c.  The actual expense of printing required in connection with any appeal from the judgment of the trial court.

     L.1960, c. 24, p. 85, s. 1.

2A:166A-2.  Expenses allowable
    The expenses for which a county shall be entitled to reimbursement shall be  limited to fees allowed to counsel assigned by the trial court pursuant to section 2A:163-1 of the New Jersey Statutes, juror and expert witness fees, the  costs of sequestering jurors and jury attendants, the cost of transcripts of  court proceedings, and the costs of printing in connection with any appeal.

     L.1960, c. 24, p. 85, s. 2.

2A:166A-3.  Claims;  approval;  certification;  budget requests
    Claims for reimbursement shall bear the approval of the trial judge and shall be certified to the administrative director of the courts by the assignment judge of the county for payment by the State Treasurer from funds appropriated for the administration of the courts.  The administrative director  of the courts shall formulate and include in annual budget requests sums  necessary to carry out the provisions of this act.

     L.1960, c. 24, p. 85, s. 3.

2A:166A-4.  Effective date;  applicability
    This act shall take effect immediately and shall apply to expenses incurred  on and after September 1, 1959.

     L.1960, c. 24, p. 86, s. 4.

2A:167-3.1.  Report of pardon, reprieve, commutation  
    1.   On or before March 1 of each year, the Governor shall report to the Legislature each reprieve, pardon and commutation granted, stating the name of the convicted person, the crime for which the person was convicted, the sentence imposed, its date, the date of the pardon, reprieve or commutation and the reasons for granting same.  

   L.1993,c.26,s.1.  

2A:167-4.  Form of order;  filing
    The governor may, upon application for commutation of sentence of any person  sentenced to imprisonment, order that such sentence be commuted upon such  terms, conditions and limitations as the governor, in his discretion, may  direct, as conditions precedent to the release of any such person from imprisonment;  which terms, conditions and limitations shall be annexed to and form part of said order.  Upon the filing of such order signed by the governor with the officer in whose custody such person may be, and after the acceptance by such person of the terms, conditions and limitations contained in said order, as evidenced by his signature affixed to the duplicate copy of such order to be kept in the files of the state parole board, such sentence shall thereupon be commuted in accordance with the terms, conditions and limitations of such order.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:167-5.  Restoration of right of suffrage and other rights; suspension or  remission of fine
    Any person who has been convicted of a crime and by reason thereof has been  deprived of the right of suffrage or of any other of his civil rights or privileges, or upon whom there has been imposed a fine or who has suffered a forfeiture, except disqualification to hold and enjoy any public office of honor, profit or trust in this state under judgment of impeachment, may make application for the restoration of the right of suffrage or of such other rights or privileges or for the suspension or remission of such fine or forfeiture, which application the governor may grant by order signed by him.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:167-6.  Form of application
    Applications for commutation of sentences, other than death sentences, or for the restoration of rights or privileges, or for the suspension or remission  of any fine or forfeiture, shall be made upon forms prescribed by the  governor.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:167-7.  Investigation and report
    The governor, in his discretion, may, prior to granting or denying any such  application, refer the same to the state parole board for its investigation,  and in such case the board shall make a full and complete investigation and  report thereon in writing to the governor with its recommendation in the case.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:167-8.  Convicts having license to be at large;  security;  legal custody;  return to place of punishment
    Any convict who was undergoing imprisonment in any of the penal institutions  of this state and to whom was granted a license to be at large or at liberty by  the court of pardons, or to whom was granted a commutation of sentence by order  of the governor, shall remain subject to the security, terms, conditions and  limitations, in all respects, upon which the same was granted.  Any convict  undergoing imprisonment in any of the penal institutions of this state and to  whom may be granted a commutation of sentence by order of the governor shall  remain subject to the security, terms, conditions and limitations, in all  respects, upon which the same is granted.

    Every convict at large or at liberty under any such license or order shall continue to be in the legal custody of the warden, keeper or chief executive officer of the institution from which such convict was or may be released under  such license or order, and under immediate and constant supervision of the  division of parole of the department of institutions and agencies in accordance  with the rules and regulations of the state parole board approved by the  governor, and until the expiration of the maximum term of the sentence imposed  upon such person for the crime for which he or she was committed.

    Every convict at large or at liberty under any such license or order shall be liable to be taken at any time and returned to the place of punishment to which he or she was originally sentenced, as hereinafter provided.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344

2A:167-9.  Retaking and detention;  warrant;  credit for time spent in custody
    If the parole officer having charge of any convict at large or at liberty under any such license or order shall have reasonable cause to believe that such person has resumed, or is about to resume, criminal conduct or associations, or has violated the terms, conditions or limitations of such license or order in any important respect, and the situation is one of immediate emergency, then such parole officer shall notify the division of parole which may, if the facts warrant, treat such convict as delinquent under such license or order.  The division of parole shall immediately notify the governor and the state parole board of such action.  By his own warrant the parole officer may apprehend any such delinquent person and cause his or her return to the institution from which released or cause such person's immediate confinement in an appropriate county or municipal jail, penitentiary or lockup.   Such retaking and detention shall continue under authority of the parole  officer's warrant until the determination by the governor as to the revocation  of the license or order under which such convict is at large or at liberty, or  his or her return to the community under such license or order. Such warrant  shall be in the form prescribed by the state parole board and approved by the governor, and, when signed by the parole officer in charge of the case, shall  be sufficient warrant and authority to all peace officers to assist in the  apprehension of the convict and shall be also sufficient authority for the  detention of the convict in the institution from which released or in a  municipal or county jail, penitentiary or lockup.  In such case, credit shall  be given the convict on his or her sentence for time spent in such custody  while awaiting the decision of the governor as to revocation of such license or  order.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:167-10.  Revocation of license or order
    The governor may, at any time, in his discretion, revoke any such license or  order, and shall revoke any such license or order whenever it shall come to his  knowledge that the person to or for whom the same was granted has violated any  of the terms, conditions or limitations thereof, or any penal law of this  state, or of any other state, or of the United States.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:167-11.  Investigation by state parole board
    The governor, in his discretion, may, prior to determining whether to revoke  any such license or order, refer the matter to the state parole board for its  investigation, and in such case the board shall make a full and complete  investigation and report thereon in writing to the governor with its recommendations in the case.  The governor may also, by general rule or regulation, require the state parole board to investigate all such cases.  In such event the board shall make a full and complete investigation and report in  writing to the governor with its recommendations in each such case.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:167-12.  Order of revocation;  arrest;  detention;  period of confinement
    When any such license or order is revoked it shall be done by an order in writing signed by the Governor and filed with the State Parole Board. The form of such order shall be prescribed by the Governor.

    Upon the signing of such order, the Governor shall issue his warrant for the  arrest of the convict to or for whom such license or order was granted, and his  or her return to the place of confinement from which he or she was released  thereunder.  The warrant may be served by any person authorized to serve  criminal process in any county in the State.

    The convict to or for whom such license or order was or may be granted, when  returned to the place of confinement from which he or she was released thereunder, shall be detained therein according to the terms of his or her original sentence;  and, in computing the period of such convict's confinement,  if it shall appear that such license or order was revoked because of conviction  of crime of an indictable character committed while at liberty upon such  license or order, the time between such person's release upon such license or  order and return to confinement shall not be taken to be any part of the term  of sentence.  If the license or order is revoked for reasons other than such  conviction of crime, then the holder of such license or order shall be required  to serve the balance of time due on his or her sentence to be computed from the  date of the violation of one or more of the terms, conditions or limitations  which resulted in the revocation of such license or order.  If the person for  whose arrest such warrant is issued is confined in any prison or penal or  correctional institution of this State, the officer to whom the warrant shall  be delivered, shall deliver the same to the warden, keeper or chief executive officer of such institution or prison, and the warden, keeper or chief executive officer shall, upon the expiration of the term of imprisonment or period of confinement then being served in that institution or prison, return  the convict to the institution or prison from which such person was released  under such license or order, or, if the release under such license or order was  from the same institution or prison, he shall detain such convict therein  according to the terms of his or her original sentence.

    No part of a sentence imposed upon a convict, concerning which a license or  order has been granted and revoked, shall be deemed to be served by such person  while he or she is serving a sentence for an offense other than the one for  which he or she was released under such license or order.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended by L.1953, c. 275, p. 1805, s. 1, eff. July 25, 1953.

2A:168-5.    Probation officers; appointment  
     2A:168-5. The Assignment Judge of the Superior Court in each county may appoint a chief probation officer, and, on application of the chief probation officer, such men and women probation officers as may be necessary. Before any order is made by such judge appointing any additional probation officers, a notice of the time and place, when and where such order shall be considered, shall be given to the board of chosen freeholders of the county and they shall be given an opportunity to be heard as to the necessity of such additional probation officers. All probation officers who are to receive salaries shall be appointed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Civil Service Commission. Orders of appointment shall be in writing and be filed in the office of the county clerk.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1953,c.311,s.1; 1991,c.91,s.136.  

2A:168-6.  Probation officers in counties of not less than 800,000; appointment of parole officers as;  civil service;  compensation
    L.1940, c. 78, p. 202, an act entitled  "An Act authorizing the appointment  of persons employed as parole officers of a city home in cities of the first  class to the position of probation officer in counties having a population as  established by the 1930 census, of not less than 800,000, and supplementing  article one of chapter one hundred and ninety-nine of Title 2 of the Revised  Statutes."  saved from repeal.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:168-7.    Powers and duties of chief probation officer; additional employees  
     2A:168-7. The chief probation officer shall have general supervision of the probation work under the direction of the court. He may appoint such other employees as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter, but the amount expended for this purpose shall not exceed the amount appropriated therefor in the annual county budget. The chief probation officer may make such necessary rules and regulations with respect to the management and conduct of the probation officers and other employees as may be authorized by the Assignment Judge of the Superior Court.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.137.  

2A:168-8.    Salaries and expenses of probation officers and employees  
     2A:168-8. The judge authorized to appoint a chief probation officer or probation officers shall fix, by order under the hand of such judge, annual salaries to be paid such officers, and before any such order shall be made by such judge, notice of the time and place, when and where such order shall be considered, shall be given to the board of chosen freeholders of the county and such board shall be given an opportunity to be heard upon the same and such order shall be filed in the office of the County Clerk. The amounts so fixed shall be paid in equal semimonthly payments in the same manner as the salaries of other officers of the county.  

    The necessary and reasonable expenses of salaried probation officers incurred in the performance of their duties shall be paid out of the county treasury, after itemized statements of such expenses have been approved by the chief probation officer and the Assignment Judge of the Superior Court and filed in the office of the county treasurer. On request of the chief probation officer, the necessary traveling and maintenance expenses in attending probation officers' meetings and conferences of social work shall be included, when previously authorized by the judge authorized to appoint probation officers.  

    The salaries of employees appointed by the chief probation officer shall be fixed by the board of chosen freeholders in accordance with the schedules of the Civil Service Commission, and paid in the same manner as the salaries of probation officers.  

 	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1953,c.311,s.2; 1991,c.91,s.138.  

2A:168-9.    Temporary probation officers; appointment; compensation  
     2A:168-9. In case of the absence or disqualification of any probation officer for any cause, the Assignment Judge of the Superior Court may appoint some other person to serve temporarily as a probation officer, who shall receive as compensation for each day's service a sum determined by the court. The compensation so paid for any excess over 90 days' absence of any probation officer in any one year may be deducted from the salary of such probation officer.  

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 1991,c.91,s.139.  

2A:168-10.  Oath of probation officers;  bond;  accounts audited
    Each probation officer, before entering on the duties of his office, shall take an oath of office to be administered by one of the judges making the appointment.  Each probation officer or employee who collects or has the custody of money shall execute a bond in a penal sum, to be fixed by the judges, with sufficient sureties approved by them, conditioned for the honest accounting of all money received by him as probation officer.  The accounts of all probation officers shall be subject to audit at any time by the board of chosen freeholders.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:168-11.  Powers and duties of probation officers
    Probation officers shall have the powers of constables in the execution of their duties.  The duties of probation officers shall be, among others:

    a.  To make such investigations and reports under sections 2A:168-3 and 2A:168-13 of this title as may be required by the judge or judges of any court having jurisdiction within the county for which the officer is appointed;

    b.  To receive under their supervision, on request of the court having jurisdiction, any person ordered to pay any sum for alimony or support in an order or judgment entered in a matrimonial action;

    c.  To receive under supervision any person placed on probation by any court  within the county for which the officer is appointed;

    d.  To collect from persons under their supervision such payments as may be  ordered by the court so to be made, and disburse the money so received under  the direction of the court;

    e.  To furnish each person under their supervision with a statement of the conditions of his probation and to instruct him regarding them;

    f.  To keep detailed records of all the work done;

     g.  To keep accurate and complete accounts of all money collected and disbursed, and to give and obtain receipts therefor;  and

     h.  To make such reports to the courts as they may require.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:168-12.  Transfer of probationers
    Probation officers may at any time, after approval by the court or chief probation officer, transfer any probationer under their care and supervision to  the jurisdiction of any other probation officer.  Whenever such transfer is  made, the probation officer making the transfer shall send to the probation  officer to whose care and supervision the probationer is being transferred, a  copy of all the records of such officer as to the offense, criminal record and  social history of the probationer.

    Probation officers may accept under their care and supervision on transfer,  any person placed on probation in any other jurisdiction, and shall, from time  to time, report to the probation officer from whom the probationer was received  under transfer as to the conduct and progress of the probationer.  Probation  officers shall, with respect to persons transferred to their supervision from  any other jurisdiction, have all of the powers and be subject to all of the  duties imposed by law upon them in regard to probationers received on probation  in their own jurisdiction.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:168-13.  Investigations for superior court;  financial status of persons  seeking relief in forma pauperis;  alimony or support payments
    The chief probation officer of each county shall, when requested by the superior court, immediately investigate and furnish to the court all necessary and available information and data concerning persons who may have become the subject of or legally interested in any matrimonial action in that court, or in  any proceeding directly or indirectly involving the custody of infants, and who  are residents of or are temporarily found within the county for which such  probation officer was appointed.

    When ordered by the superior court the chief probation officer shall cause to be investigated the financial status of applicants who are seeking relief through forma pauperis petitions.

    The superior court may also order payments of alimony or support, or both, to be made in proper cases through the chief probation officer, who shall distribute such payments as directed by the court.

    The superior court is empowered and authorized formally to request and require such investigations and information from any chief probation officer as  may be necessary to effectuate the provisions of this section, and such requests may be made at any time and at any stage of any proceeding pending in the superior court.  The court shall also have the discretionary power, in actions involving the custody of infants, to file a certified copy of its order  or judgment with the chief probation officer of the county or counties where  the child or children reside, with a direction therein to make periodic reports  to the court as to the status of the custody.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:168-14.  Governor authorized to enter into compact with states; form; contents of compact;  investigations;  duties of receiving state; retaking of probationers or parolees by sending state;  extradition waived; rules and regulations;  compact operative on ratification;  force and effect of compact; renunciation
    The governor of this state is hereby authorized and directed to enter into a  compact on behalf of the state of New Jersey with any of the states of the United States legally joining therein in the form substantially as follows:

    A compact entered into by and among the contracting states, signatories hereto, with the consent of the congress of the United States of America, granted by an act entitled  "An act granting the consent of congress to any 2 or more states to enter into agreements or compacts for co-operative effort and  mutual assistance in the prevention of crime and for other purposes."

    The contracting states solemnly agree:

     1.  That it shall be competent for the duly constituted judicial and administrative authorities of a state party to this compact (herein called "sending state" ) to permit any person convicted of an offense within such state and placed on probation or released on parole to reside in any other state party to this compact (herein called  "receiving state" ) while on probation or parole, if

    a.  Such person is in fact a resident of or has his family residing within the receiving state and can obtain employment there;

    b.  Though not a resident of the receiving state and not having his family residing there, the receiving state consents to such person being sent there.

    Before granting such permission, opportunity shall be granted to the receiving state to investigate the home and prospective employment of such person.

    A resident of the receiving state, within the meaning of this section, is one who has been an actual inhabitant of such state continuously for more than 1 year prior to his coming to the sending state and has not resided within the sending state more than 6 continuous months immediately preceding the commission of the offense for which he has been convicted.

    2.  That each receiving state will assume the duties of visitation of and supervision over probationers or parolees of any sending state and in the exercise of those duties will be governed by the same standards that prevail for its own probationers and parolees.

    3.  That duly accredited officers of a sending state may at all times enter  a receiving state and there apprehend and retake any person on probation or  parole.  For that purpose no formalities will be required other than  establishing the authority of the officer and the identity of the person to be  retaken.  All legal requirements to obtain extradition of fugitives from  justice are hereby expressly waived on the part of states party hereto, as to  such persons.  The decision of the sending state to retake a person on probation or parole shall be conclusive upon and not reviewable within the receiving state;  provided, however, that if at the time when a state seeks to retake a probationer or parolee there should be pending against him within the receiving state any criminal charge, or he should be suspected of having committed within such state a criminal offense, he shall not be retaken without  the consent of the receiving state until discharged from prosecution or from  imprisonment for such offense.

    4.  That the duly accredited officers of the sending state will be permitted  to transport prisoners being retaken through any and all states parties to this  compact, without interference.

    5.  That the governor of each state may designate an officer who, acting jointly with like officers of other contracting states, if and when appointed, shall promulgate such rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary to more effectively carry out the terms of this compact.

    6.  That this compact shall become operative immediately upon its ratification by any state as between it and any other state or states so ratifying.  When ratified it shall have the full force and effect of law within  such state, the form of ratification to be in accordance with the laws of the  ratifying state.

    7.  That this compact shall continue in force and remain binding upon each ratifying state until renounced by it.  The duties and obligations hereunder of  a renouncing state shall continue as to parolees or probationers residing therein at the time of withdrawal until retaken or finally discharged by the sending state.  Renunciation of this compact shall be by the same authority which ratified it, by sending 6 months' notice in writing of its intention to withdraw from the compact to the other states party hereto.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:168-15.  Constitutionality
    If any section, sentence, subdivision or clause of this act is for any reason held invalid or to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this act.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:168-16.  Compact deemed ratified, when
    The aforesaid compact with any other states shall be deemed to have been ratified by this state when executed by the governor of this state and such other state.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:168-17.  Citation
    This article may be cited as the  "uniform act for out-of-state parolee supervision."

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344.

2A:168-18.  Incarceration of probationer or parolee in receiving state; receiving state as agent
    Whenever the duly constituted judicial and administrative authorities in a sending State shall determine that incarceration of a probationer or reincarceration of a parolee is necessary or desirable, said officials may direct that the incarceration or reincarceration be in a prison or other correctional institution within the territory of the receiving State, such receiving State to act in that regard solely as agent for the sending State.

     L.1953, c. 83, p. 1006, s. 1.

2A:168-19.   "Receiving State"  defined
    As used in this act, the term  "receiving State"  shall be construed to mean  any State, other than the sending State, in which a parolee or probationer may  be found;  provided, that said State has enacted reciprocal legislation.

     L.1953, c. 83, p. 1007, s. 2.

2A:168-20.  Compact institutions;  incarceration in;  access to
    Every State which enacts a similar act to this act shall designate at least  one of its correctional institutions as a  "Compact Institution"  and shall  incarcerate persons therein as provided in such act, unless the sending and  receiving State in question shall make specific contractual arrangements to the  contrary.  All such States shall have access to "Compact Institutions" at all  reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting the facilities thereof and for  the purpose of visiting such of said State's prisoners as may be confined in  the institution.

     L.1953, c. 83, p. 1007, s. 3.

2A:168-21.  Persons confined in compact institutions subject to jurisdiction  of sending state
    Persons confined in  "Compact Institutions"  pursuant to the terms of the compact shall at all times be subject to the jurisdiction of the sending State and may at any time be removed from said  "Compact Institution"  for transfer to a prison or other correctional institution within the sending State, for return to probation or parole, for discharge, or for any other purpose permitted by the laws of the sending State.

     L.1953, c. 83, p. 1007, s. 4.

2A:168-22.  Rights of persons confined in compact institutions
    All persons who may be confined in a  "Compact Institution"  pursuant to the  provisions of the compact shall be treated in a reasonable and humane manner.   Incarceration or reincarceration in a receiving State shall not deprive any  person so incarcerated or reincarcerated of any rights which said person would  have had if incarcerated or reincarcerated in an appropriate institution of the  sending State;  nor shall any agreement to submit to incarceration or  reincarceration pursuant to the terms of the compact be construed as a waiver  of any rights which the prisoner would have had if he had been incarcerated or  reincarcerated in any appropriate institution of the sending State, except that  the hearing or hearings, if any, to which a parolee or probationer may be  entitled, (prior to incarceration or reincarceration) by the laws of the  sending State may be had before the appropriate judicial or administrative  officers of the receiving State.  In any such event, said judicial and  administrative officers shall act as agents of the sending State after  consultation with appropriate officers of the sending State.

     L.1953, c. 83, p. 1007, s. 5.

2A:168-23.  Costs and expenses
    Any receiving State incurring costs or other expenses under the compact shall be reimbursed in the amount of such costs or other expenses by the sending State unless the States concerned shall specifically otherwise agree. Any two or more States party to the compact may enter into supplementary agreements determining a different allocation of costs as among themselves.

     L.1953, c. 83, p. 1008, s. 6.

2A:168-24.  Rules and regulations
    Rules and regulations necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act may be promulgated by the appropriate officers of this State and of those States which have enacted substantially similar legislation.

     L.1953, c. 83, p. 1008, s. 7.

2A:168-25.  Effective when other states enact similar legislation
    This act shall take effect when any two or more States party to the compact  shall enact substantially similar legislation to this act.

     L.1953, c. 83, p. 1008, s. 8.

2A:168-26  Interstate Compact for Adult Offender Supervision.

	1. a. The Interstate Compact for Adult Offender Supervision is hereby enacted into law and entered into with all other jurisdictions legally joining therein in the form substantially as follows:



	INTERSTATE COMPACT FOR ADULT OFFENDER SUPERVISION



	The Legislature hereby finds and declares the following:

	The interstate compact for the supervision of Parolees and Probationers was established in 1937; it is the earliest corrections "compact" established among the states and has not been amended since its adoption for over 62 years;

	This compact is the only vehicle for the controlled movement of adult parolees and probationers across state lines, and it currently has jurisdiction over more than a quarter of a million offenders;

	The complexities of the compact have become more difficult to administer, and many jurisdictions have expanded supervision expectations to include currently unregulated practices such as victim input, victim notification requirements and sex offender registration; 

	After hearings, national surveys and a detailed study by a task force appointed by the National Institute of Corrections, the overwhelming recommendation has been to amend the document to bring about an effective management capacity that addresses public safety concerns and offender accountability; and

	Upon the adoption of this Interstate Compact for Adult Offender Supervision by all states and territories of the United States, it is the intention of the Legislature to repeal the previous Interstate Compact for the Supervision of Parolees and Probationers.

	b.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Interstate Compact for Adult Offender Supervision."

	c.	Article I. Purpose.  The compacting states to this Interstate Compact recognize that each state is responsible for the supervision of adult offenders in the community who are authorized pursuant to the bylaws and rules of this compact to travel across state lines both to and from each compacting state in such a manner as to track the location of offenders, transfer supervision authority in an orderly and efficient manner and when necessary return offenders to the originating jurisdictions.

	The compacting states also recognize that Congress, by enacting the Crime Control Act, 4 U.S.C.s.112 (1965), has authorized and encouraged compacts for cooperative efforts and mutual assistance in the prevention of crime.

	It is the purpose of this compact and the Interstate Commission created hereunder, through means of joint and cooperative action among the compacting states: to provide the framework for the promotion of public safety and protect the rights of victims through the control and regulation of the interstate movement of offenders in the community; to provide for the effective tracking, supervision and rehabilitation of these offenders by the sending and receiving states; and to equitably distribute the costs, benefits and obligations of the compact among the compacting states.

	In addition, this compact will: create an Interstate Commission which will establish uniform procedures to manage the movement between states of adults placed under community supervision and released to the community under the jurisdiction of courts, paroling authorities, corrections or other criminal justice agencies which will promulgate rules to achieve the purpose of this compact; ensure an opportunity for input and timely notice to victims and to jurisdictions where defined offenders are authorized to travel or to relocate across state lines; establish a system of uniform data collection, access to information on active cases by authorized criminal justice officials, and regular reporting of compact activities to heads of state councils, state executive, judicial and legislative branches and criminal justice administrators; monitor compliance with rules governing interstate movement of offenders and initiate interventions to address and correct non-compliance; and coordinate training and education regarding regulations of interstate movement of offenders for officials involved in such activity.

	The compacting states recognize that there is no "right" of any offender to live in another state and that duly accredited officers of a sending state may at all times enter a receiving state and there apprehend and retake any offender under supervision subject to the provisions of this compact and bylaws and rules promulgated hereunder.

	It is the policy of the compacting states that the activities conducted by the Interstate Commission created herein are the formation of public policies and are therefore public business.

	L.2002,c.111,s.1.

2A:168-27  Definitions.

	2.	Article II. Definitions.

	As used in this compact, unless the context clearly requires a different construction:

	"Adult" means a person who is 18 years of age or older or a person who is under 18 years of age who either by statute or court order is considered an adult.

	"Bylaws" mean those bylaws established by the Interstate Commission for its governance, or for directing or controlling the Interstate Commission's actions or conduct.

	"Compact administrator" means the individual in each compacting state appointed pursuant to the terms of this compact responsible for the administration and management of the State's supervision and transfer of offenders subject to the terms of this compact, the rules adopted by the Interstate Commission and policies adopted by the State Council under this compact.

	"Compacting state" means any state which has enacted the enabling legislation for this compact.

	"Commissioner" means the voting representative of each compacting state appointed pursuant to Article III of this compact.

	"Interstate Commission" means the Interstate Commission for Adult Offender Supervision established by this compact.

	"Member" means the commissioner of a compacting state or designee, who shall be a person officially connected with the commissioner.

	"Non Compacting state" means any state which has not enacted the enabling legislation for this compact.

	"Offender" means an adult placed under, or subject to, supervision as the result of the commission of a criminal offense and released to the community under the jurisdiction of courts, paroling authorities, corrections, or other criminal justice agencies.

	"Person" means any individual, corporation, business enterprise, or other legal entity, either public or private.

	"Rules" means acts of the Interstate Commission, duly promulgated pursuant to Article VIII of this compact, substantially affecting interested parties in addition to the Interstate Commission, which shall have the force and effect of law in the compacting states.

	"State" means a state of the United States, the District of Columbia and any other territorial possessions of the United States.

	"State Council" means the resident members of the State Council for Interstate Adult Offender Supervision created by each state under Article IV of this compact. 

	L.2002,c.111,s.2.

2A:168-28  The compact commission.

	3.	Article III. The Compact Commission.

	a.	The compacting states hereby create the "Interstate Commission for Adult Offender Supervision."  The Interstate Commission shall be a body corporate and joint agency of the compacting states.  The Interstate Commission shall have all the responsibilities, powers and duties set forth herein, including the power to sue and be sued, and such additional powers as may be conferred upon it by subsequent action of the respective legislatures of the compacting states in accordance with the terms of this compact.

	b.	The Interstate Commission shall consist of Commissioners selected and appointed by resident members of a State Council for Interstate Adult Offender Supervision for each state.  In addition to the Commissioners who are the voting representatives of each state, the Interstate Commission shall include individuals who are not commissioners but who are members of interested organizations. Such non-commissioner members shall include a member of the national organizations of governors, legislators, state chief justices, attorneys general and crime victims.  All non-commissioner members of the Interstate Commission shall be ex-officio (nonvoting) members.  The Interstate Commission may provide in its bylaws for such additional, ex-officio, non-voting members as it deems necessary.

	c.	Each compacting state represented at any meeting of the Interstate Commission is entitled to one vote.  A majority of the compacting states shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, unless a larger quorum is required by the bylaws of the Interstate Commission.

	d.	The Interstate Commission shall meet at least once each calendar year.  The chairman may call additional meetings and, upon the request of 27 or more compacting states, shall call additional meetings.  Public notice shall be given of all meetings and meetings shall be open to the public. 

	e.	The Interstate Commission shall establish an Executive Committee which shall include commission officers, members and others as shall be determined by the bylaws. The Executive Committee shall have the power to act on behalf of the Interstate Commission during periods when the Interstate Commission is not in session, with the exception of rulemaking or amendment to the Compact.  The Executive Committee shall oversee the day-to-day activities managed by the Executive Director and Interstate Commission staff, administer enforcement and compliance with the provisions of the compact, its bylaws and as directed by the Interstate Commission and perform other duties as directed by Commission or set forth in the bylaws.

	L.2002,c.111,s.3.

2A:168-29  The State Council.

	4.	Article IV. The State Council.

	a.	There is hereby established the New Jersey State Council for Interstate Adult Offender Supervision which shall consist of the following members:

	(1)	two members of the General Assembly, no more than one of whom shall be of the same political party, appointed by the Speaker of the General Assembly;

	(2)	two members of the Senate, no more than one of whom shall be of the same political party, appointed by the President of the Senate;

	(3)	the Administrative Director of the Courts;

	(4)	the Commissioner of Corrections or his designee;

	(5)	a law enforcement officer and a representative from a crime victim's organization, each appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate; and 

	(6)	the Chairman of the State Parole Board. 

	b.	The Governor shall appoint a compact administrator who shall serve at the pleasure of the Governor.  The compact administrator may be a member of the State Council or a State government official with appropriate background and experience. The compact administrator shall be the compact commissioner and presiding officer of the council and shall serve as the New Jersey Commissioner to the Interstate Commission. 

	c.	Members of the Council shall be appointed for terms of four years and the terms of their successors shall be calculated from the expiration of the incumbent's term. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed and have qualified.

	d.	The State Council shall meet at least twice a year.

	e.	The State Council shall develop policies concerning the operation of the compact within this State.  The State Council may adopt rules, including rules proposed by the commission for adoption by this state, to implement the compact.

	f.	The State Council shall report annually to the Legislature concerning the activities of the council and the Interstate Commission. 

	L.2002,c.111,s.4.

2A:168-30  Powers and duties of the interstate commission.

	5.	Article V. Powers and Duties of the Interstate Commission.

	The Interstate Commission shall have the following powers:

	a.	To adopt a seal and suitable bylaws governing the management and operation of the Interstate Commission; 

	b.	To promulgate rules which shall have the force and effect of statutory law and shall be binding in the compacting states to the extent and in the manner provided in this compact;

	c.	To oversee, supervise and coordinate the interstate movement of offenders subject to the terms of this compact and any bylaws adopted and rules promulgated by the compact commission;

	d.	To enforce compliance with compact provisions, Interstate Commission rules, and bylaws, using all necessary and proper means, including but not limited to, the use of judicial process;

	e.	To establish and maintain offices;

	f.	To purchase and maintain insurance and bonds;

	g.	To borrow, accept, or contract for services of personnel, including, but not limited to, members and their staffs;

	h.	To establish and appoint committees and hire staff which it deems necessary for the carrying out of its functions including, but not limited to, an executive committee as required by Article III which shall have the power to act on behalf of the Interstate Commission in carrying out its powers and duties hereunder;

	i.	To elect or appoint such officers, attorneys, employees, agents, or consultants, and to fix their compensation, define their duties and determine their qualifications; and to establish the Interstate Commission's personnel policies and programs relating to, among other things, conflicts of interest, rates of compensation, and qualifications of personnel;

	j.	To accept any and all donations and grants of money, equipment, supplies, materials, and services, and to receive, utilize, and dispose of same;

	k.	To lease, purchase, accept contributions or donations of, or otherwise to own, hold, improve or use any property, real, personal, or mixed;

	l.	To sell, convey, mortgage, pledge, lease, exchange, abandon, or otherwise dispose of any property, real, personal or mixed;

	m.	To establish a budget and make expenditures and levy dues as provided in Article X of this compact;

	n.	To sue and be sued;

	o.	To provide for dispute resolution among compacting states;

	p.	To perform such functions as may be necessary or appropriate to achieve the purposes of this compact;

	q.	To report annually to the legislatures, governors, judiciary, and state councils of the compacting states concerning the activities of the Interstate Commission during the preceding year.  Such reports shall also include any recommendations that may have been adopted by the Interstate Commission;

	r.	To coordinate education, training and public awareness regarding the interstate movement of offenders for officials involved in such activity; and

	s.	To establish uniform standards for the reporting, collecting, and exchanging of data. 



	L.2002,c.111,s.5.

2A:168-31  Organization and operation of the interstate commission.

	6.	Article VI. Organization and Operation of the Interstate Commission.

	a.	Bylaws. The Interstate Commission shall, by a majority of the Members, within twelve months of the first Interstate Commission meeting, adopt by-laws to govern its conduct as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of the Compact, including, but not limited to:

	(1)	Establishing the fiscal year of the Interstate Commission.

	(2)	Establishing an executive committee and such other committees as may be necessary. 

	(3)	Providing reasonable standards and procedures for the establishment of committees, and governing any general or specific delegation of any authority or function of the Interstate Commission. 

	(4)	Providing reasonable procedures for calling and conducting meetings of the Interstate Commission, and ensuring reasonable notice of each such meeting. 

	(5)	Establishing the titles and responsibilities of the officers of the Interstate Commission.

	(6)	Providing reasonable standards and procedures for the establishment of the personnel policies and programs of the Interstate Commission. 

	Notwithstanding any civil service or other similar laws of any Compacting State, the bylaws shall exclusively govern the personnel policies and programs of the Interstate Commission.

	(7)	Providing a mechanism for winding up the operations of the Interstate Commission and the equitable return of any surplus funds that may exist upon the termination of the Compact after the payment or reserving of all of its debts and obligations.

	(8)	Providing transition rules for "start up" administration of the compact.

	(9)	Establishing standards and procedures for compliance and technical assistance in carrying out the compact.

	b.	Officers and Staff. The Interstate Commission shall, by a majority of the members, elect from among its members a chairman and a vice chairman, each of whom shall have such authorities and duties as may be specified in the bylaws.  The chairman, or in his absence or disability, the vice chairman, shall preside at all meetings of the Interstate Commission.  The officers so elected shall serve without compensation or remuneration from the Interstate Commission; provided that, subject to the availability of budgeted funds, the officers shall be reimbursed for any actual and necessary costs and expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties and responsibilities as officers of the Interstate Commission.

	The Interstate Commission shall, through its executive committee, appoint or retain an executive director for such period, upon such terms and conditions and for such compensation as the Interstate Commission may deem appropriate.  The executive director shall serve as secretary to the Interstate Commission, and hire and supervise such other staff as may be authorized by the Interstate Commission, but shall not be a member. 

	c.	Corporate Records of the Interstate Commission.  The Interstate Commission shall maintain its corporate books and records in accordance with the bylaws.

	d.	Qualified Immunity, Defense and Indemnification. The members, officers, executive director and employees of the Interstate Commission shall be immune from suit and liability, either personally or in their official capacity, for any claim for damage to or loss of property or personal injury or other civil liability caused or arising out of any actual or alleged act, error or omission that occurred within the scope of Interstate Commission employment, duties or responsibilities; provided, that nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to protect any such person from suit or liability for any damage, loss, injury or liability caused by the intentional or willful and wanton misconduct of any such person.

	The Interstate Commission shall defend the Commissioner of a Compacting State, or his representatives or employees, or the Interstate Commission's representatives or employees, in any civil action seeking to impose liability, arising out of any actual or alleged act, error or omission that occurred within the scope of Interstate Commission employment, duties or responsibilities, or that the defendant had a reasonable basis for believing occurred within the scope of Interstate Commission employment, duties or responsibilities; provided, that the actual or alleged act, error or omission did not result from intentional wrongdoing on the part of such person.

	The Interstate Commission shall indemnify and hold the Commissioner of a Compacting State, the appointed designee or employees, or the Interstate Commission's representatives or employees, harmless in the amount of any settlement or judgment obtained against such persons arising out of any actual or alleged act, error or omission that occurred within the scope of Interstate Commission employment, duties or responsibilities, or that such persons had a reasonable basis for believing occurred within the scope of Interstate Commission employment, duties or responsibilities, provided, that the actual or alleged act, error or omission did not result from gross negligence or intentional wrongdoing on the part of such person. 

	L.2002,c.111,s.6.

2A:168-32  Activities of the interstate commission.

	7.	Article VII. Activities of the Interstate Commission.

	a.	The Interstate Commission shall meet and take such actions as are consistent with the provisions of this Compact.

	b.	Except as otherwise provided in this Compact and unless a greater percentage is required by the bylaws, in order to constitute an act of the Interstate Commission, such act shall have been taken at a meeting of the Interstate Commission and shall have received an affirmative vote of a majority of the members present.

	c.	Each Member of the Interstate Commission shall have the right and power to cast a vote to which that Compacting State is entitled and to participate in the business and affairs of the Interstate Commission.  A Member shall vote in person on behalf of the state and shall not delegate a vote to another member state.  However, a State Council shall appoint another authorized representative, in the absence of the commissioner from that state, to cast a vote on behalf of the member state at a specified meeting.  The bylaws may provide for Members' participation in meetings by telephone or other means of telecommunication or electronic communication.  Any voting conducted by telephone, or other means of telecommunication or electronic communication shall be subject to the same quorum requirements of meetings where members are present in person.

	d.	The Interstate Commission shall meet at least once during each calendar year.  The chairman of the Interstate Commission may call additional meetings at any time and, upon the request of a majority of the Members, shall call additional meetings.

	e.	The Interstate Commission's bylaws shall establish conditions and procedures under which the Interstate Commission shall make its information and official records available to the public for inspection or copying.  The Interstate Commission may exempt from disclosure any information or official records to the extent they would adversely affect personal privacy rights or proprietary interests.  In promulgating such rules, the Interstate Commission may make available to law enforcement agencies records and information otherwise exempt from disclosure, and may enter into agreements with law enforcement agencies to receive or exchange information or records subject to nondisclosure and confidentiality provisions.

	f.	Public notice shall be given of all meetings and all meetings shall be open to the public, except as set forth in the rules or as otherwise provided in the Compact.  The Interstate Commission shall promulgate rules consistent with the principles contained in the "Government in the Sunshine Act," 5 U.S.C.s.552(b), as may be amended.  The Interstate Commission and any of its committees may close a meeting to the public where it determines by two-thirds vote that an open meeting would be likely to:

	(1)	relate solely to the Interstate Commission's internal personnel practices and procedures;

	(2)	disclose matters specifically exempted from disclosure by statute;

	(3)	disclose trade secrets or commercial or financial information which is privileged or confidential;

	(4)	involve accusing any person of a crime, or formally censuring any person;

	(5)	disclose information of a personal nature where disclosure would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy;

	(6)	disclose investigatory records compiled for law enforcement purposes;

	(7)	disclose information contained in or related to examination, operating or condition reports prepared by, or on behalf of or for the use of, the Interstate Commission with respect to a regulated entity for the purpose of regulation or supervision of such entity;

	(8)	disclose information, the premature disclosure of which would significantly endanger the life of a person or the stability of a regulated entity; or

	(9)	specifically relate to the Interstate Commission's issuance of a subpoena, or its participation in a civil action or proceeding.

	g.	For every meeting closed pursuant to this provision, the Interstate Commission's chief legal officer shall publicly certify that, in his opinion, the meeting may be closed to the public, and shall reference each relevant exemptive provision.

	h.	The Interstate Commission shall keep minutes which shall fully and clearly describe all matters discussed in any meeting and shall provide a full and accurate summary of any actions taken, and the reasons therefor, including a description of each of the views expressed on any item and the record of any roll call vote (reflected in the vote of each Member on the question).  All documents considered in connection with any action shall be identified in such minutes.

	i.	The Interstate Commission shall collect standardized data concerning the interstate movement of offenders as directed through its bylaws and rules which shall specify the data to be collected, the means of collection and data exchange and reporting requirements. 

	L.2002,c.111,s.7.

2A:168-33  Rulemaking functions of the interstate commission.

	8.	Article VIII. Rulemaking Functions of the Interstate Commission.

	a.	The Interstate Commission shall promulgate rules in order to effectively and efficiently achieve the purposes of the Compact including transition rules governing administration of the compact during the period in which it is being considered and enacted by the states.

	b.	Rulemaking shall occur pursuant to the criteria set forth in this Article and the bylaws and rules adopted pursuant thereto.  Such rulemaking shall substantially conform to the principles of the federal Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C.A. section 551 et seq., and the federal Advisory Committee Act, 5 U.S.C.A. App. 2, section 1 et seq., as may be amended (hereinafter "APA").  

	c.	All rules and amendments shall become binding as of the date specified in each rule or amendment.  

	d.	If a majority of the legislatures of the Compacting States rejects a rule, by enactment of a statute or resolution in the same manner used to adopt the compact, then such rule shall have no further force and effect in any Compacting State.

	e.	When promulgating a rule, the Interstate Commission shall:

	(1)	publish the proposed rule stating with particularity the text of the rule which is proposed and the reason for the proposed rule;

	(2)	allow persons to submit written data, facts, opinions and arguments, which information shall be publicly available;

	(3)	provide an opportunity for an informal hearing; and

	(4)	promulgate a final rule and its effective date, if appropriate, based on the rulemaking record.

	Not later than sixty days after a rule is promulgated, any interested person may file a petition in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia or in the Federal District Court where the Interstate Commission's principal office is located for judicial review of such rule.  If the court finds that the Interstate Commission's action is not supported by substantial evidence (as defined in the APA) in the rulemaking record, the court shall hold the rule unlawful and set it aside.

	f.	Subjects to be addressed within 12 months after the first meeting must at a minimum include:

	(1)	notice to victims and opportunity to be heard; 

	(2)	offender registration and compliance; 

	(3)	violations/returns;

	(4)	transfer procedures and forms;

	(5)	eligibility for transfer;

	(6)	collection of restitution and fees from offenders; 

	(7)	data collection and reporting;

	(8)	the level of supervision to be provided by the receiving state;

	(9)	transition rules governing the operation of the compact and the Interstate Commission during all or part of the period between the effective date of the compact and the date on which the last eligible state adopts the compact; and

	(10) Mediation, arbitration and dispute resolution.

	g.	The existing rules governing the operation of the previous compact superseded by this  act shall be null and void twelve months after the first meeting of the Interstate Commission created hereunder.

	h.	Upon determination by the Interstate Commission that an emergency exists, it may promulgate an emergency rule which shall become effective immediately upon adoption, provided that the usual rulemaking procedures provided hereunder shall be retroactively applied to said rule as soon as reasonably possible, in no event later than 90 days after the effective date of the rule. 

	L.2002,c.111,s.8.

2A:168-34  Oversight, enforcement and dispute resolution by the interstate commission.

	9.	Article IX. Oversight, Enforcement and Dispute Resolution by the Interstate Commission.

	a.	Oversight. The Interstate Commission shall oversee the interstate movement of adult offenders in the compacting states and shall monitor such activities being administered in Non-compacting States which may significantly affect Compacting States.

	The courts and executive agencies in each Compacting State shall enforce this Compact and shall take all actions necessary and appropriate to effectuate the Compact's purposes and intent.  In any judicial or administrative proceeding in a Compacting State pertaining to the subject matter of this Compact which may affect the powers, responsibilities or actions of the Interstate Commission, the Interstate Commission shall be entitled to receive all service of process in any such proceeding, and shall have standing to intervene in the proceeding for all purposes.

	b.	Dispute Resolution. The Compacting States shall report to the Interstate Commission on issues or activities of concern to them, and cooperate with and support the Interstate Commission in the discharge of its duties and responsibilities.

	The Interstate Commission shall attempt to resolve any disputes or other issues which are subject to the Compact and which may arise among Compacting States and Non-compacting States.

	The Interstate Commission shall enact a bylaw or promulgate a rule providing for both mediation and binding dispute resolution for disputes among the Compacting States.

	c.	Enforcement. The Interstate Commission, in the reasonable exercise of its discretion, shall enforce the provisions of this compact using any or all means set forth in Article XII, section b., of this compact.   

	L.2002,c.111,s.9.

2A:168-35  Finance.

	10.	Article X. Finance.

	a.	The Interstate Commission shall pay or provide for the payment of the reasonable expenses of its establishment, organization and ongoing activities.

	b.	The Interstate Commission shall levy on and collect an annual assessment from each Compacting State to cover the cost of the internal operations and activities of the Interstate Commission and its staff which must be in a total amount sufficient to cover the Interstate Commission's annual budget as approved each year.  The aggregate annual assessment amount shall be allocated based upon a formula to be determined by the Interstate Commission, taking into consideration the population of the state and the volume of interstate movement of offenders in each Compacting State and shall promulgate a rule binding upon all Compacting States which governs said assessment.

	c.	The Interstate Commission shall not incur any obligations of any kind prior to securing the funds adequate to meet the same; nor shall the Interstate Commission pledge the credit of any of the compacting states, except by and with the authority of the compacting state.

	d.	The Interstate Commission shall keep accurate accounts of all receipts and disbursements. The receipts and disbursements of the Interstate Commission shall be subject to the audit and accounting procedures established under its bylaws.  However, all receipts and disbursements of funds handled by the Interstate Commission shall be audited yearly by a certified or licensed public accountant and the report of the audit shall be included in and become part of the annual report of the Interstate Commission. 

	e. (1) The Interstate compact for adult offender supervision fund is established as a special fund in the State Treasury.  The fund consists of moneys appropriated for the purposes of meeting financial obligations imposed on the State of New Jersey as a result of the State's participation in this compact.

	(2)	An assessment levied or any other financial obligation imposed under this compact is effective against the State of New Jersey only to the extent that moneys to pay the assessment or meet the financial obligation have been appropriated and deposited in the fund established pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection.

	L.2002,c.111,s.10.

2A:168-36  Compacting states, effective date and amendment.

	11.	Article XI. Compacting States, Effective Date and Amendment.

	a.	Any state, as defined in Article II of this compact, is eligible to become a Compacting State.

	b.	The Compact shall become effective and binding upon legislative enactment of the Compact into law by no less than 35 of the States. The initial effective date shall be the later of July 1, 2001, or upon enactment into law by the 35th jurisdiction.  Thereafter it shall become effective and binding, as to any other Compacting State, upon enactment of the Compact into law by that State.  The governors of Non-member states or their designees will be invited to participate in Interstate Commission activities on a non-voting basis prior to adoption of the compact by all states and territories of the United States.

	c.	Amendments to the Compact may be proposed by the Interstate Commission for enactment by the Compacting States.  No amendment shall become effective and binding upon the Interstate Commission and the Compacting States unless and until it is enacted into law by unanimous consent of the Compacting States.

	L.2002,c.111,s.11.

2A:168-37  Withdrawal, default, termination and judicial enforcement.

	12.	Article XII. Withdrawal, Default, Termination and Judicial Enforcement. 

	a.	Withdrawal. Once effective, the Compact shall continue in force and remain binding upon each and every Compacting State; provided, that a Compacting State may withdraw from the Compact ("Withdrawing State") by enacting a statute specifically repealing the statute which enacted the Compact into law.

	The effective date of withdrawal is the effective date of the repeal. 

	The Withdrawing State shall immediately notify the Chairman of the Interstate Commission in writing upon the introduction of legislation repealing this Compact in the Withdrawing State.

	The Interstate Commission shall notify the other Compacting States of the Withdrawing State's intent to withdraw within sixty days of its receipt thereof.

	The Withdrawing State is responsible for all assessments, obligations and liabilities incurred through the effective date of withdrawal, including any obligations, the performance of which extend beyond the effective date of withdrawal.

	Reinstatement following withdrawal of any Compacting State shall occur upon the Withdrawing State reenacting the Compact or upon such later date as determined by the Interstate Commission.

	b.	Default. If the Interstate Commission determines that any Compacting State has at any time defaulted ("Defaulting State") in the performance of any of its obligations or responsibilities under this Compact, the bylaws or any duly promulgated rules, the Interstate Commission may impose any or all of the following penalties:

	Fines, fees and costs in such amounts as are deemed to be reasonable as fixed by the Interstate Commission;

	Remedial training and technical assistance as directed by the Interstate Commission; and

	Suspension and termination of membership in the compact. 

	Suspension shall be imposed only after all other reasonable means of securing compliance under the bylaws and rules have been exhausted.  Immediate notice of suspension shall be given by the Interstate Commission to the Governor, the Chief Justice or Chief Judicial Officer of the state; the majority and minority leaders of the defaulting state's legislature, and the State Council.  

	The grounds for default include, but are not limited to, failure of a Compacting State to perform such obligations or responsibilities imposed upon it by this compact, Interstate Commission bylaws, or duly promulgated rules.  The Interstate Commission shall immediately notify the Defaulting State in writing of the penalty imposed by the Interstate Commission on the Defaulting State pending a cure of the default.  The Interstate Commission shall stipulate the conditions and the time period within which the Defaulting State must cure its default.  If the Defaulting State fails to cure the default within the time period specified by the Interstate Commission, in addition to any other penalties imposed herein, the Defaulting State may be terminated from the Compact upon an affirmative vote of a majority of the Compacting States and all rights, privileges and benefits conferred by this Compact shall be terminated from the effective date of suspension.

	Within sixty days of the effective date of termination of a Defaulting State, the Interstate Commission shall notify the Governor, the Chief Justice or Chief Judicial Officer and the Majority and Minority Leaders of the Defaulting State's legislature and the state council of such termination.

	The Defaulting State is responsible for all assessments, obligations and liabilities incurred through the effective date of termination including any obligations, the performance of which extends beyond the effective date of termination.  

	The Interstate Commission shall not bear any costs relating to the Defaulting State unless otherwise mutually agreed upon between the Interstate Commission and the Defaulting State.	Reinstatement following termination of any Compacting State requires both a reenactment of the Compact by the Defaulting State and the approval of the Interstate Commission pursuant to the rules.

	c.	Judicial Enforcement. The Interstate Commission may, by majority vote of the Members, initiate legal action in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia or, at the discretion of the Interstate Commission, in the Federal District where the Interstate Commission has its offices to enforce compliance with the provisions of the Compact, its duly promulgated rules and bylaws, against any Compacting State in default.  In the event judicial enforcement is necessary the prevailing party shall be awarded all costs of such litigation including reasonable attorneys fees.

	d.	Dissolution of Compact. The Compact dissolves effective upon the date of the withdrawal or default of the Compacting State which reduces membership in the Compact to one Compacting State.

	Upon the dissolution of this Compact, the Compact becomes null and void and shall be of no further force or effect, and the business and affairs of the Interstate Commission shall be wound up and any surplus funds shall be distributed in accordance with the bylaws.

	L.2002,c.111,s.12.

2A:168-38  Severability and construction.

	13.	Article XIII. Severability and Construction. The provisions of this Compact shall be severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence or provision is deemed unenforceable, the remaining provisions of the Compact shall be enforceable.

	The provisions of this Compact shall be liberally constructed to effectuate its purposes.

	L.2002,c.111,s.13.

2A:168-39  Binding effect of compact and other laws.

	14.	Article XIV. Binding Effect of Compact and Other Laws.

	a.	Other Laws. Nothing herein prevents the enforcement of any other law of a Compacting State that is not inconsistent with this Compact.

	All Compacting States' laws conflicting with this Compact are superseded to the extent of the conflict.

	b.	Binding Effect of the Compact. All lawful actions of the Interstate Commission, including all rules and bylaws promulgated by the Interstate Commission, are binding upon the Compacting States.

	All agreements between the Interstate Commission and the Compacting States are binding in accordance with their terms.

	Upon the request of a party to a conflict over meaning or interpretation of Interstate Commission actions, and upon a majority vote of the Compacting States, the Interstate Commission may issue advisory opinions regarding such meaning or interpretation.

	In the event any provision of this Compact exceeds the constitutional limits imposed on the legislature of any Compacting State, the obligations, duties, powers or jurisdiction sought to be conferred by such provision upon the Interstate Commission shall be ineffective and such obligations, duties, powers or jurisdiction shall remain in the Compacting State and shall be exercised by the agency thereof to which such obligations, duties, powers or jurisdiction are delegated by law in effect at the time this Compact becomes effective.

	L.2002,c.111,s.14.

2A:168A-1.  Legislative findings
    The Legislature finds and declares that it is in the public interest to assist the rehabilitation of convicted offenders by removing impediments and restrictions upon their ability to obtain employment or to participate in vocational or educational rehabilitation programs based solely upon the existence of a criminal record.

    Therefore, the Legislature finds and declares that notwithstanding the contrary provisions of any law or rule or regulation issued pursuant to law, a person shall not be disqualified or discriminated against by any licensing authority because of any conviction for a crime, unless N.J.S. 2C:51-2 is applicable or unless the conviction relates adversely to the occupation, trade,  vocation, profession or business for which the license or certificate is  sought.

     L.1968, c. 282, s. 1, eff. Sept. 4, 1968.  Amended by L.1974, c. 161, s. 2, eff. Nov. 15, 1974;  L.1981, c. 487, s. 3, eff. Jan. 12, 1982.

2A:168A-2  Application for license, certificate; grounds for refusal; written statement.
  
	2.	Notwithstanding the contrary provisions of any law or rule or regulation issued pursuant to law, no State, county or municipal department, board, officer or agency, hereinafter referred to as "licensing authority" authorized to pass upon the qualifications of any applicant for a license or certificate of authority or qualification to engage in the practice of a profession or business or for admission to an examination to qualify for such a license or certificate may disqualify or discriminate against an applicant for a license or certificate or an application for admission to a qualifying examination on the grounds that the applicant has been convicted of a crime, or adjudged a disorderly person, except that a licensing authority may disqualify or discriminate against an applicant for a license or certificate if N.J.S.2C:51-2 or any disqualifying criminal activity set forth in subsection a. of section 7 of P.L.2009, c.53 (C.17:11C-57) is applicable, or if a conviction for a crime relates adversely to the occupation, trade, vocation, profession or business for which the license or certificate is sought.  In determining that a conviction for a crime relates adversely to the occupation, trade, vocation, profession or business, the licensing authority shall explain in writing how the following factors, or any other factors, relate to the license or certificate sought:
 
	a.	The nature and duties of the occupation, trade, vocation, profession or business, a license or certificate for which the person is applying;
 
	b.	Nature and seriousness of the crime;
 
	c.	Circumstances under which the crime occurred;
 
	d.	Date of the crime;
 
	e.	Age of the person when the crime was committed;
 
	f.	Whether the crime was an isolated or repeated incident;
 
	g.	Social conditions which may have contributed to the crime;
 
	h.	Any evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in prison or in the community, counseling or psychiatric treatment received, acquisition of additional academic or vocational schooling, successful participation in correctional work-release programs, or the recommendation of persons who have or have had the applicant under their supervision.
 
	L.1968, c.282, s.2; amended 1974, c.161, s.3; 1981, c.487, s.4; 2009, c.53, s.71.

2A:168A-3.  Evidence of rehabilitation
    The presentation to a licensing authority of evidence of a pardon or of the  expungement of a criminal conviction, pursuant to N.J.S. 2A:164-28, or of a  certificate of the Federal or State Parole Board, or of the Chief Probation Officer of a United States District Court or a county who has supervised the applicant's probation, that the applicant has achieved a degree of rehabilitation indicating that his engaging in the proposed employment would not be incompatible with the welfare of society shall preclude a licensing authority from disqualifying or discriminating against the applicant.

     L.1968, c. 282, s. 3, eff. Sept. 4, 1968.  Amended by L.1974, c. 161, s. 4, eff. Nov. 15, 1974.

2A:168A-4.  Addiction to drugs or intoxicating liquors within four months of  application
    A licensing authority may disqualify or discriminate against an applicant for a license or certificate on the grounds that the applicant has within 4 months of the application for admission to a qualifying examination been addicted to the habitual use of drugs or intoxicating liquors.

     L.1974, c. 161, s. 5, eff. Nov. 15, 1974.

2A:168A-5.  Regulated employment pursuant to approved program of vocational  or educational rehabilitation
    Notwithstanding the contrary provisions of any law or rule or regulation issued pursuant to law, any licensing authority may permit any person subject to correctional supervision in this State to engage in regulated employment pursuant to an approved program of vocational or educational rehabilitation.

     L.1974, c. 161, s. 6, eff. Nov. 15, 1974.

2A:168A-6.  Inapplicability of act to law enforcement agencies
    This act shall not be applicable to any law enforcement agency; however, nothing herein shall preclude a law enforcement agency in its discretion from adopting the policies and procedures set forth herein.

     L.1974, c. 161, s. 7, eff. Nov. 15, 1974.

2A:168A-7  Issuance of certificate suspending certain restrictions for employment, licensure.
 
	1. a. Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, a certificate may be issued in accordance with the provisions of this act that suspends certain disabilities, forfeitures or bars to employment or professional licensure or certification that apply to persons convicted of criminal offenses.
 
	b.	A certificate issued pursuant to this act shall have the effect of relieving disabilities, forfeitures or bars, except those established or required by federal law, to: 
 
	(1)	public employment, as defined in this section; 
 
	(2)	qualification for a license or certification to engage in the practice of a profession, occupation or business, except the practice of law, or as a mortgage loan originator, or residential mortgage lender or residential mortgage broker as a qualified individual licensee, pursuant to the "New Jersey Residential Mortgage Lending Act," sections 1 through 39 of P.L.2009, c.53 (C.17:11C-51 et seq.); or 
 
	(3)	admission to an examination to qualify for that license or certification, except for the bar examination, a qualified written test for a mortgage loan originator, or residential mortgage lender or broker as a qualified individual licensee, or an examination for a law enforcement, homeland security, or emergency management position. 
 
	A certificate issued pursuant to this act may be limited to one or more enumerated disabilities, forfeitures or bars, or may relieve the subject of all disabilities, forfeitures or bars that may be affected by the act.
 
	c.	For purposes of this act: 
 
	(1)	"Public employment" shall mean employment by a State, county, or municipal agency, but shall not include elected office, or employment in law enforcement, corrections, the judiciary, in a position related to homeland security or emergency management, or any position that has access to sensitive information that could threaten the public health, welfare, or safety. 
 
	(2)	"Qualified offender" refers to a person who has one criminal conviction or who has convictions for more than one crime charged in separate counts of one indictment or accusation.  Multiple convictions charged in two indictments or two accusations, or one indictment and one accusation filed in the same court prior to entry of judgment under any of them, shall be deemed to be one conviction. Convictions of crimes entered more than 10 years prior to an application for a certificate under this act shall not be considered in determining whether a person has one criminal conviction.  In the case of a person seeking relief at the time of sentencing, qualified offender means a person who will have one conviction, as set forth in this paragraph, upon sentencing and issuance of the judgment of conviction.
 
	(3)	"Supervising authority" shall mean the court in the case of a person who was subject to probation or who was not required to serve a period of supervision, or the State Parole Board in the case of a person who was under parole supervision.
 
	L.2007, c.327, s.1; amended 2009, c.53, s.72.

2A:168A-8  Issuance of certificate; conditions.
 	2.	A certificate may be issued pursuant to this act as follows: 

	a. (1) A court, in its discretion, may issue a certificate at the time of sentencing if the applicant: 
 
	(a)	is a qualified offender, who is being sentenced to a non-incarcerative sentence for a second, third, or fourth degree crime;
 
	(b)	has established that a specific licensing or employment disqualification, forfeiture, or bar, will apply to the applicant, and may endanger the applicant's ability to maintain existing public employment or employment for which the applicant has made application, or to engage in a business enterprise for which a license or certification is required; 
 
	(c)	has no pending criminal charges, and there is no information presented that such a charge is imminent; and 
 
	(d)	has established that the relief is consistent with the public interest. 
 
	(2)	A certificate issued under this subsection shall apply only to the specific disability, forfeiture or bar that is affected, which must be specifically described in the certificate document. 
 
	b. (1) A supervising authority may issue a certificate in regard to a qualified offender who is, or had previously been, under supervision by the supervising authority if the supervising authority determines that: 
 
	(a)	the applicant is convicted of a second, third, or fourth degree offense and is eligible for relief under subsection c. of this section;
 
	(b)	the applicant has not been convicted of a crime since the conviction for which the offender is under supervision, has no pending criminal charge, and there is no information presented that such a charge is imminent; 
 
	(c)	issuing the certificate will not pose a substantial risk to public safety; and
 
	(d)	issuing the certificate will assist in the successful reintegration of the offender and is consistent with the public interest. 
 
	(2)	A certificate issued pursuant to this subsection may suspend disabilities, forfeitures, and bars generally within the limits of this act, or only certain disabilities, forfeitures, and bars, specifically named in the certificate document.
 
	c.	A qualified offender is eligible for relief under subsection b. of this section if the offender has not been convicted of:
 
	(1)	 a first degree crime;
 
	(2)	an offense to which section 2 of P.L.1997, c.117 (C.2C:43-7.2) applies;
 
	(3)	a second degree offense defined in chapters 13, 14, 15, 16, 24, 27, 30, 33, 38 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes; 
 
	(4)	a violation of subsection a. of N.J.S.2C:24-4 or paragraph (4) of subsection b. of N.J.S.2C:24-4; 
 
	(5)	a crime requiring registration pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1994, c.133 (C.2C:7-2); 
 
	(6)	a crime committed against a public entity or against a public officer; 
 
	(7)	a crime enumerated in subsection b. of section 2 of P.L.2007, c.49 (C.43:1-3.1) committed by a public employee, which involves or touches upon the employee's office, position, or employment, such that the crime was related directly to the person's performance in, or circumstances flowing from, the specific public office or employment held by the person; 
 
	(8)	any crime committed against a person 16 years of age or younger, or a person with a disability; or 
 
	(9)	a conspiracy or attempt to commit any of the crimes described in this subsection. 
 
	d. (1) A supervising authority may issue a certificate in regard to a qualified offender, when three years have passed since the applicant has completed the incarcerative or supervisory portion of the applicant's sentence, whichever is later, and the supervising authority finds that:
 
	(a)	the applicant is eligible for such relief as defined in subsection e. of this section; 
 
	(b)	issuing the certificate does not pose a substantial risk to public safety; and
 
	(c)	issuing the certificate will assist in the successful reintegration of the offender and is consistent with the public interest. 
 
	(2)	The certificate issued pursuant to this subsection may suspend disabilities, forfeitures and bars generally within the limits of this act, or only certain disabilities, forfeitures, and bars specifically named in the certificate document. 
 
	e.	A qualified offender is eligible for relief under subsection d. of this section if the offender has remained without criminal involvement since the offender's conviction, including that the offender has not subsequently been convicted of a crime, has no pending charges for any crime, and there is no information presented that such a charge is imminent; and is applying for relief from a conviction other than:
 
	(1)	a first degree crime;
 
	(2)	any of the offenses to which section 2 of P.L.1997, c.117 (C.2C:43-7.2) applies; 
 
	(3)	a violation of subsection a. of N.J.S.2C:24-4 or paragraph (4) of subsection b. of N.J.S.2C:24-4;
 
	(4)	a crime requiring registration pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1994, c.133 (C.2C:7-2);
 
	(5)	a crime enumerated in subsection b. of section 2 of P.L.2007, c.49 (C.43:1-3.1) committed by a public employee, which involves or touches upon the employee's office, position, or employment, such that the crime was related directly to the person's performance in, or circumstances flowing from, the specific public office or employment held by the person;
 
	(6)	a crime committed against a person 16 years of age or younger, or a person with a disability; or
 
	(7)	a conspiracy or attempt to commit any offense described in this paragraph.
 
	L.2007, c.327, s.2; amended 2017, c.131, s.2.

2A:168A-9  Certificate considered presumptive evidence of rehabilitation.
 
	3.	A certificate issued pursuant to this act shall be presumptive evidence of the subject's rehabilitation when considered in regard to public employment as defined in this act, or in conjunction with any licensing, or certification process to which this act applies, which in any particular case may or may not be overcome by other evidence or information.  A certificate granted under this act shall not prevent any judicial, administrative, licensing or other body, board, authority or public official from relying on grounds other than the fact of the criminal conviction in exercising any discretionary authority, if any, to suspend, revoke, refuse to issue or refuse to renew any license, permit or other authority or privilege or to determine eligibility or suitability for employment.  
 
	L.2007, c.327, s.3.

2A:168A-10  Notice to prosecutor of issuance, pendency of certificate.
 
 	4.	In all cases, the applicant or the supervising authority shall provide notice to the prosecutor of either the issuance of a certificate or the pendency of an application for a certificate, or both, pursuant to procedures that shall be developed and published by the supervising authority within thirty days of the effective date of this act. 
 
	L.2007, c.327, s.4.

2A:168A-11  Conditions for invalidating certificate.
  
	5. a. A certificate granted pursuant to this act shall no longer be valid if the person who is the subject of the certificate is indicted for a first or second degree crime or convicted of a crime. 
 
	b.	Upon presentation of satisfactory proof that the criminal charges or indictment have been dismissed, or of an acquittal after trial, a certificate revoked under the circumstances described in subsection a. of this section may be reinstated by the issuing entity. 
 
	c.	A certificate may be revoked at any time upon application of the prosecutor or on the supervising authority's own initiative when information is received that circumstances have materially changed such that the relief would not be authorized under this act or is no longer in the public interest.  The supervising authority revoking such a certificate shall notify the subject of the certificate of the revocation.
 
	d.	In addition to any other offense that may apply, a person who knowingly uses or attempts to use a revoked certificate, or a certificate that is no longer valid, in order to obtain a benefit or avoid a disqualification shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense.  For the purposes of this subsection, "uses or attempts to use," shall include knowing failure to disclose to an employer or other affected public entity the revocation or invalidity of a certificate.  
 
	L.2007, c.327, s.5.

2A:168A-12  Inapplicability to private employers.
 
	6.	This act shall not apply to private employers.  A private employer may, in its sole and complete discretion, consider a certificate issued under this statute in making employment decisions.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to create any right, privilege, or duty or to change any right, privilege, or duty existing under law. 
 
	L.2007, c.327, s.6.

2A:168A-13  Report to Governor, Legislature; recording system for certificates.
  
	7.	The State Parole Board and the Administrative Office of the Courts shall report to the Governor and the Legislature on or before the first day of the thirteenth month after the effective date of this act an evaluation of the effectiveness of the implementation of this act, including the number of applications received, considered and granted under the act.  Entities issuing certificates shall develop a system of recording the certificates and provide information to prospective employers regarding whether a certificate has been issued or is valid.  
 
	L.2007, c.327, s.7.

2A:168A-14  Report on impact of prior criminal conviction on private employment opportunities.
 
	8.	The Department of Labor and Workforce Development shall prepare a report detailing the impact of a prior criminal conviction on private employment opportunities for ex-offenders.  The department shall consult with the State Parole Board, and may consult with and seek the assistance of other executive branch agencies, municipalities, agencies and any interested parties.  The report shall include identification of barriers faced by ex-offenders seeking private employment, including those set forth in law, regulation and policies of private employers.  The report shall analyze the effect of the hiring policies of employers with more than 100 employees on the employment of ex-offenders.  In order to encourage cooperation, identities of employers and entities contacted in the course of preparing the report shall remain confidential.  The results of this study shall be reported to the Governor and the Legislature within 180 days from the effective date of this act.  
 
	L.2007, c.327, s.8.

2A:168A-15  Pardons unaffected.
 
 	9.	Nothing in this act shall be deemed to alter, limit or affect the manner of applying for pardons to the Governor, and a certificate issued under this act shall not be deemed or construed to be a pardon.  
 
	L.2007, c.327, s.9.

2A:168A-16  Regulations, guidelines, rules.
 
	10.	The State Parole Board shall promulgate any regulations or issue guidelines necessary to effectuate the provisions of this act.  The court may publish rules or guidelines to implement this act.  
 
	L.2007, c.327, s.10.

2A:169-3.  Arrest of disorderly person without process.
	2A:169-3.	Whenever an offense is committed in his presence, any police officer shall, and any other person may, apprehend without warrant or process any disorderly person, and take him before any magistrate of the county where apprehended.

	L.1951 (1st SS), c.344; amended 2023, c.250, s.10.

2A:170-20.1.  Issuing honorary membership cards or courtesy cards on behalf  of law enforcement organizations.
    It shall be unlawful for any person, for or on behalf of any organization or  association of law enforcement officers, or otherwise, to issue, offer, give,  deliver or distribute any honorary membership card, courtesy card, or card of a  similar nature, certificate, emblem, plaque, or article of a similar nature, of  such organization or association, except to bona fide members or former members  of the law enforcement agency represented by such organization or association  or to such other persons who have performed outstanding or meritorious public  service, and then only in accordance with formal authorization therefor  prescribed by resolution duly adopted by such organization or association.

    The term  "outstanding or meritorious public service"  as used in this section shall in no event be construed to mean or include the contribution or payment of money to such organization or association for any purpose whatsoever.

    Any person who violates any provision of this section is a disorderly person.

     L.1954, c. 181, p. 701, s. 2.

2A:170-51.1  Purchase of certain item for person under 21 years of age, petty disorderly persons offense.
 	3.	A person 21 years of age or older who purchases a tobacco product or cannabis item as defined in section 3 of P.L.2021, c.16 (C.24:6I-33) for a person who is under 21 years of age is a petty disorderly person.
 
	L.1995, c.304, s.3; amended 2005, c.384, s.3; 2017, c.118, s.1; 2021, c.25, s.9.

2A:170-51.2.  Vending machine ordinances not preempted.
	4.	Nothing in P.L.1995, c.304 (C.2A:170-51.1 et al.) or section 1 of P.L.2000, c.87 (C.2A:170-51.4) shall be construed to preempt the provisions of any municipal ordinance concerning vending machines that dispense tobacco products.

	L.1995,c.304,s.4; amended 2000, c.87, s.2.

2A:170-51.4  Sale, distribution of tobacco, electronic smoking device to persons under age 21; prohibited; civil penalties.
	1. a. No person, either directly or indirectly by an agent or employee, or by a vending machine owned by the person or located in the person's establishment, shall sell, offer for sale, complete a delivery to a residence without first obtaining, upon delivery, the signature of an individual who is at least 21 years of age and who resides in that residence, distribute for commercial purpose at no cost or minimal cost or with coupons or rebate offers, give, or furnish to a person under 21 years of age:
 
	(1)	any cigarettes made of tobacco or of any other matter or substance which can be smoked or any cigarette paper or tobacco in any form, including smokeless tobacco; or
 
	(2)	any electronic smoking device that can be used to deliver nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo, or pipe, or any cartridge or other component of the device or related product.
 
	Consistent with federal law, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to an individual performing his or her assigned duties as an employee of the United States Postal Service.
 
	b.	The establishment of the following shall constitute a defense to any prosecution brought pursuant to subsection a. of this section:
 
	that the purchaser of the tobacco product or electronic smoking device, the individual signing for the delivery of the tobacco product or electronic smoking device, or the recipient of the promotional sample falsely represented, by producing either a driver's license or non-driver identification card issued by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, a similar card issued pursuant to the laws of another state or the federal government of Canada, or a photographic identification card issued by a county clerk, that the purchaser or recipient was of legal age to make the purchase, sign for the delivery, or receive the sample.
 
	c.	A person who violates the provisions of subsection a. of this section, including an employee of a retail dealer licensee under P.L.1948, c.65 (C.54:40A-1 et seq.) who actually sells or otherwise provides a tobacco product to a person under 21 years of age, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not less than $500 for the first violation, not less than $1,000 for the second violation, and $2,000 for the third and each subsequent violation.  The civil penalty shall be collected pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.), in a summary proceeding before the municipal court having jurisdiction.  An official authorized by statute or ordinance to enforce the State or local health codes or a law enforcement officer having enforcement authority in that municipality may issue a summons for a violation of the provisions of subsection a. of this section and may serve and execute all process with respect to the enforcement of this section consistent with the Rules of Court. A penalty recovered under the provisions of this subsection shall be recovered by and in the name of the State by the local health agency.  The penalty shall be paid into the treasury of the municipality in which the violation occurred for the general uses of the municipality.
 
	d.	In addition to the provisions of subsection c. of this section, upon the recommendation of the municipality, following a hearing by the municipality, the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury may suspend or, after a second or subsequent violation of the provisions of subsection a. of this section, revoke the license issued under section 202 of P.L.1948, c.65 (C.54:40A-4) of a retail dealer.  The licensee shall be subject to administrative charges, based on a schedule issued by the Director of the Division of Taxation, which may provide for a monetary penalty in lieu of a suspension.
 
	e.	A penalty imposed pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any penalty that may be imposed pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1999, c.90 (C.2C:33-13.1).
 
	L.2000, c.87, s.1; amended 2003, c.175, s.1; 2005, c.384, s.1; 2009, c.182, s.3; 2017, c.118, s.2; 2025, c.226, s.2.

2A:170-51.4a  Delivery requirements for tobacco products, electronic smoking devices.
	1. a. No person shall complete a delivery of a tobacco product or electronic smoking device to a residence without first obtaining, upon delivery of the tobacco product or electronic smoking device, the signature of an individual who is at least 21 years of age and who resides in that residence.  Consistent with federal law, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to an individual performing his or her assigned duties as an employee of the United States Postal Service.
 
	b.	No person shall place a tobacco product or electronic smoking device for delivery to a residence in this State unless the outside of the package, which contains the tobacco product or electronic smoking device, clearly indicates that there is a tobacco product or electronic smoking device within the package.
 
	c.	A violation of this section shall constitute a violation of subsection a. of section 1 of P.L.2000, c.87 (C.2A:170-51.4) and section 3 of P.L.1999, c.90 (C.2C:33-13.1).
 
L.2025, c.226, s.1.

2A:170-51.5  Findings, declarations relative to flavored cigarettes.
 
	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	There has been a proliferation of flavored cigarettes in recent years, and many of these products have fruit, chocolate or other flavors that are particularly attractive to children;
 
	b.	According to public health experts, the existence of these products increases the incidence of tobacco use among children;
 
	c.	The earlier a person begins using tobacco, the more likely the person will become addicted to tobacco products and continue to smoke throughout that person's life;
 
	d.	As a result, flavored cigarettes lead to increased tobacco use and addiction, higher health care costs, and a greater incidence of smoking-related illness and death; and
 
	e.	Therefore, flavored cigarettes pose a significant threat to the health of the general public, and the protection of the public health warrants that the sale and distribution of these products be prohibited in this State.
 
	L.2008, c.91, s.1.

2A:170-51.6  Sales, distribution of certain flavored cigarettes prohibited; definitions; violations, penalties.
 
	2. a. No person, either directly or indirectly by an agent or employee, or by a vending machine owned by the person or located in the person's establishment, shall sell, offer for sale, distribute for commercial purpose at no cost or minimal cost or with coupons or rebate offers, give or furnish, to a person a cigarette, or any component part thereof, which contains a natural or artificial constituent or additive that causes the cigarette or any smoke emanating from that product to have a characterizing flavor other than tobacco, clove or menthol.  In no event shall a cigarette or any component part thereof be construed to have a characterizing flavor based solely on the use of additives or flavorings, or the provision of an ingredient list made available by any means.
 
	As used in this section: 
 
	(1)	"characterizing flavor other than tobacco, clove or menthol" means that:  the cigarette, or any smoke emanating from that product, imparts a distinguishable flavor, taste or aroma other than tobacco, clove or menthol prior to or during consumption, including, but not limited to, any fruit, chocolate, vanilla, honey, candy, cocoa, dessert, alcoholic beverage, herb or spice flavoring; or the cigarette or any component part thereof is advertised or marketed as having or producing any such flavor, taste or aroma; 
 
	(2)	"cigarette" means (a) any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any substance not containing tobacco, and (b) any roll of tobacco wrapped in any substance containing tobacco which, because of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filler, or its packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as a cigarette as described in subparagraph (a) of this paragraph (2); and
 
	(3)	"component part thereof" includes, but is not limited to, the tobacco, paper, roll or filter, or any other matter or substance which can be smoked.
 
	b.	A person who violates the provisions of subsection a. of this section shall be liable to a civil penalty of not less than $250 for the first violation, not less than $500 for the second violation, and $1,000 for the third and each subsequent violation.  The civil penalty shall be collected pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.), in a summary proceeding before the municipal court having jurisdiction.  An official authorized by statute or ordinance to enforce the State or local health codes or a law enforcement officer having enforcement authority in that municipality may issue a summons for a violation of the provisions of subsection a. of this section, and may serve and execute all process with respect to the enforcement of this section consistent with the Rules of Court.  A penalty recovered under the provisions of this subsection shall be recovered by and in the name of the State by the local health agency.  The penalty shall be paid into the treasury of the municipality in which the violation occurred for the general uses of the municipality.
 
	c.	In addition to the provisions of subsection b. of this section, upon the recommendation of the municipality, following a hearing by the municipality, the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury may suspend or, after a second or subsequent violation of the provisions of subsection a. of this section, revoke the license of a retail dealer issued under section 202 of P.L.1948, c.65 (C.54:40A-4).  The licensee shall be subject to administrative charges, based on a schedule issued by the Director of the Division of Taxation, which may provide for a monetary penalty in lieu of a suspension.
 
	L.2008, c.91, s.2.

2A:170-51.7  Sale of dextromethorphan to persons under 18 prohibited; violations, penalties.
 
 	1. a. No person shall sell or offer for sale, either directly or indirectly by an agent or employee, any product containing dextromethorphan as an active ingredient to a person under 18 years of age.
 
	b.	The establishment of all of the following shall constitute a defense to any prosecution brought pursuant to subsection a. of this section:
 
	(1)	that the purchaser of the product falsely represented, by producing either a driver's license or non-driver identification card issued by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, a similar card issued pursuant to the laws of another state or the federal government or Canada, or a photographic identification card issued by a county clerk, that the purchaser was of legal age to make the purchase;
 
	(2)	that the appearance of the purchaser of the product was such that an ordinary prudent person would believe the purchaser to be of legal age to make the purchase; and
 
	(3)	that the sale of the product was made in good faith, relying upon the production of the identification set forth in paragraph (1) of this subsection, the appearance of the purchaser, and the reasonable belief that the purchaser was of legal age to make the purchase.
 
	c.	A person who violates the provisions of subsection a. of this section, including an employee of a retail establishment who actually sells a product containing dextromethorphan as an active ingredient to a person under 18 years of age, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not more than $750.  In the case of a retail establishment that is part of a chain with two or more locations in the State, the violation shall be assessed against the particular retail establishment and not the chain.  The civil penalty shall be collected pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.), in a summary proceeding before the municipal court having jurisdiction.  An official authorized by statute or ordinance to enforce the State or local health codes or a law enforcement officer having enforcement authority in that municipality may issue a summons for a violation of the provisions of subsection a. of this section, and may serve and execute all process with respect to the enforcement of this section consistent with the Rules of Court.  A penalty recovered under the provisions of this subsection shall be recovered by and in the name of the State by the local health agency.  The penalty shall be paid into the treasury of the municipality in which the violation occurred for the general uses of the municipality.
 
	d.	The provisions of this act shall not apply to any prescription medication containing dextromethorphan as an active ingredient that is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription.
 
	L.2015, c.114, s.1.

2A:170-51.8  Listing of products containing dextromethorphan on Internet website.
 
 	2.	The Department of Health shall include on its Internet website a comprehensive list of products that contain dextromethorphan as an active ingredient.  This requirement may be satisfied by including on the Department of Health website a link to the list of products containing dextromethorphan as an active ingredient that is published by the National Institutes of Health, provided that such list is current and accurate.
 
	L.2015, c.114, s.2.

2A:170-51.9  Sale, distribution of liquid nicotine prohibited; exceptions; violations, penalties.
	1. a. No person, either directly or indirectly by an agent or employee, or by a vending machine owned by the person or located in the person's establishment, shall sell, offer for sale, give, furnish, or distribute for commercial purpose at no cost or minimal cost or with coupons or rebate offers, to any other person, liquid nicotine in a liquid nicotine container, which is intended for use in a vapor product, unless the liquid nicotine is sold, offered for sale, given, furnished, or distributed for commercial purpose in a child-resistant container. 
 
	As used in this section:
 
	(1)	"Child-resistant container" means a container which is designed and constructed in a manner that meets the federal effectiveness specifications set forth in 16 C.F.R. 1700.15 and the special packaging testing requirements set forth in 16 CFR 1700.20, so that it is significantly difficult for a child five years of age or younger to open the package or otherwise risk exposure to liquid nicotine.
 
	(2)	"Liquid nicotine" means any solution containing nicotine which is designed or sold for use with an electronic smoking device.
 
	(3)	"Liquid nicotine container" means a bottle or other container of a liquid, wax, gel, or other substance containing nicotine, where the liquid or other contained substance is sold, marketed, or intended for use in a vapor product.  "Liquid nicotine container" does not include a liquid or other substance containing nicotine in a cartridge that is sold, marketed, or intended for use in a vapor product, provided that such cartridge is prefilled and sealed by the manufacturer, with the seal remaining permanently intact through retail purchase and use; is only disposable and is not refillable; and is not intended to be opened by the consumer.
 
	(4)	"Vapor product" means any non-combustible product containing nicotine that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, to produce vapor from nicotine in a solution or any form.  "Vapor product" includes, but is not limited to, any electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, and any vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine in a solution or other form that is intended to be used with, or in, any such device.  "Vapor product" does not include any product that is approved, and that is regulated as a prescription drug delivery service, by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
 
	b.	A person who violates the provisions of subsection a. of this section shall be liable to a civil penalty of not less than $250 for the first violation, not less than $500 for the second violation, and $1,000 for the third and each subsequent violation.  The civil penalty shall be collected pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.), in a summary proceeding before the municipal court having jurisdiction.  An official authorized by statute or ordinance to enforce the State or local health codes, or a law enforcement officer having enforcement authority in that municipality, may issue a summons for a violation of the provisions of subsection a. of this section, and may serve and execute all process with respect to the enforcement of this section consistent with the Rules of Court.  A penalty recovered under the provisions of this subsection shall be recovered by and in the name of the State by the local health agency.  The penalty shall be paid into the treasury of the municipality in which the violation occurred for the general uses of the municipality.
 
	c.	In addition to the provisions of subsection b. of this section, upon the recommendation of the municipality, following a hearing by the municipality, the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury may suspend or, after a second or subsequent violation of the provisions of subsection a. of this section, revoke the license of a retail dealer issued under section 202 of P.L.1948, c.65 (C.54:40A-4). The licensee shall be subject to administrative charges, based on a schedule issued by the Director of the Division of Taxation, which may provide for a monetary penalty in lieu of a suspension.
 
	L.2015, c.294, s.1.

2A:170-51.10  Rules, regulations.
	2.	The Commissioner of Health shall, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this act.  
 
	L.2015, c.294, s.2.

2A:170-51.11  Prohibitions concerning sale of tobacco, vapor products at retail; violations, penalties.
 	1. a.  No person shall, either directly or indirectly by an agent or employee, when engaging in the sale or offer for sale of any tobacco or vapor product to a consumer at retail:
 
	(1)	offer, provide, or accept coupons, including online coupons;
 
	(2)	offer or provide price reduction promotions, including online promotional discount codes; or
 
	(3)	offer or provide price rebates.
 
	b.	A person who violates the provisions of subsection a. of this section shall be liable to a civil penalty of not less than $250 for the first violation, not less than $500 for the second violation, and $1,000 for the third and each subsequent violation.  The civil penalty shall be collected pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.), in a summary proceeding before the municipal court having jurisdiction.  An official authorized by statute or ordinance to enforce the State or local health codes or a law enforcement officer having enforcement authority in that municipality may issue a summons for a violation of the provisions of subsection a. of this section, and may serve and execute all process with respect to the enforcement of this section consistent with the Rules of Court.  A penalty recovered under the provisions of this subsection shall be recovered by and in the name of the State by the local health agency.  The penalty shall be paid into the treasury of the municipality in which the violation occurred for the general uses of the municipality.
 
	c.	In addition to the provisions of subsection b. of this section, upon the recommendation of the municipality, following a hearing by the municipality, the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury may suspend or, after a second or subsequent violation of the provisions of subsection a. of this section, revoke a license issued under section 202 of P.L.1948, c.65 (C.54:40A-4) of a retail dealer.  The licensee shall be subject to administrative charges, based on a schedule issued by the Director of the Division of Taxation, which may provide for a monetary penalty in lieu of a suspension.
 
	d.	A penalty imposed pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other penalty that may be imposed in connection with the offense.
 
	e.	Nothing in this section shall apply to  coupons  , price reductions, or price rebates for smoking cessation products, including gum, lozenges, or other aids to smoking cessation approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration , and nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a medical cannabis dispensary or clinical registrant issued a permit pursuant to P.L.2009, c.307 (C.24:6I-1 et al.) from using coupons, price reductions, or price rebates in connection with medical cannabis, paraphernalia, or other related products dispensed to or on behalf of a registered qualifying patient.  
 
	Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose liability on news media that accept or public advertising that may include coupons, price reductions, or rebates that violate the provisions of this section.
 
	f.	As used in this section: 
 
	"Tobacco product" means cigarettes made of tobacco or of any other matter or substance which can be smoked, or any cigarette paper or tobacco in any form, including smokeless tobacco.
 
	"Vapor product" means any non-combustible product containing nicotine that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, to produce vapor from nicotine in a solution or any form.  "Vapor product" includes, but is not limited to, any electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, and any vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine in a solution or other form that is intended to be used with, or in, any such device.  "Vapor product" does not include any product that is approved, and that is regulated as a prescription drug delivery service, by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
 
	L.2019, c.396, s.1.

2A:170-51.12  Sale of flavored vapor products prohibited; violations, penalties.
 	1. a. No retailer, either directly or indirectly by an agent or employee, or by a vending machine owned by the retailer or located in the retailer's establishment, shall sell, offer for sale, distribute for commercial purpose at no cost or minimal cost or with coupons or rebate offers, give or furnish, to a person any vapor product that has a characterizing flavor.
 
	b.	A retailer that violates the provisions of subsection a. of this section shall be liable to a civil penalty of not less than $500 for the first violation, not less than $1,000 for the second violation, and not less than $2,000 for the third and each subsequent violation.  The civil penalty shall be collected pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.), in a summary proceeding before the municipal court having jurisdiction.  An official authorized by statute or ordinance to enforce the State or local health codes or a law enforcement officer having enforcement authority in that municipality shall issue a summons for a violation of the provisions of subsection a. of this section, and shall serve and execute all process with respect to the enforcement of this section consistent with the Rules of Court.  A penalty recovered under the provisions of this subsection shall be recovered by and in the name of the State by the local health agency.  The penalty shall be paid into the treasury of the municipality in which the violation occurred for the general uses of the municipality.
 
	c.	In addition to the provisions of subsection b. of this section, the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury:
 
	(1)	shall, upon a third and each subsequent violation of the provisions of subsection a. of this section, following a hearing by the municipality, suspend, for a period of not less than three years, the license issued under section 4 of P.L.2019, c.147 (C.54:40B-3.3) of a vapor business; and
 
	(2)	notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection, upon a fourth or subsequent violation of the provisions of subsection a. of this section, may, upon recommendation by the municipality and following a hearing by the municipality, revoke the license issued under section 4 of P.L.2019, c.147 (C.54:40B-3.3) of a vapor business.  
 
	A licensee whose license is subject to suspension or revocation shall additionally be subject to administrative charges, based on a schedule issued by the Director of the Division of Taxation.
 
	d.	Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to medical cannabis, medical cannabis products, paraphernalia, or related supplies dispensed to or on behalf of a registered qualifying patient pursuant to the "Jake Honig Compassionate Use Medical Cannabis Act," P.L.2009, c.307 (C.24:6I-1 et al.).
 
	e.	As used in this section: 
 
	"Characterizing flavor" means a distinguishable flavor, taste, or aroma other than tobacco, including, but not limited to, any fruit, chocolate, vanilla, honey, candy, cocoa, dessert, alcoholic beverage, herb, mint, menthol, wintergreen, or spice flavoring, that is imparted, prior to or during consumption, by a vapor product, including any smoke or vapor emanating from that product.  A vapor product shall be deemed to have a characterizing flavor if the product is advertised or marketed as having or producing any such distinguishable flavor, taste, or aroma.
	"Vapor product" means any device that may be used to deliver any aerosolized or vaporized substance to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, vape pen, or e-hookah.  "Vapor product" includes any component, part, or accessory of the device, and also includes any substance that may be aerosolized or vaporized by such device, regardless of whether the substance contains nicotine.  "Vapor product" does not include any drug, device, or combination product approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration pursuant to the "Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act," 21 U.S.C. s.301 et seq.
 
	L.2019, c.425, s.1.

2A:170-51.13  Provision of cannabis item to person under 21; violations, penalties.
 	6. a. A person who is not otherwise subject to the penalty provisions for a licensed cannabis establishment, distributor, or delivery service, or agent or employee thereof, for selling or otherwise providing a cannabis item to a person under 21 years of age as set forth in section 64 of P.L.2021, c.16 (C.2C:35-10d), shall not, either directly or indirectly by an agent or employee, sell, offer for sale, distribute for commercial purpose or otherwise at no cost or minimal cost or with coupons or rebate offers, give, or furnish, any cannabis item as defined in section 3 of P.L.2021, c.16 (C.24:6I-33) to a person under 21 years of age.
 
	b.	A person who violates the provisions of subsection a. of this section who actually sells or otherwise provides a cannabis item to a person under 21 years of age, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not less than $250 for the first violation, not less than $500 for the second violation, and shall be guilty of a petty disorderly persons offense for the third and each subsequent violation.  The civil penalty shall be collected pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.), in a summary proceeding before the municipal court having jurisdiction.  An official authorized by the Cannabis Regulatory Commission established pursuant to section 31 of P.L.2019, c.153 (C.24:6I-24), or authorized by statute or ordinance to enforce the State or local health codes or a law enforcement officer having enforcement authority in that municipality may issue a summons for a violation of the provisions of subsection a. of this section, and, with respect to a civil penalty, may serve and execute all process with respect to the enforcement of this section consistent with the Rules of Court.  A civil penalty recovered under the provisions of this subsection shall be recovered by and in the name of the State by the local health agency.  The penalty shall be paid into the treasury of the municipality in which the violation occurred for the general uses of the municipality.
 
	c.	The establishment of all of the following shall constitute a defense to any action brought pursuant to subsection a. of this section:
 
	(1)	that the purchaser or the recipient of the cannabis item falsely represented, by producing a driver's license or non-driver identification card issued by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, a similar card issued pursuant to the laws of another state or the federal government of Canada, a photographic identification card issued by a county clerk, or other form of government-issued identification described in subparagraph (a) of paragraph (6) of subsection a. of section 18 of P.L.2021, c.16 (C.24:6I-35), that the purchaser or recipient was of legal age to make the purchase or receive the cannabis item;
 
	(2)	that the appearance of the purchaser or recipient was such that an ordinary prudent person would believe the purchaser or recipient to be of legal age to make the purchase or receive the cannabis item; and
 
	(3)	that the sale or distribution was made in good faith, relying upon the production of the identification set forth in paragraph (1) of this subsection, the appearance of the purchaser or recipient, and in the reasonable belief that the purchaser or recipient was of legal age to make the purchase or receive the sample.
 
	d.	A civil penalty imposed pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any penalty that may be imposed pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1999, c.90 (C.2C:33-13.1).
 
	L.2021, c.25, s.6.

2A:170-51.14  Tobacco sellers to offer at least one type of nicotine replacement therapy drug, device, combination product; definitions.
	1. a. Any entity, other than a cigar shop, that sells, offers for sale, or distributes for commercial purpose any tobacco product shall maintain a stock of, and offer for retail sale, at least one type of nicotine replacement therapy drug, device, or combination product that has been approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration for cessation of tobacco use pursuant to the "Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act," 21 U.S.C. s.301 et seq.
 
	b.	An entity that is subject to the requirements of subsection a. of this section shall have the discretion to determine:
 
	(1)	the number and type of nicotine replacement therapy products that the entity will stock and offer for sale;
 
	(2)	the quantity of each nicotine replacement therapy product that is stocked and offered for sale; and
 
	(3)	whether the entity will stock and offer for sale more than one type of nicotine replacement therapy product.
 
	c.	An entity that is subject to the requirements of subsection a. of this section that sells out of the entity's full stock of nicotine replacement therapy products shall have five business days to place an order for a new stock of a nicotine replacement therapy product, and shall have 14 days from the date the entity sells its last nicotine replacement therapy product to again stock and offer for retail sale a nicotine replacement therapy product.
 
	d.	An entity that is subject to the requirements of subsection a. of this section shall:
 
	(1)	display nicotine replacement therapy products that are offered for retail sale in a location behind the sales counter;
 
	(2)	provide printed notice within the establishment that nicotine replacement therapy products are available for retail sale at that location; and
 
	(3)	display the official logo, phone number, and Internet address of the NJ Smoking Quitline or a successor program.
 
	e.	The Commissioner of Health may establish requirements concerning how and where materials described in paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection c. of this section shall be displayed, as well as requirements concerning the size and other characteristics of the materials.
 
	f.	As used in this section:
 
	"Cigar shop" means a retail establishment wherein the only tobacco products and products related to tobacco use that are available for sale or commercial distribution are cigars and cigar accessories, including lighters, cigar cutters, humidors, and cigar carrying tubes.  An establishment shall be considered a cigar shop for the purposes of this section regardless of whether the establishment offers other, non-tobacco products for sale or commercial distribution.
 
	"Tobacco product" means any product containing, made of, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether inhaled, absorbed, or ingested by other means, including, but not limited to, a cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, or snus; any vapor product; and any component, part, or accessory of a product containing, made of, or derived from tobacco or nicotine or a vapor product, regardless of whether the component, part, or accessory contains tobacco or nicotine. "Tobacco product" includes, but is not limited to, filters, rolling papers, blunt or hemp wraps, hookahs, and pipes.

	L.2021, c.475.

