TITLE 34       	LABOR AND WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION

34:1-1.  Definitions
    As used in this title:

     "Commissioner"  means the commissioner of labor.

      "Deputy commissioner"  means the several deputy commissioners of labor except in chapter 15 of this title (s. 34:15-1 et seq.), in which  "deputy commissioner"  shall mean the several deputy commissioners of compensation.

     "Department"  means the department of labor.

      "Inspector"  means agents and employees of the department whose duty it is  to make any inspection or investigation.

34:1-2.  Department continued;  organization
    The department of labor, hereinafter in this title referred to as the "department" , organized by an act entitled  "An act to reorganize the department of labor;  to provide for the execution of its powers and the performance of its duties through departmental bureaus, under the supervision and control of the commissioner of labor;  and as incidental to such reorganization, to provide for the transfer and assignment of officials and employees in the present department, and to extend the term of office of the commissioner of labor,"  passed March fourteenth, one thousand nine hundred and  sixteen (L.1916, c. 40, p. 67), as amended and supplemented, is continued.

    It shall consist of:

     One commissioner;

     A bureau of general and structural inspection and explosives;

     A bureau of hygiene, sanitation, and mine inspection;

     A bureau of electrical and mechanical equipment;

     A bureau of engineers' and firemen's licenses;

     A bureau of statistics and records;

     A workmen's compensation bureau;

     A bureau of employment;

     A bureau for women and children.

34:1-3.  Principal office
    The department shall have its principal office in Trenton.

34:1-4.  Commissioner;  appointment, term and salary
    The commissioner shall be a citizen and resident of this state, appointed by  the governor, by and with the advice and consent of the senate.  He shall hold  his office for the term of five years and until his successor is appointed and  qualified.  He shall receive a salary of six thousand dollars per annum.  He  shall also be chairman of the workmen's compensation bureau and for his  services in that capacity shall receive the sum of fifteen hundred dollars per  annum.

34:1-5.  Duties of commissioner;  assignment of duties to bureaus; supervision over deputies and inspectors
    The commissioner shall be the executive and administrative head of the department.  All powers and duties vested in and devolved upon the commissioner  or the department shall be exercised and performed by him in person or under  his personal supervision and control, through and by any bureau or  representative thereof duly authorized by the commissioner for that purpose.   When not inconsistent with the provisions of any statute, he shall assign to  the various bureaus and cause to be performed through them, under his  supervision and in his name, such duties as may have been or hereafter may be  devolved generally upon the department or upon the commissioner, to the end  that through the several bureaus, each performing its assigned correlated  functions, the work of the department shall be economically, efficiently and  promptly performed.

    The commissioner shall exercise supervision and control over the deputy commissioners and the inspectors.

34:1-5.1  Annual determination of resort municipalities.

	2.	The Department of Labor shall annually determine which municipalities qualify as resort municipalities and determine and certify the annual mean population of resort municipalities.  This information shall be transmitted to the Office of the Attorney General by March 31 following the end of the reporting year for use in the preparation of per capita crime statistics pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1966, c.37 (C.52:17B-5.4).  The first determination shall be made as soon as practicable, but no later than one year after the effective date of this act.

	L.1998,c.50,s.2.

34:1-5.2  Annual mean population of resort municipalities.

	3.	As used in this act:

	"Annual mean population" means for each resort municipality the following:

				12P + 3SP

			AMP =.................

				      12

where AMP equals Annual Mean Population

	P equals Population

	SP equals Seasonal Population.

	"Population" means the year-round population of the resort municipality shown in the most recent State population estimates published by the Department of Labor, except that in the year of promulgation of a federal decennial census, the census figures shall be used.

	"Resort municipality" means a municipality which, because of its recreational, entertainment or amusement characteristics or facilities or its close proximity to such characteristics or facilities, experiences a total increase during the seasonal period in the number of persons temporarily resident therein of 25 percent or more of its population.

	"Seasonal population" means the average of the estimated number of persons temporarily resident in the municipality during the three consecutive months when the temporary population is greatest.

	"Temporarily resident" means the occupying for any period of time during the seasonal period by any person not counted as a resident of the municipality for population purposes of an accommodation in a rented residential unit or vacation home.

	L.1998,c.50,s.3.

34:1-5.3  Estimated seasonal population of resort municipalities.

	4. a. The seasonal population of each resort municipality shall be estimated by the Department of Labor by taking into account such factors as it deems advisable and appropriate to determine such estimates.

	b.	The department may call for and obtain any records and assistance of the several departments and divisions of the State and the respective municipalities as it deems necessary or helpful in carrying out the purposes of this act.

	L.1998,c.50,s.4.

34:1-5.4  Rules, regulations.

	5.	The Commissioner of Labor may adopt and promulgate, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), such rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this act as he shall deem necessary.

	L.1998,c.50,s.5.

34:1-6.  Inspections;  enforcement districts
    The commissioner shall enforce the provisions of this title and exercise supervision and control over the deputy commissioners, bureau chiefs and all inspectors, and shall, as often as is practicable, cause inspections to be made  of all establishments and places regulated or affected by this title.

    He may divide the state into districts and assign inspectors to such districts and in his discretion transfer them from one district to another.

34:1-7.  Inspectors graded
    Inspectors shall be classified into four grades which shall be designated respectively first grade, second grade, third grade and fourth grade.

    Inspectors of each grade shall receive such compensation as is or may be fixed by the civil service commission in accordance with the provisions of law.

    Inspectors of the third and fourth grades shall be appointed from the list of eligibles for each respective grade as ascertained by open competitive examination and submitted by the board of civil service commissioners.

    Any inspector having satisfactorily served five years as inspector of the third grade shall on recommendation of the commissioner be admitted to a noncompetitive promotion examination by the board of civil service commissioners and upon successfully passing such examination shall be promoted to the second grade.

    Similarly any inspector having satisfactorily served five years as inspector  of the second grade shall on recommendation of the commissioner be admitted to  a noncompetitive promotion examination conducted by the board of civil service  commissioners, and, upon successfully passing such examination, shall be  promoted to the first grade.

    Appointments of inspectors of the first and second grades shall not be made  otherwise than after noncompetitive promotion examination.

34:1-8.  Inspectors;  duties
    Inspectors shall perform such duties as the commissioner shall direct.

34:1-9.  Personnel;  employment;  assignment and transfers;  salaries
    The commissioner shall be the appointing authority of the department and shall in accordance with the civil service laws employ such inspectors, clerks,  stenographers and other personnel as he may consider necessary and shall fix  the salaries of officers and employees, subject to the provisions of Title 11,  Civil Service, except where otherwise provided by statute.  He may assign or  transfer clerks, stenographers and inspectors from one bureau to another or  combine the clerical force of two or more bureaus as may be necessary or  advisable.  He may require from one bureau assistance in the work of another  bureau.  He may abolish any office or position which in his judgment it may be  unnecessary to retain.

    The organization of the department is intended to facilitate the economical  and efficient performance of its work and not to impair the control or  responsibility of the commissioner.

34:1-10.  Additional personnel
    The commissioner may employ additional inspectors, expert investigators or advisers for such period as he shall consider necessary and at such compensation as shall be fixed by him or otherwise determinable by authority of  law.  He may also appoint volunteer inspectors to serve without compensation.   All persons appointed under this section shall have the same rights and powers  as regular inspectors.

34:1-11.  Expenses allowed
    Deputy commissioners, bureau heads and inspectors of the department shall, in addition to the annual salaries received by them, receive the necessary expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties.

34:1-12.  Badges and certificates of authority
    The deputy commissioners, chief inspectors and inspectors shall be provided  with certificates of authority by the secretary of state, which shall be  exhibited on demand by the person in charge of any place about to be inspected  or investigated.

    The commissioner may provide badges for department and bureau officers and inspectors.

34:1-13.  Oaths and affidavits;  authority to administer
    The commissioner, deputy commissioners and inspectors may administer oaths and take affidavits in matters relating to the enforcement of the provisions of  this title.

34:1-14.  Inspectors not to engage in other business;  hours of labor
    No inspector shall engage in any business, occupation or employment during his term of office that will in any way interfere with or prevent his full and faithful performance of his duties.

    Each inspector shall, except when prevented by illness or other disability,  devote at least eight hours each day, Sundays, Saturdays and holidays excepted,  and four hours each Saturday, to the discharge of his duties.

34:1-15.  Inspections and reports
    The commissioner, deputy commissioners and inspectors shall have the right at all reasonable hours to enter and inspect all places and establishments regulated or affected by this title and each inspector shall make a report in writing of such inspections to the commissioner at least once in each week.

34:1-16.  Obstructing or impersonating officers;  penalty
    No person shall obstruct, hinder or delay, or interfere with, by force or otherwise, the performance of any duty under the provisions of this title by the commissioner or by any of the deputy commissioners, inspectors or truant officers, or refuse to answer, in writing or otherwise, questions asked by such  officers relating to the matters coming under the provisions of article 2 of  chapter 2 (s. 34:2-2 et seq.) and article 4 of chapter 2 (s. 34:2-31 et seq.) of  this title.  No person shall impersonate an officer or inspector of the  department or forge his certificate of authority.

    Any person, corporation or firm violating any of the provisions of this section shall, for each offense, be liable to a penalty of fifty dollars.

34:1-17.  Minors;  reports to school officers
    Each inspector shall note in writing the names of minors discharged from any  employment and within twenty-four hours thereafter shall send or deliver a list  of such minors with their names in full, residence by street and number, name  of place from which discharged and date of discharge, to the principal of the  public school in district where such minors reside or to the truant officer in  charge of such district.

34:1-18.  Prosecutions for violations
    The commissioner shall prosecute violations of the provisions of this title  in any court of competent jurisdiction.

34:1-19.  Report to governor
    The commissioner shall, on or before October thirty-first in each year, make  report to the governor of the work of the department.

34:1-20.  Rules, regulations and orders
    The commissioner may make and publish rules and regulations not inconsistent  with law as he shall deem necessary to enforce the provisions of this title.

    Whenever any condition is found to exist in contravention of any provision of this title, the commissioner may by written order signed by him specifying the things to be done and the time for compliance, require such condition to be  corrected.

34:1-23.  Fees for approval of plans, specifications, buildings, or new work;  computation;  disposition
    The commissioner may charge a fee of not less than $15.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for issuing a certificate of approval of any plans or specifications,  or both, required by law or regulation of the department to be submitted to him  for approval.

    In fixing the amount of such fees required by the preceding paragraph, the commissioner shall make the computation on the following basis:  A fee of $15.00 for the first $15,000.00 of approved valuation or any part thereof, and thereafter $1.00 per $1,000.00 of approved valuation or part thereof, up to a maximum fee of $1,000.00.  Before a valuation is submitted to the commissioner on a form for that and other purposes for approval, the commissioner may prepare or order to be prepared by the applicant an estimate of cost and the decision of the commissioner as to the proper amount to be considered the approved valuation for the work shall be final.

    The commissioner may charge a fee of not less than $5.00 nor more than $20.00 for issuing a certificate of approval of (a) any building or premises or  the occupancy of said building or premises coming under his jurisdiction, where  such approval is required to be issued by him for a specific purpose by law or  regulation of the department, or (b) new work performed in such building on  recommendation of the commissioner; provided, that nothing contained herein  shall be construed to decrease the amount of any fee provided for by any other  statute or regulation of the department.

    In fixing the amount of such fees provided for in the preceding paragraph the commissioner shall be governed by the amount of work and expense involved in the examination of such building.

    Notwithstanding the provisions of any other general, local or special laws,  all fees and moneys derived from the operation of this section shall be remitted to the State Treasurer and by him deposited in the General State Fund and the cost of administration of this section shall be included in the annual appropriation law.

     Amended by L.1942, c. 234, p. 636, s. 1;  L.1950, c. 39, p. 75, s. 1; L.1971,  c. 154, s. 5, eff. May 20, 1971.

34:1-24.  Fees for blue prints and publications
    The commissioner may charge a reasonable fee for blue prints, literature and  publications issued by the department.

34:1-25.  Moneys paid to state treasurer
    Fees and moneys collected by the commissioner under the provisions of this title shall be paid by him to the state treasurer.

34:1-38.1.  Mechanical inspection bureau;  composition;  examining board; appointment;  qualifications of members;  duties of bureau
    There shall be within the Division of Labor, Department of Labor and Industry, a mechanical inspection bureau which shall administer engineers' and firemen's licensing and boiler, pressure vessel and refrigeration plant inspection, and shall contain an examining board and a board of boiler, pressure vessel and refrigeration rules.  There shall be within the mechanical inspection bureau a deputy director of the Division of Labor in charge of the bureau, an assistant chief of said bureau and an examining board composed of the deputy director, the assistant chief and not less than 2 nor more than 4 additional examiners.  They shall be appointed by the Commissioner of Labor and  Industry in accordance with Title 11, Civil Service, of the Revised Statutes.   The members of the board shall:  (1) be citizens of the State of New Jersey;   (2) have held, for at least 1 year, a Class I, Grade A operating engineer's  license issued by the Department of Labor and Industry;  and (3) either (a)  have had experience for at least 10 years as a Grade A or Grade B New Jersey  licensed engineer, or (b) have held a position of equal responsibility and  duration or (c) have been engaged for at least 5 years as an inspector pursuant  to sections 34:1-34 through 34:1-45 of the Revised Statutes.

    The members of the mechanical inspection bureau shall perform such duties as  the commissioner shall prescribe and from time to time, report to the commissioner in such form as he shall approve.

     L.1960, c. 134, p. 646, s. 1.

34:1-38.2.  Powers and duties of examining board
    The examining board of the mechanical inspection bureau shall administer the  licensing of engineers and firemen and the inspection of boilers, pressure  vessels and refrigeration plants.  The examining board shall exercise  supervision over all inspections of boilers, pressure vessels and refrigeration  plants required by law, in addition to those actually performed by the  Mechanical Inspection Bureau.

     L.1960, c. 134, p. 647, s. 2.

34:1-40.  Prescription of duties and adoption of rules and regulations by commissioner;  conduct of examinations;  issuance of licenses
    The commissioner shall prescribe the duties of and adopt all necessary rules, regulations and by-laws for the operation of the mechanical inspection bureau not inconsistent with law, and shall prescribe rules for the enforcement  of chapter 7 of this Title (34:7-1 et seq.) and for the examination and  licensing of persons required to be licensed by the provisions of said chapter.   Such regulations shall specify the terms and conditions under which licenses  shall be issued or renewed;  and provide for revocation of license for proper  cause.  The license examinations shall be conducted by 1 or more members of the  examining board.

    All licenses recommended by the examining board shall issue under the hand and seal of the commissioner whose office shall preserve a record thereof. Such licenses shall also be signed by the member or members of the examining board conducting the examination therefor.

     Amended by L.1946, c. 249, p. 883, s. 2;  L.1960, c. 134, p. 647, s. 3.

34:1-41.  Expenses of members of mechanical inspection bureau
    Each member of the mechanical inspection bureau shall be paid his necessary  expenses incurred in the performance of duty.

     Amended by L.1960, c. 134, p. 648, s. 4.

34:1-44.  Inspectors;  eligibility and qualifications;  certificate
    Any citizen of the State having had at least 5 years' experience as engineer  in the maintenance and operation of steam boilers, or as boiler maker, or as  inspector for an insurance company specializing in the inspection and insurance  of boilers and licensed to do business within the State, who shall  satisfactorily pass the examination held by the examining board as required by  section 34:1-45 of this Title, and who shall meet the requirements of the Civil  Service Commission with regards to character, fitness and physical condition,  shall receive from the commissioner a certificate of competency which shall  authorize him to inspect boilers, pressure vessels and refrigeration plants  within the State and which shall make him eligible for examination by the Civil  Service Commission for the position of boiler, pressure vessel and  refrigeration plant inspector in the department.

     Amended by L.1960, c. 134, p. 648, s. 5.

34:1-45.  Examinations
    The commissioner shall from time to time direct the examining board of the mechanical inspection bureau to hold examinations for inspectors and shall prescribe the rules for and scope of such examination.

     Amended by L.1960, c. 134, p. 648, s. 6.

34:1-47.  Board of boiler, pressure vessel and refrigeration rules; composition;  rules and regulations
    The Governor shall appoint 6 citizens of this State, 2 of whom shall be professional engineers licensed by this State, and who shall represent the following interests:  one manufacturer of boilers, pressure vessels or refrigeration equipment;  one authorized insurer of boilers, pressure vessels and refrigeration equipment in this State;  one operator of boiler, pressure vessels or refrigeration equipment in this State and licensed by the Mechanical  Inspection Bureau;  2 users of boilers, pressure vessels or refrigeration  equipment in this State, and one resident of this State representing the  general public.

    All of these appointees shall serve at the pleasure of the Governor, and together with the commissioner and the examining board in the mechanical inspection bureau shall constitute a board of boiler, pressure vessel and refrigeration rules.  This board shall meet at the call of the commissioner, or  his designee, who shall be chairman, and it shall promulgate, after a public  hearing, subsequent to the publication of notice of said hearing, rules and  regulations for the safe and proper construction and installation and use of  steam boilers, pressure vessels and refrigeration plants which are subject to  the provisions of article 2, chapter 7 of this Title.

     Amended by L.1960, c. 134, p. 648, s. 7;  L.1967, c. 213, s. 1, eff. Oct. 5, 1967.

34:1-48.  Chief of bureau of statistics and records;  appointment
    The bureau of statistics and records shall be under the direction of a chief  of bureau who shall be appointed by the commissioner.

34:1-49.  Duties of bureau in general
    The bureau of statistics and records shall collect, classify and report to the legislature, on or before the last day of October in each year, statistical  details relating to labor in the state with particular regard to the  commercial, industrial, social, educational and sanitary condition of the laboring classes, and in all suitable and lawful ways foster and encourage all productive industries, with the view to their permanent establishment upon a prosperous basis, both to employer and employed.

34:1-50.  Commercial statistics and information
    The annual report of the bureau shall include statistics showing the number  of private firms and corporations engaged in the several industries in this  state;  the capital invested;  amount of raw material used and its cost value;   amount of goods manufactured and the selling price of said goods; the number  of persons employed, by months, and distinguished as to sex; total wages paid;   classification of wages, and such other information as may be necessary to  show the true condition of each of said manufacturing industries.

34:1-51.  Names of informants not to be divulged
    The information secured shall be presented in the annual report by figures only;  the names of persons, firms or corporations shall in no case be printed and the business of manufacturers, individually, shall not be divulged.

34:1-52.  Returns by employers
    It shall be the duty of every owner, operator, lessee, manager or superintendent of every factory, mill, workshop, mine or other establishment or  industry in which labor is employed within this state, to make such reports or  returns on blanks furnished by the bureau as the bureau may require for  compiling statistics authorized by law within the time prescribed therefor, and  to certify to the correctness of the same.

34:1-53.  Penalty for failure to report
    Any owner, operator, lessee, manager or superintendent of an establishment or industry in which labor is employed within this state, who willfully neglects or refuses to make return or report as and when required pursuant to section 34:1-52 of this title shall be subject to a penalty of fifty dollars for each such failure or delay, to be recovered in an action at law brought by and in the name of the commissioner.

34:1-54.  Power of chief of bureau to examine witnesses
    The chief of the bureau of statistics and records shall have power to examine witnesses under oath.

34:1-55.  Bulletins and pamphlets
    The bureau of industrial statistics and records shall publish and issue from  time to time bulletins and pamphlets pertaining to its work and shall perform  such other duties as the commissioner shall direct.

34:1-56.  Industrial directory
    The bureau of statistics and records shall continue the compilation and publication every third year, or oftener if in the judgment of the commissioner  the interests of the state will be served thereby, of a revised industrial  directory including such features for advertising the state, its manufacturing  interests and industrial opportunities as commend themselves to the judgment of  the commissioner and the chief of bureau.

34:1-57.  Workmen's compensation bureau;  director;  compensation
    The workmen's compensation bureau shall consist of the commissioner who shall act as chairman, a director, deputy commissioners of compensation appointed by the commissioner;  and such referees and other employees as may, in the judgment of the commissioner, be necessary.  Appointments under this section shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Title 11, Civil Service.

    The director of the bureau shall be designated by the commissioner from among the deputy commissioners of compensation with approval of the Governor. Such deputy commissioner shall also serve as secretary of the bureau, and may continue to perform the duties of a deputy commissioner of compensation.  He shall receive compensation of nine thousand five hundred dollars ($9,500.00) per annum, and upon his designation he shall retain all of his prior civil service status as a deputy commissioner of compensation under the provisions of  Title 11, Civil Service.

    The director, subject to supervision and direction of the commissioner, shall:

    (a) be the administrative head of the bureau;

     (b) prescribe the organization of the bureau, and the duties of his subordinates and assistants, except as may otherwise be provided by law;

     (c) direct and supervise the activities of all members of the bureau;

     (d) make an annual report to the commissioner of the work of the bureau, which report shall be published annually for general distribution at such reasonable charge, not exceeding cost, as the commissioner shall determine.

     Amended by L.1945, c. 74, p. 378, s. 2.

34:1-57.2.  First director
    The first director of the workmen's compensation bureau to be designated under this act shall be the deputy commissioner of compensation serving upon the effective date hereof in the capacity of secretary of the bureau.

     L.1945, c. 74, p. 379, s. 3.

34:1-58.  Deputy commissioner;  compensation board
    Any referee, who is a counselor at law duly admitted to practice by the supreme court, and who has served as a referee in the bureau for not less than two years, may at the discretion of the commissioner be certified to the civil service commission as eligible for examination for the position of deputy commissioner of compensation, and upon successfully passing the examination, he  may be advanced to said office, as a member of the workmen's compensation board  in addition to the deputy commissioners appointed under section 34:1-57 of this  title.

34:1-59.  Bureau of employment
    The bureau of employment shall consist of a chief of bureau appointed by the  commissioner and such clerks and employees as may be necessary.  The commissioner may, for the purposes of the bureau, use such offices as may be available.

34:1-60.  Subdivisions of employment bureau
    The department is authorized to establish such subdivisions of the bureau of  employment as he may deem advisable for the following purposes:

    To bring together employers seeking employees and working people seeking employment;

    To supply information as to opportunities for securing employment in this state and the character of the work to be performed;

    To supply such information as may enable persons to secure industrial and agricultural training and employment;

    To investigate the extent and causes of unemployment in the state and as far  as possible suggest remedies therefor;

    To adopt the most efficient means to avoid unemployment;

     To provide employment and to prevent distress from involuntary idleness;

     To keep a record of all labor disturbances and strikes.

34:1-61.  Co-operation;  advisory assistants
    The commissioner is authorized to co-operate with other public employment bureaus, whether operated by voluntary, charitable or eleemosynary organizations, or by municipalities in this or other states, or by states, or by the United States government.

    He may appoint, to aid in carrying on his work in various parts of this state, advisory committees or agents who shall serve without pay.

34:1-62.  Federal employment service;  planned co-operation;  custody and disbursement of funds
    The bureau of employment of the New Jersey department of labor is hereby designated as the state agency which shall co-operate with the employment service of the United States department of labor as provided by act of congress  approved June sixth, one thousand nine hundred and thirty-three, entitled  "An  act to provide for the establishment of a national employment system and for  co-operation with the states in the promotion of such system, and for other  purposes,"  which act is hereby accepted by the state of New Jersey.

    The bureau of employment is empowered and directed to do all that may be required to secure for this state the benefits of the appropriations under said  act of congress for each and every purpose specified therein.

    The employment bureau and the state rehabilitation commission shall prepare  a plan of co-operation in carrying out the provisions of said act. The bureau  of employment is authorized to use state funds or funds otherwise made  available in matching federal funds available to the state of New Jersey.

    The state treasurer shall be the custodian of all money paid to the state from appropriations under said act.  He shall receive and provide for the proper custody of the same.  He shall disburse the same upon warrant of the state comptroller when such disbursement has been certified by the commissioner.

34:1-63.  Information as to employment
    The commissioner shall collect and disseminate all data as to unemployment and places offering employment in the manner most likely to enable the unemployed to secure employment.

34:1-64.  Publication of information
    The commissioner in his discretion may issue such bulletins, notices, circulars or other printed matter as may be necessary in furtherance of the purposes and duties of the bureau of employment.

34:1-65.  Records of strikes
    The bureau of employment and bureaus co-operating in carrying out the provisions of sections 34:1-59 to 34:1-64, 34:1-66 to 34:1-69 of this title, shall keep a record of all labor disturbances or strikes within the territory covered by each office.  All such bureaus shall give notice of the existence of  any labor disturbance or strike to all applicants for a position who may be  affected thereby.

34:1-66.  Migrant laborers
    The bureau of employment shall assist migrant laborers in securing suitable  employment, investigate their living and working conditions, and counsel them  in matters of sanitation, and proper housing.

34:1-67.  Veterans aided
    The bureau of employment shall investigate unemployment conditions affecting  soldiers and sailors of the United States after their discharge from service,  collect and compile data as to opportunities for employment and formulate plans  for placing such soldiers and sailors desiring employment in suitable  positions.

    The bureau may act as agent of the federal government and its agencies in the placing of soldiers and sailors in suitable and available employments.

34:1-68.  Lists of sources of employment
    Each office of the bureau of employment shall in co-operation with the chief  executive officers of the several municipalities within its district prepare  and preserve a list of all available employments and sources of employment  within such municipalities and all data in relation thereto.

    Each office shall prepare and keep on file a list of all discharged soldiers  and sailors who may apply for employment or who reside in its district and  shall transmit a copy of such list to the commissioner.

    The commissioner from time to time shall furnish to each office a list of available employments within the state and such other data as he shall deem necessary to the end that soldiers and sailors desiring employment may have available information as to opportunities for employment elsewhere in the state.

34:1-69.  No fees permitted
    No compensation shall be charged or received, directly or indirectly, for any service performed pursuant to sections 34:1-59 to 34:1-68 of this title from any person applying for employment or desiring an employee.

34:1-69.1.  Division of the deaf
    There is hereby created in the Department of Labor and Industry a division to be devoted to the interests of the deaf.

     L.1941, c. 197, p. 586, s. 1.  Amended by L.1977, c. 166, s. 2, eff. July 31,  1977.

34:1-69.1a.  Advisory Council on the Deaf and Hard of Hearing; membership; terms; compensation; vacancies  
    8. a.  There shall be within the Division of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing an Advisory Council on the Deaf and Hard of Hearing which shall consist of 18 members.  One representative from each of the following shall be ex-officio members:  Department of Education, Department of Health, Department of Human Services, Division of Vocational Rehabilitation Services in the Department of Labor, Commission on Higher Education and the Marie Katzenbach School for the Deaf.  Twelve members shall be appointed by the Governor:  one shall be a business person selected from a list of candidates supplied by the New Jersey State Chamber of Commerce, one lay citizen born of deaf parents, five citizens who are deaf, two of whom shall be chosen from the professions and three to be lay persons, and five citizens who are hard of hearing.  In considering the appointment of the five citizens who are deaf the Governor shall give appropriate consideration to persons recommended by profoundly deaf adults represented by the New Jersey Association of the Deaf, Incorporated.  In considering the appointment of the five citizens who are hard of hearing, the Governor shall give appropriate consideration to persons recommended by hard of hearing adults represented by the organization, Self Help for Hard of Hearing People, Inc.  Each appointive member shall serve for a term of three years and until his successor is appointed and qualifies, except that of the members first appointed the Governor shall designate the appointee's terms so that two shall be appointed for terms of one year, two for terms of two years and three for terms of three years.  

   b.   Members of the Advisory Council on the Deaf and Hard of Hearing shall serve without compensation but shall be entitled to reimbursement for expenses incurred in performance of their duties. Vacancies on the council shall be filled for the unexpired term. Members may be removed by the Governor for cause.  

.1977,c.166,s.8; amended 1995,c.168,s.1.  

34:1-69.2.  Director of the division of the deaf
    The Commissioner of Labor and Industry shall appoint a competent person to have charge of such Division of the Deaf, who shall be fully conversant with the sign language of the deaf as ascertained by at least three certified members of the New Jersey Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf; such appointee to be known as Director of the Division of the Deaf, and to be subject to the regular rules and regulations of the Department of Labor and Industry.  The director shall be appointed without regard to the provisions of Title 11 (Civil Service) of the Revised Statutes and shall serve at the pleasure of the Commissioner of Labor and Industry.

     L.1941, c. 197, p. 586, s. 2.  Amended by L.1977, c. 166, s. 3, eff. July 31,  1977;  L.1978, c. 173, s. 1, eff. Dec. 28, 1978.

34:1-69.3.  Duties of director
    The director of such division shall collect and tabulate statistics pertaining to the deaf, their employment and welfare;  shall ascertain primarily by annual review of the New Jersey job market, by reference to occupational information publications of the United States Department of Labor as well as other sources herein identified what trades or occupations are most suitable for them;  shall arrange for Statewide vocational retraining when necessary;  shall endeavor to create new fields of employment to which they may  adapt themselves, and to place them in such various lines of employment; investigate may file a complaint with the Division on Civil Rights on behalf of any deaf persons and assist them in any subsequent proceedings involving any, and all acts of discrimination against them by specific employers, industries, corporations or organizations with whom they may seek employment including the State and shall use his best efforts for the general welfare of all the deaf within the State.  He shall develop field contacts to increase the  employability of deaf persons and seek the cooperation of all State departments, officers and State agencies and minor governmental bodies to the end that deaf persons may be employed in such capacities in the government of the State, or any subdivision thereof, as they may fill as efficiently as other persons.  He shall make such reports and recommendations to his superior as may  be requested or as may be required by law, or otherwise, and issue such reports  in pamphlet form, or otherwise, as may be necessary or desirable to advance the  best interests of the division and the deaf people of the State in general.

     L.1941, c. 197, p. 586, s. 3.  Amended by L.1977, c. 166, s. 4, eff. July 31,  1977.

34:1-69.3a.  Annual report
    The Director of the Division of the Deaf shall report annually to the Legislature.  Such report shall include, but not be limited to, a review of the  status of services to deaf persons within the State, recommended priorities for  development and coordination of such services, evaluation of achievements  resulting from recommendations made in the preceding annual report, and a  statement of the division's goals for the next year and the programs planned to  achieve them.

     L.1977, c. 166, s. 9, eff. July 31, 1977.

34:1-69.4.  Assistants;  qualifications;  compensation
    The Commissioner of Labor and Industry shall employ additional assistants who are competent and experienced in working and communicating with the deaf at  such compensation as is required to effectively carry out the provisions of  this act.

     L.1941, c. 197, p. 587, s. 4.  Amended by L.1977, c. 166, s. 5, eff. July 31,  1977.

34:1-69.5.  Compensation and expenses of director
    The Director of the Division of the Deaf shall receive such compensation as  shall be determined by the Commissioner of Labor and Industry and such actual  and necessary expenses as shall be incurred in the performance of their  official duties, to be paid in the same manner as the compensation and expenses  of other employees of the Department of Labor and Industry.

     L.1941, c. 197, p. 587, s. 5.  Amended by L.1977, c. 166, s. 6, eff. July 31,  1977.

34:1-69.6.   "Deaf"  defined
    The term  "deaf" , for purposes of the Division of the Deaf and as used in this act, means those persons in whom the sense of hearing is nonfunctional for  ordinary purposes of life and includes two distinct classes based on the time  of the loss of hearing;  a. the congenitally deaf, those who were born deaf  and, b. the adventitiously deaf, those who were born with normal hearing but in  whom the sense of hearing becomes nonfunctional through illness, accident, etc.   In clinical terms deaf means a hearing loss above 25 db ISO in the 500-2,000  frequency Hz range unaided in the better ear, and so designated by a certified  audiologist.

     L.1941, c. 197, p. 587, s. 6.  Amended by L.1977, c. 166, s. 7, eff. July 31,  1977.

34:1-69.7.  Legislative findings and declarations
    The Legislature finds and declares that it shall be the policy of this State  to secure the rights of hearing impaired persons who, because of impairment of  hearing or speech, are unable to readily understand or communicate spoken  language and who consequently cannot be fully protected in legal proceedings  unless qualified interpreters are available to assist them.

     L.1983, c. 564, s. 1, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

34:1-69.8.  Definitions
    As used in this act:

    a.   "Appointing authority"  means the presiding judge or justice of any court, the chairman of any board, commission, or authority, the director or commissioner of any department or agency, or any other person presiding at any hearing or other proceeding in which a qualified interpreter is required pursuant to this act.

    b.   "Hearing impaired person"  means a person whose hearing is impaired so  as to prohibit the person from understanding oral communication.  The term  further includes a person who, because of loss of hearing, cannot communicate  spoken language.

    c.   "Principal party in interest"  means a person who is a named party in any proceeding or who will be directly affected by the decision or action which  may be made or taken.

    d.   "Qualified interpreter"  means an interpreter certified by the National  Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf, Inc. and listed by the State Division of  the Deaf in the Department of Labor or the New Jersey Registry of Interpreters  for the Deaf.

    e.   "Intermediary interpreter"  means a certified interpreter who, because  of his intimate acquaintance with hearing impaired persons with minimal  language skills, can be used as an intermediary between the hearing impaired  person and a qualified interpreter.

     L.1983, c. 564, s. 2, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

34:1-69.9.  Intermediary interpreter to assist qualified interpreter
    If a qualified interpreter or the hearing impaired client states that the interpretation is not satisfactory and that an intermediary interpreter will improve the quality of interpretation, the appointing authority shall appoint an intermediary interpreter to assist the qualified interpreter. An intermediary interpreter shall be subject to the same provisions that govern a qualified interpreter under this act.

     L.1983, c. 564, s. 3, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

34:1-69.10.  Qualified interpreter for hearing impaired persons' appointment;  prohibition of retention in custody pending arrival
    The appointing authority shall appoint a qualified interpreter to assist a hearing impaired person throughout the proceedings and in preparation with counsel as follows:

    a.  In any case before any court or grand jury in which a hearing impaired person is a party, either as a complainant, defendant or witness, or as hearing  impaired parent of a juvenile;

    b.  At all stages in any proceeding of a judicial or quasi-judicial nature before any State agency or county or municipal governing body or agency in which a hearing impaired person is a principal party in interest, either as a complainant, defendant, witness or supplicant, or as hearing impaired parent of a juvenile;

    c.  In any proceedings in which a hearing impaired person may be subject to confinement or criminal sanction or in any proceeding preliminary thereto, including a coroner's inquest, grand jury proceedings and proceedings related to mental health commitments.  A hearing impaired person who has been arrested and who is otherwise eligible for release shall not be held in custody pending the arrival of an interpreter.

    (1) When a hearing impaired person is arrested for an alleged violation of a  criminal law, a qualified interpreter shall be appointed prior to reading of  Miranda warnings, interrogating or taking a statement from the hearing impaired  person.

    (2) Any statement, written or oral, made by a hearing impaired person in reply to a question from a law enforcement officer or any other person having a  prosecutorial function in any criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding shall not  be used against that hearing impaired person unless either the statement was  made or elicited through a qualified interpreter and was made knowingly, voluntarily and intelligently, or the hearing impaired person has requested a waiver pursuant to section 10 of this act and the court makes a finding that any statement made by the hearing impaired person was made knowingly, voluntarily and intelligently.

    (3) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to apprehensions, arrests or statements involving a violation of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes  (Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulation).

     L.1983, c. 564, s. 4, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

34:1-69.11.  Positioning of interpreter
    In any action or proceeding in which an interpreter is required to be appointed, the court or administrative authority may not commence proceedings until the appointed interpreter is in full view of and spatially situated to assure proper communication with the hearing impaired person involved as a participant.

     L.1983, c. 564, s. 5, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

34:1-69.12.  List of qualified interpreters;  request;  substitution for appointed interpreter
    Whenever an appointing authority is required to appoint an interpreter, the  appointing authority shall request a list of qualified interpreters from either  the State Division of the Deaf in the Department of Labor or the New Jersey  Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf.

    If the appointing authority's choice of a qualified interpreter does not meet the needs or wishes of the hearing impaired person, the appointing authority shall appoint another qualified interpreter.

     L.1983, c. 564, s. 6, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

34:1-69.13.  List of qualified interpreters;  maintenance
    a.  The State Division of the Deaf in the Department of Labor, created pursuant to P.L.1941, c. 197 (C. 34:1-69.1 et seq.) shall maintain a list of qualified interpreters and provide the list to appointing authorities upon request.

    b.  The division shall regularly obtain a list of qualified interpreters from the New Jersey Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf and ensure that the list contains the most current information available from the registry.

     L.1983, c. 564, s. 7, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

34:1-69.14.  Oath
    Every appointed interpreter before entering upon his duties, shall take an oath that he will make a true interpretation in an understandable manner to the  person for whom he is appointed and that he will repeat the statements of the  person in the English language to the best of his skill and judgment.

     L.1983, c. 564, s. 8, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

34:1-69.15.  Fees and expenses
    a.  An appointed interpreter shall receive a reasonable fee for his services, together with his actual expenses for travel and waiting time.

    b.  The Supreme Court shall establish rules governing the method for payment  and the amount of the fee.  In the case of any civil or criminal proceeding  before a court in this State the fee shall be paid by the court and in the case  of any proceeding before a State agency or a county or municipal governing body  or agency the fee shall be paid that agency or governing body.

     L.1983, c. 564, s. 9, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

34:1-69.16.  Waiver of right to interpreter
    The right of a hearing impaired person to an interpreter shall not be waived  unless the hearing impaired person requests a waiver in writing. The waiver  shall be granted if the hearing impaired person's counsel and the appointing  authority approve the request for a waiver.

     L.1983, c. 564, s. 10, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

34:1-69.17.  Information to remain confidential and privileged
    Any information that the interpreter gathers from the hearing impaired person pertaining to any proceeding then pending shall at all times remain confidential and privileged on an equal basis with the attorney-client privilege.

     L.1983, c. 564, s. 11, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

34:1-70.     Recovery of penalties, procedure  
     34:1-70. Except as otherwise in this Title specifically provided, a proceeding for the recovery of a penalty for the violation of any provision of this Title shall be by a civil action in the name of the commissioner, to be instituted in the Superior Court or a municipal court of the municipality, where the offense was committed.  

    If a corporation violates the provisions of this Title and if, according to the practice of the court in which the action is brought, service of process cannot be made upon it in the county where the offense was committed, then such service may be made upon the manager, superintendent, foreman or person in charge of the business where such offense was committed. If an individual violating the provisions of this Title is the owner or operator of the business wherein the offense was committed, and if he does not reside in the county where such offense was committed, service of process against him may be made upon the manager, superintendent, foreman or person in charge of the business.  

    If an individual is committed under execution against his body, he shall not be discharged under the insolvent debtors law of the State, but shall only be discharged by the court issuing the execution, or by the Superior Court, when it is satisfied that further confinement will not result in the payment of the judgment and costs.  

    Amended 1953,c.33,s.1; 1991,c.91,s.343.  

34:1A-1.  Department of Labor and Industry established;   "department" defined
    There is hereby established in the Executive Branch of the State Government  a principal department which shall be known as the Department of Labor and  Industry.

    As used in this act, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the word  "department"  means the Department of Labor and Industry established herein.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1762, s. 1.

34:1A-1.1.  Change of name of department of labor and industry to department  of labor
    On the effective date of this act the Department of Labor and Industry established pursuant to P.L.1948, c. 446 (C. 34:1A-1 et seq.) shall be entitled  and known as the Department of Labor and whenever in any law, rule, regulation,  order, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding or otherwise,  reference is made to the Department of Labor and Industry, the same shall mean  and refer to the Department of Labor.

     L.1981, c. 122, s. 29, eff. April 16, 1981.

34:1A-1.2  Department of Labor and Workforce Development; reference.
	1.	On and after the effective date of this 2004 amendatory and supplementary act, the Department of Labor shall be entitled and known as the Department of Labor and Workforce Development and whenever, in any law, rule, regulation, order, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding, or otherwise, reference is made to the Department of Labor, the same shall mean and refer to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.

	L.2004,c.39,s.1.

34:1A-1.3  Transfer of workforce development programs from DHS.
	2.  a.  To the extent not inconsistent with any federal law, and notwithstanding any other State law, all employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities of the Department of Human Services which are funded through the Work First New Jersey program established pursuant to P.L.1997, c.38 (C.44:10-55 et seq.), the federal "Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996," Pub.L.104-193, 42 U.S.C. s.601 et seq., and the federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, Pub.L.95-113, 7 U.S.C. s. 2011 et seq. are hereby transferred to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.

	b.	The employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities which shall be transferred from the Department of Human Services to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to this section and provided by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development shall include, but not be limited to:

	(1)	Career guidance;

	(2)	Labor market information;

	(3)	Employability assessment;

	(4)	Development of Employability Development Plans;

	(5)	Employment-directed case management;

	(6)	Subsidized and unsubsidized employment in the public and private sectors;

	(7)	Job search and readiness programs;

	(8)	Community work experience programs;

	(9)	Alternative work experience programs;

	(10) Community service programs;

	(11) On-the -job training;

	(12) Vocational education and training;

	(13) Employment-related education and job skill training;

	(14) Basic skills and literacy training;

	(15) Work-related educational enhancements;

	(16) A proportionate share of employment and training related expenses;

	(17) Referral and access to work support services, including transport and childcare services;

	(18) Early employment initiative; and

	(19) Career advancement vouchers.

	c.	The programmatic, administrative and support staff and equipment comprising the employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities in the Department of Human Services are transferred to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to this section and the "State Agency Transfer Act," P.L.1971, c.375 (C.52:14D-1 et seq.), with all of their functions, powers and duties and a proportionate share of the resources to maintain the programs and activities.

	L.2004,c.39,s.2.

34:1A-1.4  New Jersey Youth Corps transferred.
	3.	The New Jersey Youth Corps, established pursuant to P.L.1984, c.198 (C.9:25-1 et seq.), is hereby transferred to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.  To the extent not inconsistent with any federal law, and notwithstanding any other State law, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development is authorized to enhance, strengthen and expand the New Jersey Youth Corps program.  The programmatic, administrative and support staff and equipment assigned to the New Jersey Youth Corps are transferred to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, with all of their functions, powers and duties and the resources to maintain the programs and activities pursuant to this section and the "State Agency Transfer Act," P.L.1971, c.375 (C.52:14D-1 et seq.).

	L.2004,c.39,s.3.

34:1A-1.5  Certain powers, functions, duties of DOE transferred.
	4.  a.  Notwithstanding any other State law, all powers, functions and duties of the Department of Education with respect to the following employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities are hereby transferred to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development:

	(1)	The administration and provision of adult education and literacy activities as defined in 20 U.S.C. s.9202;

	(2)	Operational authority for the approval of private or proprietary trade, business or vocational schools or similar training institutions pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1966, c.13 (C.44:12-2); and

	(3)	Registration and approval of registered apprenticeship programs under a joint agreement negotiated with the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training in the United States Department of Labor.

	b.	The programmatic, administrative and support staff and equipment comprising the employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities in the Department of Education are transferred to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to this section and the "State Agency Transfer Act," P.L.1971, c.375 (C.52:14D-1et seq.), with all of their functions, powers and duties and a proportionate share of the resources to maintain the programs and activities.

	L.2004,c.39,s.4.

34:1A-1.6  Construction of act relative to Civil Service tenure, rights, protection.
	5.  a.  Nothing in this 2004 amendatory and supplementary act and no transfer carried out pursuant to this act shall be construed or permitted to deprive any person of any tenure rights or reduce or deny any right or protection provided him or her by Title 11A, Civil Service, of the New Jersey Statutes, or under any pension law or retirement system.

	b.	All staff who are hired to work at a One Stop Career Center and supported by any resources transferred to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to section 2, 3 or 4 of this act, shall be hired and employed by the State pursuant to Title 11A, Civil Service, of the New Jersey Statutes, be hired and employed by a political subdivision of the State, or be qualified staff hired and employed by a non-profit organization which began functioning as the One Stop Career Center operator with the written consent of the chief elected official and the commissioner prior to the effective date of this act.

	c.	Any staff member, including staff located at any One Stop Career Center, providing services to unemployment insurance claimants or services to employment service clients shall be hired and employed pursuant to Title 11A, Civil Service, of the New Jersey Statutes, if that staff member is supported by any funds provided to the State under the Wagner-Peyser Act (29 U.S.C. s.49 et seq.) or section 903 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. s.1103), as amended.

	d.	For the purpose of this section, "One Stop Career Center" means any of the facilities established, sponsored or designated by the State, a political subdivision of the State or a Workforce Investment Board in a local area to coordinate or make available State and local programs providing employment and training services or other employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities, including job placement services, and any other similar facility as may be established, sponsored or designated at any later time to coordinate or make available any of those programs, services or activities, and "qualified staff" means staff whose qualifications meet standards set by regulations adopted by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.

	L.2004,c.39,s.5.

34:1A-1.7  Short title.

	1. 	This act shall be known as "The Domestic Violence and Workforce Development Initiative Act."

	L.2005,c.309,s.1.

34:1A-1.8  Requirements for job training counselors for victims of domestic violence.

	2.	Each counselor who provides counseling pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1992, c.48 (C.34:15B-38), section 7 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-7), or section 3 of P.L.1992, c.47 (C.43:21-59), and any other staff member of the Department of Labor and Workforce Development or of a One Stop Career Center as defined in subsection d. of section 5 of P.L.2004, c.39 (C.34:1A-1.6) who processes unemployment compensation claims and has direct, in person, contact with claimants or who provides counseling or employment services to claimants, shall:

	a.	Be trained to implement the provisions of this section applicable to the counselor or staff member and to understand and address employment, training, income security, safety and related issues facing individuals who are victims of domestic violence as defined in section 3 of P.L.1991, c.261 (C.2C:25-19);

	b.	Comply with standards adopted by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, in consultation with the Advisory Council on Domestic Violence created pursuant to P.L.1979, c.337 (C.30:14-1 et seq.), regarding the screening or self-screening of each individual receiving any of the indicated counseling or employment services or applying for unemployment compensation, to ascertain whether the individual is a victim of domestic violence;

	c.	For each individual who is or appears to be a victim of domestic violence, make referrals to services determined to be appropriate in the case of the individual, including, but not limited to, any appropriate referral to a designated domestic violence agency as defined in subsection (j) of R.S.43:21-5 or a community shelter for victims of domestic violence certified pursuant to standards and procedures established by P.L.1979, c.337 (C.30:14-1 et seq.), and disclose the rights that the individual may have to unemployment compensation pursuant to subsection (j) of R.S.43:21-5 , but shall not provide domestic violence counseling or be regarded as a Certified Domestic Violence Specialist;

	d.	Include in any Employability Development Plan developed for the individual appropriate accommodations for the individual's needs as a victim of domestic violence; and

	e.	Comply with all requirements regarding the confidentiality of the individual, including, as applicable, the requirements of section 4 of P.L.1992, c.48 (C.34:15B-38), section 7 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-7), section 3 of P.L.1992, c.47 (C.43:21-59) and the "Address Confidentiality Program Act," R.S.47:4-1 et seq.

	The training conducted pursuant to subsection a. of this section shall be conducted by a Certified Domestic Violence Specialist or, if a Certified Domestic Violence Specialist is not available to conduct the training, by another person found by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, in consultation with the Commissioner of Community Affairs, to have equivalent qualifications and expertise regarding domestic violence issues, based on standards of qualification and expertise developed by the commissioner in consultation with the Advisory Council on Domestic Violence created pursuant to P.L.1979, c.337 (C.30:14-1 et seq.).  For the purposes of this section, "Certified Domestic Violence Specialist" means a person who has fulfilled the requirements of certification as a Domestic Violence Specialist established by the New Jersey Association of Domestic Violence Professionals.

	L.2005,c.309,s.2.

34:1A-1.9  Rules, regulations.

	3.	The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L. 1968, c. 410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), and in consultation with the Advisory Council on Domestic Violence created pursuant to P.L.1979, c.337 (C.30:14-1 et seq.) and the Commissioner of Community Affairs, adopt rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of section 2 of this act.

	L.2005,c.309,s.3.

34:1A-1.10  Credentials Review Board established.

	25.	There is established, in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Credentials Review Board, for the purpose of directing the technical credentialing process for the workforce investment system and approving such credentials as it deems appropriate for issuance to individuals in connection with employment and training programs.  The board shall include the following members or their designated representatives: the Commissioner of Education; the Staff Director of the Center for Occupational Employment Information; the Chairman of the Commission on Higher Education; the Director of the Division of Vocational Education; the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development; the Executive Director of the State Employment and Training Commission; a Workforce Investment Board director as designated by the commissioner; and a One-Stop Career Center operator as designated by the department.

	L.2005,c.354,s.25.

34:1A-1.11  Definitions relative to suspension, revocation of certain employer licenses.
	1.	As used in this act:

	"Agency" means any agency, department, board or commission of this State, or of any political subdivision of this State, that issues a license for purposes of operating a business in this State.
 
	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, and shall include any designee, authorized representative, or agent acting on behalf of the commissioner.
 
	"License" means any agency permit, certificate, approval, registration, charter or similar form of authorization that is required by law and that is issued by any agency for the purposes of operating a business in this State, and includes, but is not limited to:
 
	(1)	A certificate of incorporation pursuant to the "New Jersey Business Corporation Act," N.J.S.14A:1-1 et seq.;
 
	(2)	A certificate of authority pursuant to N.J.S.14A:13-1 et seq.;
 
	(3)	A statement of qualification or a statement of foreign qualification pursuant to the "Uniform Partnership Act (1996)," P.L.2000, c.161 (C.42:1A-1 et al.);
 
	(4)	A certificate of limited partnership or a certificate of authority pursuant to the "Uniform Limited Partnership Law (1976)," P.L.1983, c.489 (C.42:2A-1 et seq.);
 
	(5)	A certificate of formation or certified registration pursuant to the "New Jersey Limited Liability Company Act," P.L.1993, c.210 (C.42:2B-1 et seq.); and
 
	(6)	Any license, certificate, permit or registration pursuant to R.S.48:16-1 et seq., R.S.48:16-13 et seq.; the "New Jersey Alcoholic Beverage Control Act," R.S.33:1-1 et seq.; section 4 of P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-70); P.L.1971, c.192 (C.34:8A-7 et seq.); section 12 of P.L.1975, c.217 (C.52:27D-130); section 14 of P.L.1981, c.1 (C.56:8-1.1); or "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.).
 
	"State wage, benefit and tax laws" means:
 
	(1)	P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.1 et seq.);
 
	(2)	The "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.);
 
	(3)	The "New Jersey State Wage and Hour Law," P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a et seq.);
 
	(4)	The workers' compensation law, R.S.34:15-1 et seq.;
 
	(5)	The "unemployment compensation law," R.S.43:21-1 et seq.;
 
	(6)	The "Temporary Disability Benefits Law," P.L.1948, c.110 (C.43:21-25 et al.);
 
	(7)	P.L.2008, c.17 (C.43:21-39.1 et al.); 
 
	(8)	The "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq.; and
 
	(9)	P.L.2018, c.10 (C.34:11D-1 et seq.).
 
	L.2009, c.194, s.1; amended 2021, c.165, s.1.

34:1A-1.12  Commissioner; actions relative to employer violations.
	2. a. (1) If the commissioner determines that an employer has violated any State wage, benefit and tax law, including but not limited to a violation of R.S.34:15-79, or failed to meet obligations required by R.S.43:21-7 or R.S.43:21-14, or violated any provision of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.) or P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-1 et al.), the commissioner shall, as an alternative to, or in addition to, any other actions taken in the enforcement of those laws, notify the employer of the determination and have an audit of the employer and any successor firm of the employer conducted not more than 12 months after the determination.
 
	(2)	If the commissioner is notified pursuant to subsection g. of this section of a conviction of an employer, the commissioner shall, as an alternative to, or in addition to, any other actions taken in the enforcement of the laws violated by the employer, have an audit of the employer and any successor firm of the employer conducted not more than 12 months after receipt of the notification.
 
	b.	If, in an audit conducted pursuant to subsection a. of this section, the commissioner determines that the employer or any successor firm to the employer has continued in its failure to maintain or report records as required by those laws or continued in its failure to pay wages, benefits, taxes or other contributions or assessments as required by those laws, or if the commissioner is notified pursuant to subsection g. of this section of a conviction of the employer and the offense resulting in the conviction occurred subsequent to an audit conducted pursuant to subsection a. of this section, the commissioner:
 
	(1)	May, after affording the employer or successor firm notice and an opportunity for a hearing in accordance with the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), issue a written determination directing any appropriate agency to suspend any one or more licenses that are held by the employer or successor firm, for a period of time determined by the commissioner.  In determining the length of a suspension, the commissioner shall consider any of the following factors which are relevant:
 
	(a)	The number of employees for which the employer or successor firm failed to maintain or report required records and pay required wages, benefits, taxes or other contributions or assessments;
 
	(b)	The total amount of wages, benefits, taxes or other contributions or assessments not paid by the employer or successor firm;
 
	(c)	Any other harm resulting from the violation;
 
	(d)	Whether the employer or successor firm made good faith efforts to comply with any applicable requirements;
 
	(e)	The duration of the violation;
 
	(f)	The role of the directors, officers or principals of the employer or successor firm in the violation;
 
	(g)	Any prior misconduct by the employer or successor firm; and
 
	(h)	Any other factors the commissioner considers relevant; and
 
	(2)	Shall conduct a subsequent audit or inspection of the employer or any successor firm of the employer not more than 12 months after the date of the commissioner's written determination.
 
	c.	If, in the subsequent audit or inspection conducted pursuant to subsection b. of this section, the commissioner determines that the employer or successor firm has continued in its failure to maintain or report records as required pursuant to State wage, benefit and tax laws, as defined in section 1 of this act, and continued in its failure to pay wages, benefits, taxes or other contributions or assessments as required by those laws, or if the commissioner is notified pursuant to subsection g. of this section of a conviction of the employer for an offense occurring after the audit conducted pursuant to subsection b. of this section, the commissioner, after affording the employer or successor firm notice and an opportunity for a hearing in accordance with the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), shall issue a written determination directing any appropriate agency to permanently revoke any one or more licenses that are held by the employer or any successor firm to the employer and that are necessary to operate the employer or successor firm.
 
	d.	Upon receipt of any written determination of the commissioner directing an agency to suspend or revoke a license pursuant to this section, and notwithstanding any other law, the agency shall immediately suspend or revoke the license.
 
	e.	In instances where an employee leasing company has entered into an employee leasing agreement with a client company pursuant to P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.), any written determination by the commissioner directing agencies to suspend an employer license pursuant to subsection b. of this section, or revoke an employer license pursuant to subsection c. of this section, for a failure or continued failure to keep records regarding, and to pay, wages, benefits and taxes pursuant to State wage, benefit and tax laws, shall be for the suspension or revocation of the licenses of the client company and not the licenses of the employee leasing company if the commissioner determines that the failure or continued failure was caused by incomplete, inaccurate, misleading, or false information provided to the employee leasing company by the client company.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as diminishing or limiting the authority or obligation of the commissioner to rescind the registration of an employee leasing company pursuant to the provisions of section 10 of P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-76).
 
	f.	If, in the course of an audit or inspection conducted pursuant to this section, the commissioner discovers that an employee of the employer or of any successor firm of the employer has failed to provide compensation to the employee as required under any of the State wage and hour laws as defined in R.S.34:11-57, then the commissioner shall initiate a wage claim on behalf of the employee pursuant to R.S.34:11-58.
 
	g.	Upon the conviction of an employer under subsection a. of section 10 of P.L.1999, c.90 (C.2C:40A-2), section 13 of P.L.2019, c.212 (C.34:11-58.6), subsection a. of section 10 of P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.10), subsection a. of section 25 of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a24), or N.J.S.2C:20-2 if the property stolen consists of compensation the employer failed to provide to an employee under any State wage and hour law as defined in R.S.34:11-57, the prosecutor or the court shall notify the commissioner of the employer's conviction.
 
	h.	In the alternative to proceedings under the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) in accordance with the provisions of subsection b. of this section, and in addition to any other actions taken in the enforcement of the laws violated by any employer, the commissioner shall have the authority, to be exercised in the commissioner's sole discretion, to bring enforcement actions for any violation of any State wage, benefit and tax law, including but not limited to a violation of R.S.34:15-79, or a failure to meet obligations required by R.S.43:21-7 or R.S.43:21-14, or for a violation of any provision of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.) or P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-1 et al.), in the Office of Administrative Law or in the Superior Court for the county in which the violation occurred.  When the commissioner, including any of the commissioner's authorized representatives in the Office of the Attorney General, brings an action in the Office of Administrative Law or Superior Court which seeks relief on behalf of any individual for any of the above violations, communications between members of the Attorney General's office and that individual shall be privileged as would be a communication between an attorney and a client.
 
	i.	In any enforcement action brought under subsection h. of this section, the commissioner, including any of the commissioner's authorized representatives in the Office of the Attorney General, may initiate the action by making, signing, and filing a verified complaint against the employer.  If the action is brought by the commissioner in Superior Court, a jury trial may be requested upon the application of any party.  If the commissioner is a prevailing plaintiff in the action, any and all remedies available by law shall be available on behalf of any named or unnamed victims as if the claims were brought directly by the victims. In addition to any remedies sought on behalf of the named or unnamed victims, the commissioner shall be entitled to seek any fines, penalties or administrative assessments authorized by law, including but not limited to penalties for misclassification set forth in section 1 of P.L.2019, c.373 (C.34:1A-1.18).  If the suit seeks relief for one or more unnamed members of a class, the commissioner shall have the discretion to settle the suit on the terms the commissioner deems appropriate.  If the commissioner is a prevailing plaintiff, the court shall award reasonable attorney's fees and litigation and investigation costs.
 
	j.	At any time after the filing of any verified complaint under subsection i. of this section, or whenever it appears to the commissioner that an employer has engaged in, is engaging in, or is about to engage in, any violation of a State wage, benefit or tax law, including a violation of R.S.34:15-79 or any failure to meet obligations required by R.S.43:21-7 or R.S.43:21-14, or has violated any provision of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.) or P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-1 et al.), the commissioner may proceed against the employer in a summary manner in the Superior Court of New Jersey to obtain an injunction prohibiting the employer from continuing or engaging in the violation or doing any acts in furtherance of the violation, to compel compliance with any of the provisions of this Title, or to prevent violations or attempts to violate any of those provisions, or attempts to interfere with or impede the enforcement of those provisions or the exercise or performance of any power or duty under this Title.  Prospective injunctive relief against an employer shall also be available as a remedy to the commissioner as a prevailing plaintiff in any enforcement action under subsection i. of this section.
 
	L.2009, c.194, s.2; amended 2019, c.212, s.1; 2021, c.165, s.2.

34:1A-1.13  Presumption of successor firm.
 
	3.	A rebuttable presumption that an employer has established a successor firm shall arise if the two parties share two or more of the following capacities or characteristics:
 
	a.	Performing similar work within the same geographical area;
 
	b.	Occupying the same premises;
 
	c.	Having the same telephone or fax number;
 
	d.	Having the same e-mail address or Internet website;
 
	e.	Employing substantially the same work force, administrative employees, or both;
 
	f.	Utilizing the same tools, equipment or facilities;
 
	g.	Employing or engaging the services of any person or persons involved in the direction or control of the other; or
 
	h.	Listing substantially the same work experience.
 
	L.2009, c.194, s.3.

34:1A-1.14  Notification of employer responsibility relative to record maintenance.
 
	4. a. Each employer which is required to maintain and report records regarding wages, benefits, taxes and other contributions and assessments pursuant to State wage, benefit and tax laws, as defined in section 1 of this act, shall conspicuously post notification, in a place or places accessible to all employees in each of the employer's workplaces, in a form issued by regulation adopted by the commissioner, of the obligation of the employer to maintain and report those records.  The employer shall also provide each employee a written copy of the notification not later than 30 days after the form of the notification is issued, or, if the employee is hired after the issuance, at the time of the employee's hiring.  In adopting the regulation regarding the notification requirement, the commissioner shall, to the greatest extent practicable, design the notification in a manner which coordinates or consolidates the notification with any other notifications required pursuant to State wage, benefit and tax laws, as defined in section 1 of this act.  The notification shall also provide information on how an employee or the employee's authorized representative, may contact, by telephone, mail and e-mail, a representative of the commissioner to provide information to, or file a complaint with, the representative regarding possible violations of the requirements of this act or any State wage, benefit and tax law, as defined in section 1 of this act, or may obtain information about any actual violation, including any audit undertaken pursuant to this act.
 
	b.	No employer shall discharge or in any other manner discriminate against an employee because the employee has made an inquiry or complaint to his employer, to the commissioner or to his authorized representative regarding any possible violation by the employer of the provisions of this act or any State wage, benefit and tax laws, as defined in section 1 of this act, or because the employee has caused to be instituted or is about to cause to be instituted any proceeding under or related to this act or those laws, or because the employee has testified or is about to testify in the proceeding.
 
	c.	Any employer who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense and shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000.  In the case of a discharge or other discriminatory action in violation of this section, the employer shall also be required to offer reinstatement in employment to the discharged employee and to correct any discriminatory action, and to pay to the employee all reasonable legal costs of the action, all wages and benefits lost as a result of the discharge or discriminatory action, plus punitive damages equal to two times the lost wages and benefits, under penalty of contempt proceedings for failure to comply with the requirement.
 
	L.2009, c.194, s.4.

34:1A-1.15  Provision of information relative to certain employee leave and benefit rights.
 	1. a. The Department of Labor and Workforce Development shall maintain on its Internet website a webpage developed by the department, in consultation with the Department of Law and Public Safety, of information regarding any rights provided by law to employees in New Jersey to receive benefits during family leave or disability, and any rights provided by law for employees to return to work after leave.
 
	b.	The information required pursuant to subsection a. of this section shall include, but not be limited to:
 
	(1)	information that an employee eligible to receive benefits for the purpose of caring for a child during the first 12 months after the child's birth, may be also eligible for temporary disability benefits pursuant to P.L.1948, c.110 (C.43:21-25 et al.) during pregnancy and recovery from childbirth for the period that a legally licensed practitioner specified under subsection (d) of section 15 of P.L.1948, c.110 (C.43:21-39) deems necessary, and that an employee eligible for temporary disability benefits in connection with pregnancy and recovery from childbirth may also be eligible for family leave benefits to care for the child after recovery from childbirth; 
 
	(2)	information regarding an employee's rights to return to work pursuant to the "Family Leave Act," P.L.1989, c.261 (C.34:11B-1 et seq.), the "New Jersey Security and Financial Empowerment Act," P.L.2013, c.82 (C.34:11C-1 et seq.), and the federal "Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993," Pub.L.103-3 (29 U.S.C.s.2601 et seq.), including an explanation of the types of employers subject to each of those acts and an explanation of an employee's rights if the employer is not subject to those acts;
 
	(3)	links to texts of: the "Family Leave Act," P.L.1989, c.261 (C.34:11B-1 et seq.); the "Temporary Disability Benefits Law," P.L.1948, c.110 (C.43:21-25 et al.); P.L.2008, c.17 (C.43:21-39.1 et seq.); the "New Jersey Security and Financial Empowerment Act," P.L.2013, c.82 (C.34:11C-1 et seq.); and R.S.34:15-1 et seq.; and
 
	(4)	instructions for claiming the benefits provided to workers pursuant to each law indicated in paragraph (3) of this subsection and information on where employers and employees can make inquiries or request resources relevant to each of those laws. 
 
	L.2015, c.248, s.1.

34:1A-1.16  Definitions, publishing of violators of State wage, benefit, and tax laws.
	1. a. As used in this section:

	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the Department of Labor and Workforce Development or the Commissioner's duly authorized representative.
 
	"Contracting" means any arrangement giving rise to an obligation to supply any product or to perform any service for a public body, other than by virtue of State employment, or to supply any product to or perform any service for a private person where the State provides substantial financial assistance and retains the right to approve or disapprove the nature or quality of the goods or services or the persons who may supply or perform the same. 
 
	"Department" means the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	"Final order" means either a final administrative determination of the commissioner or other appropriate agency officer issued following adjudication of a matter as a contested case pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), or where the department or other appropriate agency has made a finding regarding a violation of any State wage, benefit and tax laws or regarding the levying of a penalty pursuant to any State wage, benefit and tax laws, has notified the violator of the finding, and the violator has expressly waived the right to a hearing by virtue of having failed to request a hearing within the appropriate time limit established by either law or rule.
 
	"Person" means any natural person, company corporate officer or principal, firm, association, corporation, contractor, subcontractor or other entity engaged in contracting.
 
	"Public body" means the State of New Jersey, any of its political subdivisions, any authority created by the Legislature of the State of New Jersey, and any instrumentality or agency for the State of New Jersey or of any of its political subdivisions. 
 
	"State wage, benefit and tax laws" has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 1 of P.L.2009, c.194 (C.34:1A-1.11).
 
	b.	The department may post to a list on its website the name of any person found to be in violation of any State wage, benefit, or tax laws and against whom a final order has been issued by the commissioner or other appropriate agency officer for any violation of State wage, benefit and tax laws.
 
	c.	In the event that either the person satisfies the entirety of the outstanding liability ordered by the court or the commissioner; or a settlement has been reached and all payments have been made pursuant to the settlement, prior to the anticipated date for posting of the name on the department's website, the posting shall not occur.  The department shall update the website on a monthly basis, no later than the fifth day of each month.  The department shall remove the name of a person from the website within 15 days after the department determines that the person has satisfied the entirety of the outstanding liability ordered by the court, the commissioner or other agency head, or made all payments pursuant to the settlement for a violation of any State wage, benefit and tax laws.
 
	 d.	A person placed on the list pursuant to subsection b. of this section shall be prohibited from contracting with any public body until the liability for violations of State wage, benefit, and tax laws have been resolved to the satisfaction of the commissioner.
 
	 e.	The department shall provide notice to the person of its intent to post the name of the person on the department's website 15 business days prior to the posting.  That notice shall include the following:
 
	(1)	The name, email address, and telephone number of a contact person at the department and description of the procedure for removal of the posting;
 
	(2)	The specific details concerning the violations and a copy of the unsatisfied court final judgment or final order for any violation of State wage, benefit and tax laws;
 
	(3)	Notification that the person shall be prohibited from contracting with a public body if the liability is not resolved; and
 
	(4)	Notification that the person can request a hearing in writing to the commissioner within 20 days of receipt of the notice of intent to place the person on the list.
 
	 f.	A person who receives a notice of intent pursuant to subsection e. of this section shall have the right to request a hearing within 20 days.  All hearings requested pursuant to this section shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	 g.	The commissioner shall consider the following factors as material in each decision to place a person on the list pursuant to subsection b. of this section:
 
	(1)	The record of previous violations;
 
	(2)	Previous placement on the list by the commissioner;
 
	(3)	The frequency of violations by the person discovered in previous or still pending cases;
 
	(4)	The significance or scale of the violations;
 
	(5)	The existence of failure to pay;
 
	(6)	Failure to cooperate or respond to a request to produce records, forms, documents, or proof of payments; 
 
	(7)	Submission of falsified or altered records, forms, documents, or proof of payment;
 
	(8)	Failure to provide goods or services; and
 
	(9)	Failure to comply with contract specifications.
 
	L.2019, c.366, s.1.

34:1A-1.17  Entrance into place of business, employment; stop-work order.
	1. a. The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development and any agent of the commissioner, upon receipt of a complaint or through routine investigation for a violation of any State wage, benefit and tax law, including but not limited to a violation of R.S.34:15-79, or a failure to meet obligations required by R.S.43:21-7 or R.S.43:21-14, or for a violation of any provision of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.) or P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-1 et al.), is authorized to enter, during usual business hours, the place of business or employment of any employer of the individual to determine compliance with those laws, and for that purpose may examine payroll and other records and interview employees, call hearings, administer oaths, take testimony under oath and take interrogatories and oral depositions.
 
	b.	The commissioner may issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and records.  Any entity that fails to furnish information required to the commissioner or agent of the commissioner upon request, or who refuses to admit the commissioner or agent to the place of employment of the employer, or who hinders or delays the commissioner or agent in the performance of duties in the enforcement of this section, may be fined not less than $1,000 and shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense.  Each day of the failure to furnish the records to the commissioner or agent shall constitute a separate offense, and each day of refusal to admit, of hindering, or of delaying the commissioner or agent shall constitute a separate offense. 
 
	In addition to the foregoing fines, and in addition to or as an alternative to any criminal proceedings, if an entity fails to comply with any subpoena lawfully issued, or upon the refusal of any witness to testify to any matter regarding which the witness may be lawfully interrogated, the commissioner may apply to the Superior Court to compel obedience by proceedings for contempt, in the same manner as in a failure to comply with the requirements of a subpoena issued from the court or a refusal to testify in the court.
 
	c. (1) If the commissioner determines, after either an initial determination as a result of an audit of a business or an investigation pursuant to subsection a. of this section, that an employer is in violation of any State wage, benefit and tax law, including but not limited to a violation of R.S.34:15-79, or a failure to meet obligations required by R.S.43:21-7 or R.S.43:21-14, or for a violation of any provision of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.) or P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-1 et al.), the commissioner may issue a stop-work order against the employer requiring cessation of all business operations of the employer at one or more worksites or across all of the employer's worksites and places of business.  The stop-work order may be issued only against the employer found to be in violation or non-compliance.  The commissioner shall serve a notification of intent to issue a stop-work order on the employer at the place of business or, for a particular employer worksite, at that worksite at least seven days prior to the issuance of a stop-work order.  The order shall be effective when served upon the employer at the place of business or, for a particular employer worksite, when served at that worksite.  The order shall remain in effect until the commissioner issues an order releasing the stop-work order upon finding that the employer has come into compliance and has paid any penalty deemed to be satisfactory to the commissioner, or after the commissioner determines, in a hearing held pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection, that the employer did not commit the act on which the order was based.  The stop-work order shall be effective against any successor entity engaged in the same or equivalent trade or activity that has one or more of the same principals or officers as the corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or sole proprietorship against which the stop-work order was issued.  The commissioner may assess a civil penalty of $5,000 per day against an employer for each day that it conducts business operations that are in violation of the stop-work order.  A request for hearing shall not automatically stay the effect of the order.
 
	(2)	An employer who is subject to a stop-work order shall, within 72 hours of its receipt of the notification, have the right to appeal to the commissioner in writing for an opportunity to be heard and contest the stop-work order. 
 
	Within seven business days of receipt of the notification from the employer, the commissioner shall hold a hearing to allow the employer to contest the issuance of a stop-work order.  The department and the employer may present evidence and make any arguments in support of their respective positions on the imposition of the misclassification penalty.  If a hearing is not held within seven business days of receipt of the notification from the employer, an administrative law judge shall have the authority to release the stop-work order.  The commissioner shall issue a written decision within five business days of the hearing either upholding or reversing the employer's stop-work order.  The decision shall include the grounds for upholding or reversing the employer's stop-work order.  If the employer disagrees with the written decision, the employer may appeal the decision to the commissioner, in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.). 
 
	If the employer does not request an appeal to the commissioner in writing, the stop-work order shall become a final order after the expiration of the 72-hour period. The authority to assess a civil penalty under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be in addition to any misclassification penalty assessed under section 1 of P.L.2019, c.373 (C.34:1A-1.18) and all other enforcement provisions or assessments issued for the employer's violation of any State wage, benefit and tax law, including but not limited to a violation of R.S.34:15-79, or a failure to meet obligations required by R.S.43:21-7 or R.S.43:21-14, or for a violation of any provision of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.) or P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-1 et al.) The commissioner may compromise any civil penalty assessed under this section in an amount the commissioner determines to be appropriate.
 
	Once the stop-work order becomes final, any employee affected by a stop-work order issued pursuant to this section shall be entitled to pay from the employer for the first ten days of work lost because of the stop-work.  Upon request of any employee not paid wages, the commissioner can take assignment of the claim and bring any legal action necessary to collect all that is due.
 
	(3)	As an alternative to issuing a stop-work order in accordance with paragraph (1) of this subsection, if the commissioner determines, after an investigation pursuant to subsection a. of this section, that an employer is in violation of R.S.34:15-79, the commissioner may provide and transfer all details and materials related to the investigation under this section to the Director of the Division of Workers' Compensation for any enforcement of penalties or stop-work orders the director determines are appropriate.
 
	d.	For purposes of this section: 
 
	"Employer" means any individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, the administrator or executor of the estate of a deceased individual, or the receiver, trustee, or successor of any of the same, employing any person in this State. For the purposes of this subsection the officers of a corporation and any agents having the management of such corporation shall be deemed to be the employers of the employees of the corporation.  In addition, any members of a partnership or limited liability company and any agents having the management of such partnership or limited liability company shall be deemed to be employers of the employees of the partnership or limited liability company.
 
	"Employee" means any person suffered or permitted to work by an employer, except a person performing services for remuneration whose services satisfy the factors set forth in subparagraphs (A),(B), and (C) of R.S.43:21-19(i)(6).
 
	"Employ" means to suffer or permit to work.
 
	"State wage, benefit and tax laws" means "State wage, benefit and tax laws" as defined in section 1 of P.L.2009, c.194 (C.34:1A-1.11).
 
	e.	Nothing in this section shall preclude an employer from seeking injunctive relief from a court of competent jurisdiction if the employer can demonstrate that the stop-work order would be issued or has been issued in error.
 
	L.2019, c.372, s.1; amended 2021, c.165, s.3.

34:1A-1.18  Violations concerning misclassification of employees; penalties.
	1. a. If the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development finds that a violation of a State wage, benefit and tax law has occurred and that the violation was in connection with failing to properly classify employees, the commissioner is, in addition to imposing any other remedies or penalties authorized by law, authorized to assess and collect:
 
	(1)	an administrative "misclassification penalty" up to a maximum of $250 per misclassified employee for a first violation and up to a maximum of $1,000 per misclassified employee for each subsequent violation; and
 
	(2)	a penalty to be provided for the misclassified worker of not more than 5 percent of the worker's gross earnings over the past twelve months from the employer who failed to properly classify them.  The employer may be required to make these penalty payments to the commissioner to be held in a special account in trust for the worker or workers, or paid on order of the commissioner directly to the workers or workers affected.
 
	When determining the amount of the administrative "misclassification penalty" imposed pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection, the commissioner shall consider factors which include the history of previous violations by the employer, the seriousness of the violation, the good faith of the employer and the size of the employer's business.  No administrative "misclassification penalty" shall be levied pursuant to this section unless the commissioner provides the alleged violator with notification of the violation and of the amount of penalty, and provides the alleged violator an opportunity to request a hearing before the commissioner or his or her designee.
 
	b.	For violations of any State wage, benefit or tax law, other than the State unemployment and disability benefits laws, which occur in connection with the misclassification of one or more employees, the alleged violator may request a hearing within 15 days following receipt of the notice.  If a hearing is requested, the commissioner shall issue a final order upon such hearing and a finding that the violation has occurred.  If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order upon expiration of the 15-day period.  For violations subject to this subsection b., payment of the administrative "misclassification penalty" shall be due when the final order is issued or when the notice becomes the final order.
 
	c.	For violations of the State unemployment and disability benefits laws in connection with the misclassification of one or more employees, the alleged violator may request a hearing in the manner and within the time prescribed by those laws, and payment of the administrative "misclassification penalty" shall be due when assessment for contributions, penalties and interest are due pursuant to subsection (d) of R.S.43:21-14 or section 31 of P.L.1948, c.110 (C.43:21-55).
 
	d.	Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding commenced by the Commissioner pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	e.	Any sum collected as an administrative "misclassification penalty" pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection a. shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the division within the Department of Labor and Workforce Development responsible for enforcement of the law violated by the employer.  Nothing in this section shall prevent the commissioner from assessing interest, penalties, or other fees allowable by law.
 
	f.	For purposes of this section, "State wage, benefit and tax laws" means "State wage, benefit and tax laws" as defined in section 1 of P.L.2009, c.194 (C.34:1A-1.11), and "State unemployment and disability benefits laws" mean the "unemployment compensation law," R.S.43:21-1 et seq., and the "Temporary Disability Benefits Law," P.L.1948, c.110 (C.43:21-25 et al.).
 
	L.2019, c.373, s.1.

34:1A-1.19  Post notices about misclassification.
 	1.	Post notices about misclassification. a. Each employer required to maintain and report records regarding wages, benefits, taxes and other contributions and assessments pursuant to State wage, benefit and tax laws, as defined in section 1 of P.L.2009, c.194 (C.34:1A-1.11), shall conspicuously post notification, in a place or places accessible to all employees in each of the employer's workplaces, in a form issued by the commissioner, explaining: 
 
	(1)	The prohibition against employers misclassifying employees; 
 
	(2)	The standard delineated in paragraph (6) of subsection (i) of R.S.43:21-19 that is applied by the department to determine whether an individual is an employee or an independent contractor; 
 
	(3)	The benefits and protections to which an employee is entitled under State wage, benefit and tax laws; 
 
	(4)	The remedies under New Jersey law to which workers affected by misclassification may be entitled; and 
 
	(5)	Information on how a worker or a worker's authorized representative may contact, by telephone, mail and e-mail, a representative of the commissioner to provide information to, or file a complaint with, the representative regarding possible worker misclassification.
 
	b.	No employer shall discharge or in any other manner discriminate against an employee because the employee has made an inquiry or complaint to his employer, to the commissioner or to his authorized representative regarding possible worker misclassification, or because the employee has caused to be instituted or is about to cause to be instituted any proceeding regarding worker misclassification under State wage, benefit and tax laws, or because the employee has testified in the proceeding.
 
	c.	An employer who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense and shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000.  In the case of a discharge or other discriminatory action in violation of this section, the employer shall also be required to offer reinstatement in employment to the discharged employee and to correct any discriminatory action, and to pay the employee all reasonable legal costs of the action, all wages and benefits lost as a result of the discharge or discriminatory action, plus punitive damages equal to two times the lost wages and benefits, under penalty of contempt proceedings for failure to comply with the requirement.
 
	L.2019, c.375, s.1.

34:1A-1.20  Information regarding worker misclassification.
 	2.	Information regarding worker misclassification.  The Department of Labor and Workforce Development shall maintain a webpage that contains information regarding: 
 
	(a)	The prohibition against employers misclassifying employees; 
 
	(b)	The standard delineated in paragraph (6) of subsection (i) of R.S.43:21-19 that is applied by the department to determine whether an individual is an employee or an independent contractor; 
 
	(c)	The benefits and legal protections to which an employee is entitled under State wage, benefit and tax laws; 
 
	(d)	The remedies under New Jersey law to which workers affected by misclassification may be entitled; and 
 
	(e)	Information on how a worker or a worker's authorized representative may contact, by telephone, mail and e-mail, a representative of the commissioner to provide information to, or file a complaint with, the representative regarding possible worker misclassification.
 
	L.2019, c.375, s.2.

34:1A-1.20a  Employer disclosure of immigration status to conceal violation of State wage, benefit, tax laws, prohibited; penalties.
	1. a. If the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development finds that an employer has, for the purpose of concealing any violation of State wage, benefit and tax laws, disclosed or threatened to disclose to a public body an employee's immigration status, the commissioner is, in addition to imposing any other remedies or penalties authorized by law, authorized to assess and collect an administrative penalty as follows:
 
	(1) for the first violation, an administrative penalty not to exceed $1,000;
 
	(2) for the second violation, an administrative penalty not to exceed $5,000; and
 
	(3) for any subsequent violation, an administrative penalty not to exceed $10,000.
 
	b.	When determining the amount of the administrative penalty imposed pursuant to subsection a. of this section, the commissioner shall consider factors which include the history of previous violations by the employer, the seriousness of the violation, the good faith of the employer, and the size of the employer's business.  No administrative penalty shall be levied pursuant to this section unless the commissioner provides the alleged violator with notification of the violation and of the amount of administrative penalty and unless the commissioner provides the alleged violator an opportunity to request a hearing before the commissioner or the commissioner's designee.
 
	c.	For violations of subsection a. of this section that occur for the purpose of concealing a violation of any State wage, benefit, or tax law, other than the State unemployment and disability benefits laws, the alleged violator may request a hearing within 15 days following receipt of the notice.  If a hearing is requested, the commissioner shall issue a final order upon such hearing and a finding that the violation has occurred.  If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order upon expiration of the 15-day period.  For violations subject to this subsection c., payment of the administrative penalty shall be due when the final order is issued or when the notice becomes the final order.
 
	d.	For violations of subsection a. of this section that occur for the purpose of concealing a violation of the State unemployment and disability benefits laws, the alleged violator may request a hearing in the manner and within the time prescribed by those laws, and payment of the administrative penalty shall be due when assessment for contributions, penalties and interest are due pursuant to subsection (d) of R.S.43:21-14 or section 31 of P.L.1948, c.110 (C.43:21-55).
 
	e.	Any administrative penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding commenced by the commissioner pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	f.	Any sum collected as an administrative penalty pursuant to this section shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Wage and Hour Compliance within the Department of Labor and Workforce Development responsible for enforcement of the State wage, benefit, or tax law the violation of which the employer sought to conceal by disclosing or threatening to disclose an employee's immigration status.  Nothing in this section shall prevent the commissioner from assessing interest, penalties, or other fees allowable by law.
 
	g.	 For purposes of this section, "State wage, benefit and tax laws" means "State wage, benefit and tax laws" as defined in section 1 of P.L.2009, c.194 (C.34:1A-1.11), and "State unemployment and disability benefits laws" means the "unemployment compensation law," R.S.43:21-1 et seq., and the "Temporary Disability Benefits Law," P.L.1948, c.110 (C.43:21-25 et al.).
 
L.2024, c.51.

34:1A-1.21  Findings, declarations.
	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	More than 19 million people in the United States work in state and local governments, and more than 570,000 people have public sector jobs in New Jersey, including 130,000 State government employees, employed in a wide variety of jobs and occupations, including accountants, corrections officers, mail clerks, chaplains, social workers, doctors, lawyers, teachers, and computer programmers;
 
	b.	People with disabilities can benefit from the experience of employment in State agencies, gaining skills and receiving benefits through both internships and employment in the public sector and the State can benefit from the contributions that they can make as State employees;
 
	c.	Nine states have instituted within their human resources agencies policies and programs that foster the inclusion of people with disabilities into state government jobs, including provisional appointments, alternative examination and interview processes, trial work periods, and special appointment lists;
 
	d.	As a leading employer, and as an employer providing many well-paid, quality jobs with ample paid time off and medical and pension benefits, the State of New Jersey can set an important example to other employers, especially private sector employers, by increasing its efforts to recruit and retain in employment individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities; and
 
	e.	It is therefore appropriate to establish a Task Force to Promote the Employment by State Agencies of People with Disabilities for the purposes of studying the problem of unemployment and underemployment among individuals in New Jersey with disabilities, reviewing existing programs in this and other states, and private sector companies, to recruit and retain in employment individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities, and assisting in the identification and implementation of strategies to expand efforts of New Jersey State agencies to recruit and retain in employment individuals with disabilities, including by providing guidance and support to agencies and institutions of higher education.
 
	L.2021, c.84, s.1.

34:1A-1.22  Task Force to Promote the Employment by State Agencies of People with Disabilities.
	2. a. There is established, in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Task Force to Promote the Employment by State Agencies of People with Disabilities.  The task force shall consist of 13 members, including one representative each for the Civil Service Commission, the Department of Education, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the State Treasurer, the Office of the Ombudsman for Individuals with Intellectual or Developmental Disabilities and their Families, the State Council on Developmental Disabilities, the State Rehabilitation Council, and the John J. Heldrich Center for Workforce Development, who shall serve ex officio, and five members appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate as follows: a member representing the Association for Choices in Community Supports and Employment Services (ACCSES New Jersey); a member representing The Arc of New Jersey; a representative of a community rehabilitation program, and two individuals who have a disability.
 
	b.	All appointments shall be made within 90 days after the effective date of this act.  The appointed members of the task force shall serve for terms of three years.  Vacancies in the membership of the appointed members of the task force shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments.
 
	c.	Members of the task force shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as members of the task force, within the limits of funds appropriated or otherwise made available to the task force for its purposes.
 
	d.	The task force shall organize as soon as possible after the appointments are made and select a chairperson from among its members.  The task force shall meet at least quarterly, may hold meetings and hearings at places and times as it designates, and may meet at any other times at the call of the chairperson.  No action shall be taken by the task force except by an affirmative vote of a majority of the voting members.
 
	L.2021, c.84, s.2.

34:1A-1.23  Purpose of task force.
 	3. a. The purpose of the task force is to study the problem of unemployment and underemployment among individuals with disabilities, review relevant, available programs within the State of New Jersey for State and local government agencies to recruit, hire, and retain in employment individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities, as well as similar programs in other states and private sector employers, and assist in the identification and implementation of strategies to expand efforts of New Jersey State and local government agencies to recruit, hire, and retain in employment individuals with disabilities.
 
	b.	The task force shall issue annual reports which offer a vision and provide viable recommendations on how the State can increase opportunities for employment for individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities by expanding efforts of New Jersey State and local government agencies to promote the employment of such individuals by recruiting, hiring, and retaining them in employment, including by providing guidance and support to agencies and institutions of higher education.
 
	c.	The task force shall issue its first report to the Governor and Legislature not later than one year after the members of the task force are appointed.  Each annual report shall be made available to the public by means including the posting of the report on the web sites of the State agencies represented on the task force.
 
	L.2021, c.84, s.3.

34:1A-2.  Commissioner of Labor and Industry;  head of department; appointment;  term;  salary
    The administrator and head of the department shall be a commissioner, who shall be known as the Commissioner of Labor and Industry, and who shall be a person qualified by training and experience to perform the duties of his office.  The commissioner shall be appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate, and shall serve at the pleasure of the Governor during the Governor's term of office and until the appointment and qualification of the commissioner's successor.  He shall receive such salary as  shall be provided by law.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1763, s. 2.

34:1A-3.  Duties of Commissioner
    The commissioner, as head of the department, shall:

    (a) Administer the work of the department;

     (b) Appoint and remove officers and other personnel employed within the department, subject to the provisions of Title 11 of the Revised Statutes, Civil Service, and other applicable statutes, except as herein otherwise specifically provided;

    (c) Perform, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the  department through such divisions as may be established by this act or otherwise by law;

    (d) Organize the work of the department in such divisions, not inconsistent  with the provisions of this act and in such bureaus and other organizational  units as he may determine to be necessary for efficient and effective  operation;

    (e) Adopt, issue and promulgate, in the name of the department, such rules and regulations as may be authorized by law;

    (f) Formulate and adopt rules and regulations for the efficient conduct of the work and general administration of the department, its officers and employees;

    (g) Institute or cause to be instituted such legal proceedings or processes  as may be necessary properly to enforce and give effect to any of his powers or  duties;

    (h) Make an annual report to the Governor and to the Legislature of the department's operations, and render such other reports as the Governor shall from time to time request or as may be required by law;

    (i) Co-ordinate the activities of the department, and the several divisions  and other agencies therein, in a manner designed to eliminate overlapping and  duplicating functions;

    (j) Integrate within the department, so far as practicable, all staff services of the department and of the several divisions and other agencies therein;  and

    (k) Perform such other functions as may be prescribed in this act or by any  other law.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1763, s. 3.

34:1A-3.1  Job training programs.
  	8.	The Department of Labor and Workforce Development shall establish job training programs for those who work in manufacturing and servicing of offshore wind energy equipment through Workforce Investment Boards, county colleges, and other appropriate institutions.  The department shall develop training curricula in consultation with the equipment manufacturers.
 
	L.2018, c.17, s.8.
 
34:1A-4.  Delegation of powers by commissioner
    The commissioner may delegate to subordinate officers or employees in the department such of his powers as he may deem desirable, to be exercised under his supervision and direction, and shall, by order, rule or regulation filed with the Secretary of State designate one or more officers or employees in the department who may act for him and on his behalf in the event of his absence or  disability.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1764, s. 4.

34:1A-5.  Divisions in Department
    There is hereby established in the Department of Labor and Industry a Division of Labor, a Division of Workmen's Compensation, and a Division of Employment Security.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1764, s. 5.

34:1A-5.1.  Reference to division of workmen's compensation to mean and refer to division of workers' compensation
    Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the division heretofore referred to as the Division of Workmen's Compensation in the Department of Labor and Industry shall be known as the Division of Workers' Compensation, and  whenever the term  "Division of Workmen's Compensation"  is used in any law or  statute such term shall mean and refer to the Division of Workers' Compensation.

     L.1975, c. 352, s. 1, eff. March 3, 1976.

34:1A-6.  Powers and duties of existing Department of Labor, of Commissioner  of Labor and of Unemployment Compensation Commission transferred
    All of the functions, powers and duties of the existing Department of Labor,  of the Commissioner of Labor, and of the respective bureaus and divisions  therein, of the existing Unemployment Compensation Commission, and of the  respective bureaus and divisions therein, and of the executive director of such  commission are continued, but such functions, powers and duties are hereby  transferred to the Department of Labor and Industry established hereunder.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1764, s. 6.

34:1A-7.  Division of Labor to perform duties transferred exclusive of those  administered through workmen's compensation bureau and those performed under  chapter fifteen of Title 34
    All of the functions, powers and duties of the existing Department of Labor  and of the respective bureaus and divisions therein and of the Commissioner of  Labor herein transferred to the Department of Labor and Industry, exclusive of  those of, or relating to, or administered through, the workmen's compensation  bureau and those exercised or performed in the administration of the provisions  of chapter fifteen of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes, and the acts amendatory  and supplementary thereof, are hereby assigned to, and shall be exercised and  performed through, the Division of Labor in the department.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1765, s. 7.

34:1A-7.1.   Orientation program to educate employers about wage and hour laws, etc.  
     27.  The Division of Workplace Standards shall conduct an extensive orientation program to educate new and existing employers about wage and hour laws and, as appropriate, other laws pertaining to workplace standards.  To implement the program, the division may foster cooperative efforts with any appropriate business organization, trade association, civic or community organization or educational institution.  

    L.1991,c.205,s.27.  

34:1A-8.  Director of Division of Labor
    The Division of Labor shall be under the immediate supervision of a director, who shall be a person qualified by training and experience to direct the work of such division.  The director of such division shall be appointed by  the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate, and shall serve during  the term of office of the Governor appointing him and until the director's  successor is appointed and has qualified.  He shall receive such salary as  shall be provided by law.

    The director shall administer the work of such division under the direction  and supervision of the commissioner, and shall perform such other functions of  the department as the commissioner may prescribe.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1765, s. 8.

34:1A-9.  Bureau of migrant labor;  transfer of functions, powers and duties  to
    There shall be within the Division of Labor, a Bureau of Migrant Labor.

    The division of migrant labor of the existing Department of Labor and Industry, together with all of its functions, powers and duties is continued, but such division is transferred to and constituted the Bureau of Migrant Labor  in the Division of Labor.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1765, s. 9.  Amended by L.1967, c. 91, s. 14, eff. June 7,  1967.

34:1A-10.  Organization of existing Department of Labor continued; divisions constituted bureaus;  deputy directors
    Except as otherwise provided herein or as may be changed pursuant to authorization contained herein or in any other law, the organization of the existing Department of Labor is continued as the organization of the Division of Labor established hereunder;  provided, however, that divisions in the Department of Labor shall hereafter be constituted bureaus in the Division of Labor established hereunder, and any person appointed, pursuant to law, as a deputy in such division shall hereafter be known and designated as a deputy director in such division.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1766, s. 10.

34:1A-11.  Division of Workmen's Compensation;  powers and duties
    All of the functions, powers and duties of the workmen's compensation bureau  of the existing Department of Labor, and those exercised or performed by it or  any of its officers or employees in the administration of the provisions of  chapter fifteen of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes, and the acts amendatory  and supplementary thereof, and all of the functions, powers and duties of the  existing Department of Labor and of the Commissioner of Labor relating to or  administered through such workmen's compensation bureau, and all of the  functions, powers and duties of the director and secretary of such bureau, are  hereby assigned to, and shall be exercised and performed through, the Division  of Workmen's Compensation in the department.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1766, s. 11.

34:1A-12.  Division of Workmen's Compensation;  officials and employees in Division;  director;  powers and duties
    The Division of Workmen's Compensation shall consist of the Commissioner of  Labor and Industry who shall act as chairman, a director who shall be appointed  as hereinafter provided, judges of compensation appointed by the commissioner,  and such referees and other employees as may, in the judgment of the  commissioner, be necessary.  Appointments of such judges of compensation,  referees and other employees shall be made in accordance with the provisions of  Title 11 of the Revised Statutes, Civil Service.

    The Director of the Division of Workmen's Compensation shall be a person qualified by training and experience to direct the work of such division. He shall be appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate, and shall serve during the term of office of the Governor appointing him and until the director's successor is appointed and has qualified.  He shall receive such salary as shall be provided by law.

    The Director of the Division of Workmen's Compensation shall, subject to the  supervision and direction of the Commissioner of Labor and Industry:

    (a) Be the administrative head of the division;

     (b) Prescribe the organization of the division, and the duties of his subordinates and assistants, except as may otherwise be provided by law;

     (c) Direct and supervise the activities of all members of the division;

     (d) Make an annual report to the Commissioner of Labor and Industry of the work of the division, which report shall be published annually for general distribution at such reasonable charge, not exceeding cost, as the commissioner  shall determine;

    (e) Perform such other functions of the department as the commissioner may prescribe.

    The Director of the Division of Workmen's Compensation shall also serve as secretary of such division, and may perform the duties of a judge of compensation.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1766, s. 12.  Amended by L.1950, c. 54, p. 95, s. 1; L.1960, c. 58, p. 487, s. 1.

34:1A-12.1.  Director and each judge of compensation to be attorneys
    The Director of the Division of Workmen's Compensation and each judge of compensation shall be an attorney-at-law of the State of New Jersey.

     L.1952, c. 269, p. 921, s. 5.  Amended by L.1960, c. 58, p. 488, s. 2.

34:1A-12.2.  Referee, qualifications of
    Any person hereafter appointed as a  "referee,"   "referee, formal hearings,"   "supervising referee,"  or  "supervising referee, formal hearings"  shall be an attorney-at-law of the State of New Jersey, except that a referee or a referee, formal hearings who, on July 1, 1966, had been a referee or a referee, formal hearings for a period of not less than 5 years may  be appointed as a  "referee,"   "referee, formal hearings,"  or as a "supervising referee"  or  "supervising referee, formal hearings," notwithstanding that he is not such an attorney-at-law.

     L.1952, c. 269, p. 921, s. 6.  Amended by L.1960, c. 57, p. 486, s. 1; L.1967, c. 128, s. 1, eff. June 22, 1967.

34:1A-12.3.  Continuation of deputy directors as judges of compensation
    All persons heretofore appointed and serving as deputy directors of compensation shall continue in such appointments, as heretofore, with the title  of judge of compensation.

     L.1960, c. 58, p. 488, s. 3.

34:1A-12.4.  Director of Division of Worker's Compensation; duties  
    4.   The Director of the Division of Worker's Compensation shall:

  

   a.   cause copies of the voter registration forms furnished under subsection f. of section 16 of P.L.1974, c.30 (C.19:31-6.4) to be prominently displayed at each public office of the division and to be made readily available to each individual who, when applying for benefits under R.S.43:21-19 et seq., may wish, on a voluntary basis, to register to vote.  An employee of the division shall provide the applicant with any assistance necessary in completing the form; shall inform the applicant that the applicant may leave the completed form with the employee; and, if the applicant chooses to leave the form, shall accept the completed form, stamp or otherwise mark it with the date on which it was so received, and forward it to the Secretary of State;  

   b.   provide for the continuous supply of the forms and instructions specified in subsection a. of this section to every office of the division which distributes application forms for benefits administered by the division;

   c.   provide the forms and instructions specified in subsection a. of this section in both the English and Spanish languages to each office of the division which distributes application forms for benefits administered by the division which is located in any county in which bilingual sample ballots must be provided pursuant to R.S.19:14-21, R.S.19:49-4 or section 2 of P.L.1965, c.29 (C.19:23-22.4); and  

   d.   provide for the collection of completed voter registration forms by any employee of the division who is employed in any office which distributes application forms for benefits administered by the division, and for the transmittal of the forms to the Secretary of State.  

   L.1991,c.318,s.4; amended 1994,c.182,s.19.  

34:1A-13.  Organization of existing workmen's compensation bureau continued
    Except as otherwise provided herein or as may be changed pursuant to authorization contained herein or in any other law, the organization of the workmen's compensation bureau of the existing Department of Labor is continued as the organization of the Division of Workmen's Compensation established hereunder.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1767, s. 13.

34:1A-14.  Powers and duties of the Unemployment Compensation Commission assigned to Division of Employment Security
    All of the functions, powers and duties of the Unemployment Compensation Commission, of the respective bureaus and divisions therein, and of the executive director of such commission, are hereby assigned to, and shall be exercised and performed through, the Division of Employment Security in the Department of Labor and Industry established hereunder.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1768, s. 14.

34:1A-15.  Director of division of Employment Security
    The division of Employment Security shall be under the immediate supervision  of a director who shall be a person qualified by training and experience to  direct the work of such division.  The director of such division shall be  appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate and shall  serve during the term of office of the Governor appointing him and until the  director's successor is appointed and has qualified.  He shall receive such  salary as shall be provided by law.

    The director shall administer the work of such division under the direction  and supervision of the commissioner, and shall perform such other functions of  the department as the commissioner may prescribe.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1768, s. 15.

34:1A-15.1.  Director of Division of Employment Services; duties  
     5.   The Director of the Division of Employment Services shall:

  

    a.   cause copies of the voter registration forms furnished under subsection f. of section 16 of P.L.1974, c.30 (C.19:31-6.4) to be prominently displayed at each public office of the division and to be made readily available to each individual who, when applying for services administered by the division, may wish, on a voluntary basis, to register to vote.  An employee of the division shall inquire of every applicant for such services whether the applicant, if not already registered to vote from the place of his or her present residence, wishes to be so registered and shall inform the applicant that whether or not the applicant chooses to register will not affect the applicant's eligibility for those services.  The employee shall provide the applicant with any assistance necessary in completing the form; shall inform the applicant that the applicant may leave the completed form with the employee; and, if the applicant chooses to leave the form, shall accept the completed form, stamp or otherwise mark it with the date on which it was so received, and forward it to the Secretary of State;  

    b.   provide for the continuous supply of the forms and instructions specified in subsection a. of this section to every office of the division which receives applications for services administered by the division;  

    c.   provide the forms and instructions specified in subsection a. of this section in both the English and Spanish languages to each office of the division that receives applications for services administered by the division which is located in any county in which bilingual sample ballots must be provided pursuant to R.S.19:14-21, R.S.19:49-4 or section 2 of P.L.1965, c.29 (C.19:23-22.4); and  

    d.   provide for the collection of completed voter registration forms by any employee of the division who is employed in any office which receives applications for services administered by the division, and for the transmittal of the forms to the Secretary of State.  

    L.1991,c.318,s.5.  

34:1A-15.2.  Director of the Division of Unemployment and Temporary Disability Insurance; duties  
     6.   The Director of the Division of Unemployment and Temporary Disability Insurance shall:  

    a.   cause copies of the voter registration forms furnished under subsection f. of section 16 of P.L.1974, c.30 (C.19:31-6.4) to be prominently displayed at each public office of the division and to be made readily available to each individual who, when applying for benefits administered by the division, may wish, on a voluntary basis, to register to vote.  An employee of the division shall inquire of every applicant for such services whether the applicant, if not already registered to vote from the place of his or her present residence, wishes to be so registered and shall inform the applicant that whether or not the applicant chooses to register will not affect the applicant's eligibility for those benefits.  The employee shall provide the applicant with any assistance necessary in completing the form; shall inform the applicant that the applicant may leave the completed form with the employee; and, if the applicant chooses to leave the form, shall accept the completed form, stamp or otherwise mark it with the date on which it was so received, and forward it to the Secretary of State;  

    b.   provide for the continuous supply of the forms and instructions specified in subsection a. of this section to every office of the division which receives applications for services administered by the division;  

    c.   provide the forms and instructions specified in subsection a. of this section in both the English and Spanish languages to each office of the division that receives applications for services administered by the division which is located in any county in which bilingual sample ballots must be provided pursuant to R.S.19:14-21, R.S.19:49-4 or section 2 of P.L.1965, c.29 (C.19:23-22.4); and  

    d.   provide for the collection of completed voter registration forms by any employee of the division who is employed in any office which receives applications for services administered by the division, and for the transmittal of the forms to the Secretary of State.  

    L.1991,c.318,s.6.  

34:1A-17.  Powers and duties of Employment Security Council
    The Employment Security Council shall:

    (a) Consult and advise with the Commissioner of Labor or his designated representative with respect to the administration and operation of the unemployment compensation law and the temporary disability benefits law;

    (b) Review the operation and effect of the unemployment compensation law and  the temporary disability benefits law in their several parts, and to that end  hold hearings with respect thereto as it may deem necessary or desirable; and

    (c) Report to the Governor and the Legislature annually and at such other times as it may deem in the public interest with respect to its findings and conclusions.

    The commissioner shall, insofar as practicable, consult the council on all matters of major policies and procedures involved in or connected with the administration of the unemployment compensation law and the temporary disability benefits law and he shall inform the council of the action taken in connection with such matters.

    The council shall have access to all files and records of the division and may require any officer or employee therein to provide such information as it may deem necessary in the performance of its functions.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1769, s. 17.  Amended by L.1984, c. 24, s. 14, eff. Oct. 1,  1984.

34:1A-18.  Advisory Council on Disability Benefits in Division of Employment  Security;  powers
    There shall also be within the Division of Employment Security the Advisory  Council on Disability Benefits, as established by and constituted under the  Temporary Disability Benefits Law, except that, in keeping with the purposes  and provisions of this act, the council shall aid, consult with and advise the  Commissioner of Labor and Industry and the Director of the Division of  Employment Security.  The council shall have access to all files and records of  the division relating to the administration of the Temporary Disability  Benefits Law, and may require any officer or employee therein to provide such  information as it may deem necessary in the performance of its functions.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1770, s. 18.

34:1A-19.  Board of Review in Division of Employment Security
	19.	There shall be within the Division of Employment Security a Board of Review consisting of three members, who shall act as a final appeals board in cases of benefit disputes, including appeals from determinations with respect to demands by the deputy for refunds of benefits pursuant to subsection (d) of R.S.43:21-16, and who shall supervise the work of local appeal tribunals which may be organized pursuant to the unemployment compensation law.  The members of the Board of Review shall be appointed by the director of the Division of Employment Security, subject to the approval of the commissioner, pursuant to the provisions of Title 11A of the New Jersey Statutes, Civil Service.  No member of the Board of Review shall participate in any case in which the member is an interested party.  The commissioner, at the commissioner's discretion, may on a temporary basis appoint three additional members to the Board of Review using either, or a combination of both, of the following two methods: (1) interim appointment, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 4A:4-1.6(d)3, of State employees who hold full-time primary employment in State service or (2) appointment, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 4A:3-3.8, of individuals who do not hold full-time primary employment in State service to an intermittent title.  If three additional members of the Board of Review are appointed by the commissioner on a temporary basis, increasing the membership of the Board of Review from three to six, the commissioner shall designate two separate panels from among the six members of the Board of Review, and each of the two panels shall be empowered to act independently of the other as a final appeals board in cases of benefit disputes, including appeals from determinations with respect to demands by the deputy for refunds of benefits pursuant to subsection (d) of R.S.43:21-16.  The commissioner may interchange panel members from among the six members of the Board of Review as operational needs dictate.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1770, s. 19; amended 2024, c.77, s.2.

34:1A-20.  Appeal tribunals;  membership;  compensation; disqualification for interest;  alternates;  disputed benefit claims
    To hear and decide disputed benefit claims, including appeals from determinations with respect to demands by the deputy for refunds of benefits under section 43:21-16(d) of the Revised Statutes, the director of the Division  of Employment Security, with the approval of the Commissioner of Labor and  Industry, shall establish one or more impartial appeal tribunals consisting in  each case of either a salaried examiner or a body consisting of three members,  one of whom shall be a salaried examiner, who shall serve as chairman, one of  whom shall be a representative of employers and the other of whom shall be a  representative of employees;  each of the latter two members shall serve at the  pleasure of the commissioner and be paid a fee of not more than twenty dollars  ($20.00) per day of active service on such tribunal plus necessary expenses.   No person shall participate on behalf of the division in any case in which he  is an interested party.  The director of the Division of Employment Security  may designate alternates to serve in the absence or disqualification of any  member of an appeal tribunal.  The chairman shall act alone in the absence or  disqualification of any other member and his alternates.  In no case shall the  hearings proceed unless the chairman of the appeal tribunal is present.

    Disputed claims for benefits under approved private plans established in accordance with the Temporary Disability Benefits Law shall be heard, reviewed,  and determined as provided in section 26(a) of that act.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1771, s. 20.

34:1A-21.  Organization of existing Unemployment Compensation Commission continued;  divisions constituted bureaus
    Except as otherwise provided herein or as may be changed pursuant to authorization contained herein or in any other law, the organization of the existing Unemployment Compensation Commission is continued as the organization of the Division of Employment Security established hereunder; provided, however, that any division required by law in the Unemployment Compensation Commission shall hereafter be constituted a bureau in the Division of Employment Security established hereunder.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1771, s. 21.

34:1A-23.  New Jersey State Board of Mediation transferred to Department of  Labor and Industry;  removal of members
    The New Jersey State Board of Mediation of the existing Department of Labor  and all of its functions, powers and duties are hereby transferred to the  Department of Labor and Industry established hereunder.  Such board shall continue to have all of the powers and shall exercise all of the functions and duties vested in, or imposed upon, it by law.  This act shall not affect the terms of office of the present members of such board.  Such board shall continue to be constituted as provided by existing law.  Any member of such board may be removed from office by the Governor, for cause, upon notice and opportunity to be heard.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1772, s. 23.

34:1A-24.  Directors of divisions;  unclassified service of civil service; removal;  vacancies
    The director of each division in the Department of Labor and Industry shall  be in the unclassified service of the civil service of the State. Any such  director may be removed from office by the Governor, for cause, upon notice and  opportunity to be heard.

    Any vacancy occurring in the office of director of any division in the department shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1772, s. 24.

34:1A-25.  Appropriations transferred
    All appropriations and other moneys available to become available to any department, commission, board, office or other agency, the functions, powers and duties of which have been herein assigned or transferred to the Department of Labor and Industry or to any office or agency designated, continued or constituted therein, are hereby transferred to the Department of Labor and Industry established hereunder, and shall be available for the objects and purposes for which appropriated subject to any terms, restrictions, limitations  or other requirements imposed by State or Federal law.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1772, s. 25.

34:1A-26.  Employees;  transfer
    Such employees of any department, commission, board, office or other agency,  the functions, powers and duties of which have been herein assigned or  transferred to the Department of Labor and Industry or to any office or agency  designated, continued or constituted therein, as the Commissioner of Labor and  Industry may determine are needed for the proper performance of the functions  and duties imposed upon the Department of Labor and Industry, or such office or  agency therein, are hereby transferred to the department, office or agency to  which such functions, powers and duties have been herein assigned or  transferred.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1773, s. 26.

34:1A-27.  Civil service, pension and retirement rights not affected
    Nothing in this act shall be construed to deprive any person holding any office or position not abolished pursuant to the provisions of this act, of any  tenure rights or of any right or protection provided him by Title 11 of the  Revised Statutes, Civil Service.  Nothing in this act shall be construed to  deprive any person of any right or protection provided him under any pension  law or retirement system.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1773, s. 27.

34:1A-28.  Files, books, records and property transferred
    All files, books, papers, records, equipment and other property of any department, commission, board, office or other agency, the functions, powers and duties of which have been herein assigned or transferred to the Department of Labor and Industry or to any officer or agency designated, continued or constituted hereunder, shall upon the effective date of this act be transferred  to the department, officer or agency to which such assignment or transfer has  been made hereunder.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1773, s. 28.

34:1A-29.  Orders, rules and regulations continued
    This act shall not affect the orders, rules and regulations heretofore made  or promulgated by any department, commission, board, officer or other agency,  the functions, powers and duties of which have been herein assigned or  transferred to the Department of Labor and Industry or to any officer or agency  designated, continued or constituted hereunder;  but such orders, rules and  regulations shall continue with full force and effect until amended or repealed  pursuant to law.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1773, s. 29.

34:1A-30.  Pending actions or proceedings;  orders or recommendations not affected
    This act shall not affect actions or proceedings, civil or criminal, brought  by or against any department, commission, board, officer or other agency, the  functions, powers and duties of which have been herein assigned or transferred  to the Department of Labor and Industry or to any officer or agency designated,  continued or constituted hereunder, and pending on the effective date of this  act, but such actions or proceedings may be prosecuted or defended in the same  manner and to the same effect by the department, officer or agency to which  such assignment or transfer has been made hereunder, as if the foregoing  provisions had not taken effect;  nor shall any of the foregoing provisions  affect any order or recommendation made by, or other matters or proceedings  before, any department, commission, board, officer or agency, the functions,  powers and duties of which have been herein assigned or transferred to the  Department of Labor and Industry or to any officer or agency designated,  continued or constituted hereunder, and all such matters or proceedings pending  before such department, commission, board, officer or other agency on the effective date of this act shall be continued by the department, officer or agency to which such assignment or transfer has been made hereunder, as if the  foregoing provisions had not taken effect.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1774, s. 30.

34:1A-31.  Commissions and offices abolished
    The Unemployment Compensation Commission, the office of executive director of the Unemployment Compensation Commission, the office of director of the New Jersey State Employment Service Division of the Unemployment Compensation Commission and the office of commissioner of labor are hereby abolished.

    The term of office of the present commissioner of labor shall expire on the  effective date of this act.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1774, s. 31.

34:1A-32.  Definition of terms referred to in laws, contracts or documents
    Subject to the provisions of this act:

    Whenever the term  "Commissioner of Labor"  occurs or any reference is made  thereto in any law, contract or document, the same shall be deemed to mean or  refer to the Commissioner of Labor and Industry designated as the head of the  Department of Labor and Industry established hereunder.

    Whenever the term  "Unemployment Compensation Commission"  occurs or any reference is made thereto in any law, contract or document, the same shall be deemed to mean or refer to the Commissioner of Labor and Industry designated as  the head of the Department of Labor and Industry established hereunder.

    Whenever the term  "Department of Labor"  occurs or any reference is made thereto in any law, contract or document, the same shall be deemed to mean or refer to the Division of Labor established hereunder.

    Whenever the term  "deputy commissioner of labor"  occurs or any reference is made thereto in any law, contract or document, the same shall be deemed to mean or refer to a deputy director in the Division of Labor established hereunder.

    Whenever the term  "deputy commissioner of workmen's compensation" occurs or any reference is made thereto in any law, contract or document, the same shall be deemed to mean or refer to a deputy director of workmen's compensation  in the Division of Workmen's Compensation established hereunder.

    Whenever the term  "inspector of the department of labor"  occurs or any reference is made thereto in any law, contract or document, the same shall be deemed to mean or refer to an inspector of the Division of Labor established hereunder.

    Whenever the term  "workmen's compensation bureau"  occurs or any reference  is made thereto in any law, contract or document, the same shall be deemed to  mean or refer to the Division of Workmen's Compensation established hereunder.

    Whenever the term  "secretary of the workmen's compensation bureau" occurs or any reference is made thereto in any law, contract or document, the same shall be deemed to mean or refer to the secretary of the Division of Workmen's Compensation established hereunder.

    Whenever the term  "division of migrant labor in the department of labor" occurs or any reference is made thereto in any law, contract or document, the same shall be deemed to mean or refer to the Bureau of Migrant Labor in the Division of Labor established hereunder.

    Whenever the term  "Executive Director of the Unemployment Compensation Commission"  occurs or any reference is made thereto in any law, contract or document, the same shall be deemed to mean or refer to the director of the Division of Employment Security established hereunder.

    Whenever the term  "New Jersey State Employment Service Division" occurs or  any reference is made thereto in any law, contract or document, the same shall  be deemed to mean or refer to the New Jersey State Employment Service Bureau in  the Division of Employment Security established hereunder.

    Whenever the term  "board of review"  occurs or any reference is made thereto in the unemployment compensation law, the same shall be deemed to mean or refer to the Board of Review in the Division of Employment Security established hereunder.

    Whenever the term  "appeal tribunal"  occurs or any reference is made thereto in the unemployment compensation law, the same shall be deemed to mean or refer to an appeal tribunal in the Division of Employment Security established hereunder.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1775, s. 32.

34:1A-33.  Repeal
    All acts and parts of acts inconsistent with any of the provisions of this act are, to the extent of such inconsistency, hereby repealed.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1776, s. 33.

34:1A-34.  Short title
    This act shall be known as, and may be cited as the  "Department of Labor and Industry Act of 1948."

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1776, s. 34.

34:1A-35.  Effective date
    This act shall take effect on the first day of January, one thousand nine hundred and forty-nine, except that any appointment, and any confirmation or approval of any appointment, permitted by this act may be made prior to such date.

     L.1948, c. 446, p. 1777, s. 35.

34:1A-36.  State Apprenticeship Council
    The Governor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Senate, a State Apprenticeship Council in the Division of Labor in the Department of Labor and Industry, composed of three representatives each from employer and employee organizations respectively and one representative of the general public, who shall be the chairman.  The council by majority vote may designate one of its members, other than the chairman, as vice-chairman to act in the absence or disability of the chairman.  Each member shall be appointed for a term of three years.  Each member shall hold office until his successor is appointed and has qualified, and any vacancy shall be filled by appointment for  the unexpired portion of the term.  The Commissioner of Education and the Commissioner of Labor and Industry shall ex officio be members of such council without vote.  The members of the council shall receive no compensation for their services.

    The council may:  (a) establish suggested standards for apprenticeship agreements in conformity with the provisions of this act;  (b) adopt such rules  and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the intent and purposes of  this act;  (c) compile such data as may be deemed necessary to determine trends  of employment opportunity in various trades;  (d) terminate or cancel any  apprenticeship agreement in accordance with the provisions of such agreement;   (e) perform such other duties as may be necessary to give full effect to the  provisions of this act.

    The council shall annually make a report to the Commissioner of Labor and Industry of its activities and findings.

     L.1953, c. 198, p. 1501, s. 1.

34:1A-37.  Personnel
    The Commissioner of Labor and Industry shall appoint a person to be in charge of apprentice training in the Division of Labor in the Department of Labor and Industry.  The Commissioner of Labor and Industry is authorized to appoint such clerical, technical, and professional assistants and may also designate such available personnel as shall be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act.  The personnel appointed under this act, shall receive annual compensations in accordance with their respective positions as classified by the Civil Service Commission and within the ranges established therefor and within the limits of available appropriations.

    The person in charge of apprentice training shall further the purposes of this act, and his duties shall include (a) encouragement and promotion of the making of such apprenticeship agreements as may conform to the standards established by or in accordance with this act;  (b) settlements of differences arising out of apprenticeship agreements when such differences cannot be adjusted locally or in accordance with established trade procedure;  (c) supervision of the execution of agreements and maintenance of standards;  (d) acting as secretary of the council and of State joint apprenticeship committees;  (e) registration of such apprenticeship agreements as the council shall authorize as conforming to the standards herein;  (f) keeping a record of  apprenticeship agreements and upon performance thereof issuing certificates of  completion of apprenticeship;  (g) co-operation with other State apprenticeship  councils and the Federal Committee on Apprenticeship in promoting and  maintaining bona fide apprenticeships.

     L.1953, c. 198, p. 1502, s. 2.

34:1A-38.  Related and supplemental instruction
    Related and supplemental instruction for apprentices, co-ordination of instruction with job experience, and the selection of teachers and co-ordinators for such instruction shall be the responsibility of State and local vocational education boards.

    In accordance with statutory provisions, the State Department of Education shall be responsible for and provide related training as required by apprenticeship programs set up under this act.  The State Apprenticeship Council may accept other related instruction facilities where vocational education related instruction facilities are not available or where registered apprenticeship programs designate other facilities for related instruction.

     L.1953, c. 198, p. 1503, s. 3.

34:1A-39.  Local, regional and State joint apprenticeship committees
    Local and State joint apprenticeship committees may be approved, in any trade or group of trades, in trade areas or regions of the State by the council, whenever the apprentice training needs of such trade or group of trades or such areas or regions justify such establishment.  Such local, regional or State joint apprenticeship committees shall be composed of an equal  number of employer and employee representatives chosen from names submitted by  the respective local or State employer and employee organizations in such trade  or group of trades and also such additional members representing local boards  of education or other educational agencies as may be deemed advisable.  In a  trade or group of trades in which there is no bona fide employer or employee  organization, the joint committee shall be composed of persons known to  represent the interests of employers and of employees respectively, or a State  joint apprenticeship committee may be approved as, or the council may act  itself as, the joint committee in such trade or group of trades.  Subject to a  review by the council and in accordance with the standards established by the  council, such committees may devise standards for apprenticeship agreements and  give such aid as may be necessary in their operation, in their respective  trades and localities.

     L.1953, c. 198, p. 1503, s. 4.

34:1A-40.  Standards for apprenticeship agreements
    Standards for apprenticeship agreements may be as follows:

    (1) A statement of the trade or craft to be taught and the required hours for completion of apprenticeship which shall be not less than four thousand hours of reasonably continuous employment.

    (2) A statement of the processes in the trade or craft divisions in which the apprentice is to be taught and the approximate amount of time to be spent at each process.

    (3) A statement of the number of hours to be spent by the apprentice in work  and the number of hours to be spent in related and supplemental instruction,  which instruction shall be not less than one hundred forty-four hours per  year.

    (4) A statement that apprentices shall be not less than sixteen years of age.

    (5) A statement of the progressively increasing scale of wages to be paid the apprentice.

    (6) Provision for a period of probation during which the apprenticeship council, or the person in charge of apprenticeship when authorized by the council, shall be directed to terminate an apprenticeship agreement at the request in writing of any party thereto.  After the probationary period the apprenticeship council, or the person in charge of apprenticeship, when authorized by the council, shall be empowered to terminate the registration of an apprentice upon agreement of the parties.

    (7) Provision that the services of the person in charge and the apprenticeship council may be utilized for consultation regarding the settlement of differences arising out of the apprenticeship agreement where such differences cannot be adjusted locally or in accordance with the established trade procedure.

    (8) Provision that if an employer is unable to fulfill his obligation under  the apprenticeship agreement he may transfer such obligation to another employer.

    (9) Such additional standards as may be prescribed in accordance with the provisions of this act.

     L.1953, c. 198, p. 1504, s. 5.

34:1A-41.  Apprenticeship agreements
    For the purposes of this act an apprenticeship agreement shall be deemed to  be:

    (1) An individual written agreement between an employer and an apprentice, or (2) a written agreement between an employer or an association of employers, and an organization of employees describing conditions of employment for apprentices, or (3) a written statement describing conditions of employment for  apprentices in a plant where there is no bona fide employee organization.

     L.1953, c. 198, p. 1505, s. 6.

34:1A-42.  Limitation
    The provisions of this act shall apply to a person, firm, corporation or craft only after such person, firm, corporation or craft has voluntarily elected to conform with its provisions.

     L.1953, c. 198, p. 1505, s. 7.

34:1A-43.  Separability
    If any provision of this act or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of the act, and the application of such provision to other persons and circumstances, shall not be affected thereby.

     L.1953, c. 198, p. 1505, s. 8.

34:1A-44.  Effective date
    This act shall take effect July first, one thousand nine hundred and fifty-three.

     L.1953, c. 198, p. 1505, s. 9.

34:1A-45.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the  "Division of Travel and Tourism Act."

     L.1977, c. 225, s. 1.

34:1A-46  Legislative findings and declarations.
 
 	2.	The Legislature hereby finds and declares that:

	a.	Increased revenues for this State and more employment opportunities for its citizens will result from the proper promotion throughout the United States and the world of the many tourist attractions which New Jersey has to offer to vacationers and travelers.
 
	b.	Such proper promotion--and the desired expansion of tourism in New Jersey--will be enhanced by the formulation of a master plan for the development of the tourist industry throughout New Jersey.
 
	c.	It is an objective of State programs, agencies, and resources to provide an optimum of satisfaction and high-quality service to visitors, to protect the natural beauty of New Jersey, and to sustain, promote, and expand the economic health of the tourist industry in a manner and to the extent compatible with such goals.
 
	d.	Because of the crucial importance tourism plays in New Jersey's economy, the Department of State is therefore charged with the mandate to increase tourism through promotional, informational, educational, and developmental programs.  These initiatives are to be designed to support a State policy of maintaining and increasing New Jersey's standing as a premier national and international travel destination.  To implement this policy, the Department of State shall create advertisements for use on television, radio, the Internet and in print, to promote the State's diverse appeal to prospective national and international vacationers and travelers as part of its advertising, public relations, and marketing campaign.  In addition, as required pursuant to section 9 of P.L.1977, c.225 (C.34:1A-53), the Division of Travel and Tourism shall annually review the 10-year master plan developed pursuant to section 8 of P.L.1977, c.225 (C.34:1A-52) by the director of the division with the assistance of the New Jersey Tourism Policy Council, and submit a report to the Governor and Legislature containing an evaluation of the preceding year's activities and developments in tourism and the revisions recommended in the master plan.
 
	e.	In the advancement and promotion of New Jersey's tourism industry, it is necessary to require that the division report semiannually to the Governor and the Legislature on the efforts of the division to promote tourism in New Jersey and on the expenditure of funds allocated to tourism advertising and promotion from hotel and motel occupancy fees pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2003, c.114 (C.54:32D-2).  As tourism may be particularly sensitive to changing economic conditions, a frequent review of the State's tourism planning and activities may necessitate revisions in the State's tourism policy to further encourage tourism promotion and to otherwise meet the challenges of implementing this policy.
 
	L.1977, c.225, s.2; amended 2005, c.378, s.1; 2007, c.253, s.1.

34:1A-47  Definitions.
 
 	3.	As used in this act, unless a different meaning appears from the context:

	"Council" means the New Jersey Tourism Policy Council.
 
	"Department" means the Department of State.
 
	"Director" means the Director of the Division of Travel and Tourism.
 
	"Division" means the Division of Travel and Tourism in the Department of State.
 
	"Elected local official" means the county executive of any county wherein that office is established, a member of the governing body of a county, or a mayor or member of the governing body of a municipality.
 
	"Tourism" means activities involved in providing and marketing services and products, including accommodations, for nonresidents and residents who travel to and in New Jersey for recreation and pleasure.
 
	"Tourist industry" means the industry consisting of private and public organizations which directly or indirectly provide services and products to nonresidents and residents who travel to and in New Jersey for recreation and pleasure.
 
	L.1977, c.225, s.3; amended 1991, c.280, s.1; 2005, c.378, s.2; 2007, c.253, s.2.

34:1A-48  Division of Travel and Tourism; establishment; director; appointment.
 
 	4.	There is hereby established in the Department of State the Division of Travel and Tourism.  The division shall be under the supervision of a director, who shall be a person qualified by training and experience to direct the work of such division.  The director shall be appointed by the Governor after consultation with the council and with the advice and consent of the Senate.  The director shall serve during the term of office of the Governor appointing the director and until the director's successor is appointed and qualified.  The director shall receive such salary as shall be provided by law and shall devote the director's entire time and attention to the duties of the director's office and shall not, while in office, engage in any other gainful pursuit.  The Governor may remove the director from office for cause, upon notice and opportunity to be heard.
 
	L.1977, c.225, s.4; amended 2005, c.378, s.3; 2007, c.253, s.3.

34:1A-48.1  Division of Travel and Tourism transferred to the Department of State.
 
 	4. a. All the functions, powers, and duties of the Division of Travel and Tourism in the New Jersey Commerce, Economic Growth and Tourism Commission are transferred to the Department of State.
 
	b.	All appropriations and other moneys available and to become available to the division are hereby continued in the Department of State and shall be available for the objects and purposes for which such moneys are appropriated subject to any terms, restrictions, limitations, or other requirements imposed by State or federal law.
 
	c.	Whenever, in any law, rule, regulation, order, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding or otherwise, reference is made to the Division of Travel and Tourism in the New Jersey Commerce, Economic Growth and Tourism Commission, the same shall mean and refer to the Division of Travel and Tourism in the Department of State.
 
	L.2007, c.253, s.4.

34:1A-49.  Transfer of functions, power and duties of office of tourism and  promotion to division of travel and tourism
    All the functions, powers, and duties of the Office of Tourism and Promotion  in the Division of Economic Development in the Department of Labor and Industry  are transferred to the Division of Travel and Tourism established hereunder.

     L.1977, c. 225, s. 5.

34:1A-50.  Transfer made in accordance with State Agency Transfer Act
    The transfer directed by this act shall be made in accordance with the "State Agency Transfer Act,"  P.L.1971, c. 375 (C. 52:14D-1 et seq.).

     L.1977, c. 225, s. 6.

34:1A-51  New Jersey Tourism Policy Council.
  
	7. a. There is created in the division the New Jersey Tourism Policy Council which shall consist of 23 members:
 
	(1)	Two members of the Senate, who shall serve as ex officio, non-voting members to be appointed by the President thereof, not more than one of whom shall be of the same political party, and two members of the General Assembly, who shall serve as ex officio, non-voting members to be appointed by the Speaker thereof, not more than one of whom shall be of the same political party;
 
	(2)	Nine public members, who shall be residents of this State, not more than five of whom shall be of the same political party, who shall be appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate, who shall include persons who by experience or training represent the areas of the tourist industry as follows:
 
	One representative of the lodging sector;
 
	One representative of the food service sector;
 
	One representative of the eco-tourism sector;
 
	One representative of the cultural arts sector;
 
	One representative of the convention and visitor bureaus or tour/receptive services sectors;
 
	One representative of the entertainment or amusement sector;
 
	One representative of the outdoor recreation sector;
 
	One representative of the historical community; and
 
	One representative of a Statewide travel and tourism association representing the various sectors of the tourism industry;
 
	(3)	The Secretary of State, who shall serve ex officio as a voting member and chair of the council;
 
	(4)	Six elected local officials, not more than three of whom shall be of the same political party, who shall be appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate, and of whom one shall be a resident of Cape May or Cumberland County, one shall be a resident of Atlantic County, one shall be a resident of Burlington, Camden, Gloucester, Mercer or Salem County, one shall be a resident of Monmouth or Ocean County, one shall be a resident of Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Middlesex, Passaic or Union County, and one shall be a resident of Hunterdon, Morris, Somerset, Sussex or Warren County; and
 
	(5)	The executive directors of the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority, and the Atlantic City Convention Center Authority, or their designees, all of whom shall serve ex officio and as voting members.

	b. (1) The public members of the council shall be appointed to three-year terms, except that public members initially appointed on or after the effective date of P.L.2005, c.378, representing the lodging, food service, and eco-tourism sectors shall be appointed to a two-year term, and public members representing the cultural arts and outdoor recreation sectors and the historical community shall be appointed to a one-year term.  Public members shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified.  Vacancies occurring other than by expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
 
	(2)	The term of appointment, as a member of the council, of an elected local official appointed pursuant to paragraph 4 of subsection a. of this section shall be the same as the term of office, as an elected local official, that the person is serving at the time of such appointment.  In the event that a member of the council appointed pursuant to that paragraph no longer serves as an elected local official, the term of appointment for that member shall cease and the Governor may, with the advice and consent of the Senate, appoint a replacement to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.  In the case of a person who, at the time of such appointment, serves as an elected local official in two different offices, the term of the person's appointment to the council shall be measured by the longer of the terms as an elected local official.  Nothing in this paragraph shall preclude the reappointment as an elected local official member of the council of a person whose term of office as such elected local official has expired, but who has been reelected to succeed himself in the same local office.
 
	c.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.1991, c.280).
 
	d.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.1991, c.280).
 
	e.	The members of the council shall serve without compensation but shall be entitled to reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as members.
 
	f.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.1991, c.280).
 
	g.	The council shall meet at the call of the chair and not less than once every month.
 
	h.	Whenever, in any law, rule, regulation, order, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding or otherwise, reference is made to the New Jersey Tourism Advisory Council, the same shall mean and refer to the New Jersey Tourism Policy Council in the Division of Travel and Tourism.
 
	L.1977, c.225, s.7; amended 1991, c.280, ss.2,3; 1997, c.10; 2001, c.255; 2005, c.378, s.4; 2007, c.253, s.5.

34:1A-52.  Master plan;  contents
    The director, upon consultation with the council, shall develop a 10-year master plan for the growth of tourism for presentation to the Governor and the Legislature no later than February 1, 1979.

    The plan shall include, but not be limited to, consideration of the following:

    a.  New Jersey's need for additional job opportunities and for tax revenues;

    b.  The optimum distribution of the tourist industry throughout the State and the effect of such industry on the environment;

    c.  The upgrading and improvement of the facilities and services available to tourists in New Jersey;

    d.  The development of tourist destination areas attractive in appearance, manageable in terms of densities, and with wholesome recreational opportunities;

    e.  The protection and preservation of shoreline areas;

     f.  The providing of access to shoreline areas for tourists and the assurance of the rights of residents to the use of public beaches and public beach access areas, surfing and fishing sites, hiking trails, and other recreational sites and scenic areas;

    g.  The reconstruction, maintenance, and preservation of sites which have been important in New Jersey history and American history;

    h.  The promotion of various cultural and ethnic holidays, observances, and  festivities and of understanding by visitors and residents of the social and  cultural contributions of all ethnic groups and people residing in New Jersey;   and

    i.  The desirability and the feasibility of creating a Department of Tourism.

     L.1977, c. 225, s. 8.

34:1A-52.1  New Jersey Governor's Cup Hydrofest Series; designated.
 
	1.	The Sunset Lake Hydrofest in Wildwood Crest, New Jersey, is designated as the New Jersey Governor's Cup Hydrofest Series.
 
	L.2009, JR4, s.1.

34:1A-52.2  Designation of trophy, commendation.
 
	2.	An appropriate perpetual trophy or commendation, to be provided by the governing body of the event, shall be designated as the New Jersey Governor's Cup of the Sunset Lake Hydrofest in Wildwood Crest, New Jersey.
 
	L.2009, JR4, s.2.

34:1A-52.3  Annual award.
 
	3.	Every year, the Governor, or the designee thereof, shall award the New Jersey Governor's Cup to the winner of the Sunset Lake Hydrofest.
 
	L.2009, JR4, s.3.

34:1A-53  Powers and duties of division.
  
	9.	In the pursuance and promotion of a State policy on tourism, the division, at the direction of the Secretary of State, shall:
 
	a.	Provide and promote adequate opportunities for county and municipal participation, federal agency participation, and private citizens' involvement in the decision-making process of tourism planning and policy formulation;
 
	b.	Encourage all State, county, and municipal governmental and private agencies to do their utmost to assure the personal safety of residents and tourists both within and without tourist destination areas;
 
	c.	Take whatever administrative, litigable, and legislative steps as are necessary to minimize the problems of tourists in not receiving contracted services, including transportation, tours, hotels;
 
	d.	Attempt to reconcile and balance the activities and accommodations of the tourist with the daily pursuits and lifestyles of the residents;
 
	e.	Develop an understanding among all citizens of the role of tourism in New Jersey, both in terms of its economic and social importance and the problems it presents, through appropriate formal and informal learning experiences;
 
	f.	Cooperate with the Department of Education to promote throughout the educational system of New Jersey an awareness of New Jersey history and culture;
 
	g.	Ensure that the growth of the tourist industry is consistent with the attainment of economic, social, physical, and environmental objectives in any State plan and county plans that are adopted;
 
	h.	Continuously monitor and evaluate the social costs of growth of the tourist industry against the social benefits;
 
	i.	Emphasize in the State's tourism promotional efforts the high quality of the State's natural and cultural features;
 
	j.	Promote the tourist industry through such activities as Visitors Bureaus and similar county and municipal agencies, and assure that the tourist industry contributes its fair share of the cost of such promotion;
 
	k.	Request and receive from any department, division, board, bureau, commission, or other agency of the State, or any political subdivision or public authority thereof, such assistance and data as may be necessary to enable the division to carry out its responsibilities under this act;
 
	l.	In consultation with the council, review annually and, if necessary, revise or update the 10-year master plan developed pursuant to section 8 of P.L.1977, c.225 (C.34:1A-52), and submit a report to the Governor and the Legislature containing an evaluation of the preceding year's activities and developments in tourism and the revisions recommended in the master plan;
 
	m.	At the direction of the council, operate the division's Travel and Tourism Cooperative Marketing Campaign Program; and
 
	n.	Establish and operate the division's Travel and Tourism Advertising and Promotion Program.
 
	L.1977, c.225, s.9; amended 2005, c.378, s.6; 2007, c.253, s.6.

34:1A-53.1  Reports required from division.
 
 	8.	In addition to the powers and duties of the division as provided in section 9 of P.L.1977, c.225 (C.34:1A-53), the division shall submit a report no later than January 31 and July 31 of every year on the tourism marketing campaigns of the division and the expenditure of funds appropriated to the division for tourism promotion to the Governor, the President of the Senate, the Speaker of the General Assembly, the Senate Wagering, Tourism and Historic Preservation Committee and the Assembly Tourism and Gaming Committee, or their successors.  The report shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
 
	a.	A description of the efforts of the division to promote New Jersey tourism in the six-month period ending on December 31 and June 30 preceding the respective dates on which the report is due. The report shall list: (1) the type of each promotion made, including but not limited to, promotions in the form of print, radio, Internet or television advertisements, tourism information or reference guides, tourism event calendars or the attendance by employees of the division at conferences relevant to tourism promotion, (2) the content of each such advertisement, guide, calendar or other promotional aid made, or conference attended, (3) the dates and locations where tourism advertisements were shown, when such guides, calendars or other promotional aids were made available, or when such conferences took place, and (4) the aggregate amount of money expended on each advertisement, guide, calendar, promotional aid or conference listed;
 
	b.	A list of entities that received, in the six-month period ending on December 31 and June 30 preceding the respective dates on which the report is due, State matching funds under the division's Travel and Tourism Cooperative Marketing Campaign Program and the division's Advertising and Promotion Program, the amount of funds each entity received from either program, and the amount of each of the recipient entity's expenditures made from the funds of either program; and
 
	c.	A general description of the potential tourism promotion efforts the division is considering for the six-month period beginning on January 1 and July 1 preceding the respective dates on which the report is due.  Such description shall be distributed to the members of the council.  A member of the public may receive a copy of such description upon request.
 
	The report shall identify whether or not each of the efforts to promote tourism listed in the report is consistent with the provisions of the 10-year master plan developed pursuant to section 8 of P.L.1977, c.225 (C.34:1A-52), identify the relevant provisions of the master plan with which the effort to promote tourism is consistent or inconsistent, and provide an explanation of the consistency or inconsistency.
 
	L.2005, c.378, s.8; amended 2007, c.253, s.7.

34:1A-53.2  Statewide 9/11 Memorial Registry.
	1. a. The Director of the Division of Travel and Tourism in the Department of State shall establish a Statewide 9/11 Memorial Registry.  The registry shall provide the location and condition of all 9/11 memorials in the State owned, operated, or maintained by a governmental entity.  The division may seek the assistance and cooperation of the Adjutant General, the Commissioner of Environmental Protection, and local government officials and entities.
 
	b.	The Director of the Division of Travel and Tourism shall publish the 9/11 Memorial Registry on the division's Internet website.  The information on the website shall be searchable and available as a list and as an interactive map, and shall:
 
	(1)	specify the location of each 9/11 memorial included on the 9/11 Memorial Registry and provide driving directions from the north, south, east, and west, as well as directions by public transit where applicable;
 
	(2)	display photographs of each memorial; and
 
	(3)	provide contact information for the owner or operator of each memorial, including the telephone number and Internet website address of the memorial.
 
	c.	The director shall ensure that the Internet website is updated whenever a governmental entity establishes a new 9/11 memorial.  The division shall accept information or changes to the website from the Adjutant General, the Commissioner of Environmental Protection, and local government officials and entities
 
	d.	The division shall accept submissions from the public recommending, for inclusion on the 9/11 Memorial Registry, 9/11 memorials not owned, operated, or maintained by a governmental entity through an electronic submission form made available by the division on its Internet website.  The division may include 9/11 memorials not owned, operated, or maintained by a governmental entity on the 9/11 Memorial Registry as it deems appropriate.
 
	L.2017, c.216, s.1.

34:1A-53.3  Publication of information on farm-to-table restaurants on Division of Travel and Tourism website.
 	1. a. The Division of Travel and Tourism shall publish on its Internet website, and update as appropriate, information on farm-to-table restaurants in the State by region, including the name, address, and other pertinent information for each restaurant which the division determines would be of interest for the purposes of educating the public about local sources for fresh, healthy foods and options to support restaurants that use locally grown and produced food products.  For the purposes of this subsection, "region" means north, south, or central New Jersey as designated by the division.
 
	b.	The division shall establish a process by which farm-to-table restaurants may register for posting on the website, including the criteria to be met for designation as a "farm-to-table restaurant," and shall promote the program on its website and to restaurants around the State to ensure as much participation as possible.
 
	L.2018, c.154, s.1.

34:1A-53.4  "Agritourism Fund" established; definition.
	1. a. As used in this section:
 
	"Agritourism" means a form of commercial enterprise that links agricultural production or agricultural processing with tourism to attract visitors onto a farm, ranch, winery, brewery, or other agricultural business for the purpose of entertaining or educating the visitors and generating income for the farm, ranch, winery, brewery, or agricultural business owner.
 
	b.	There is established in the Department of State a nonlapsing revolving fund to be known as the "Agritourism Fund," to be held separate and apart from all other funds of the State.  The Division of Travel and Tourism shall administer the fund and ensure that monies deposited in the fund, and any interest earned thereon, shall be used for the purpose of making grants to New Jersey businesses involved in agritourism.  The division shall award grants annually through a process established by the division.
 
	c.	There shall be appropriated annually from the General Fund to the Department of State the sum of $2.5 million for deposit in the "Agritourism Fund" to effectuate the purposes and objectives of this section.  Any unspent monies in the fund shall be carried forward.
 
L.2023, c.87.

34:1A-53.5  Division of Travel and Tourism, re-draw State tourism map, Central Jersey region.
	1. a. The Division of Travel and Tourism shall re-draw the State tourism map to create a "Central Jersey" region comprised, at a minimum of the counties of Hunterdon, Mercer, Middlesex, and Somerset, and to incorporate the "Central Jersey" region in all regional marketing activities, including in publications and on the VisitNJ.org website.
 
	b.	The division shall remove from its grant applications and contracts any requirement that State tourism grant funds be targeted to audiences located at a minimum distance, and shall promote overnight stays.
 
L.2023, c.149.

34:1A-54  Duties of council.
 
 	10.	The council shall:

	a.	Aid the division in the formulation and updating of the 10-year master plan developed pursuant to section 8 of P.L.1977, c.225 (C.34:1A-52) and the annual review thereof;
 
	b.	Consider all matters referred to it by the Secretary of State;
 
	c.	Make recommendations to the division on any matter relating to tourism and the tourist industry in New Jersey and to those objectives and responsibilities specified in sections 8 and 9 of P.L.1977, c.225 (C.34:1A-52 and C.34:1A-53);
 
	d.	Direct the division to review the spending of funds by the regional tourism councils and provide comments and recommendations to such councils on the spending of funds when appropriate;
 
	e.	Direct the division to encourage the development of local marketing organizations, including but not limited to destination marketing organizations and convention and visitor bureaus;
 
	f.	Direct the division to ensure that a recipient of funding by the Department of State for tourism promotion is in compliance with all terms of the funding agreement, and that the recipient's promotional message is consistent with the promotional message for the State established by the Secretary of State;
 
	g.	Direct the division on the operation of the division's Travel and Tourism Cooperative Marketing Campaign Program;
 
	h.	Commission the New Jersey Center for Hospitality and Tourism at Richard Stockton College of New Jersey to conduct an annual survey and analysis of New Jersey's tourism industry for the purpose of providing data to improve the effectiveness of tourism promotion.  The council shall direct the division to make the survey and analysis results available to tourism groups throughout the State.  In a year during which the New Jersey Center for Hospitality and Tourism is unable or unavailable to conduct the survey and analysis, the council shall choose another entity to conduct the survey and analysis for that year; and
 
	i.	Perform other duties as assigned by the Secretary of State.
 
	L.1977, c.225, s.10; amended 2005, c.378, s.7; 2007, c.253, s.8.

34:1A-55.  Severability
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or other part of this act is  adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or  invalidate the remainder of this act, but shall be confined in its effect to  the section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or other part of this act directly  involved in the controversy in which said judgment shall have been rendered.

     L.1977, c. 225, s. 11.

34:1A-56.  Repealer
    All acts and parts of acts inconsistent with this act are, to the extent of  such inconsistency, superseded and repealed.

     L.1977, c. 225, s. 12.

34:1A-69.1.  Immunity from liability for injury caused by product or invention fostered or advanced by L.1977, c. 429
    The State, its offices, departments, divisions, bureaus, boards, commissions  and agencies, including the Office for Promoting Technical Innovation, as well  as the employees thereof, shall not be liable in tort, contract, or implied  warranty for any injury caused by a product or invention, or its development  that in any way was fostered or advanced pursuant to the provisions of  P.L.1977, c. 429.

     L.1981, c. 53, s. 3, eff. March 2, 1981.

34:1A-69.2.  Nonliability for debts, claims, obligations or judgments incurred by or asserted against party to agreements under L.1977, c. 429
    The State, its offices, departments, divisions, bureaus, boards, commissions, and agencies, including the Office for Promoting Technical Innovation, as well as the employees thereof, shall not be liable for any debts, claims, obligations or judgments incurred by or asserted against a party  to agreements entered into pursuant to this act.

     L.1981, c. 53, s. 4, eff. March 2, 1981.

34:1A-69.3.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the  "New Products, New Jobs Act  of 1980."

     L.1981, c. 53, s. 5, eff. March 2, 1981.

34:1A-70.  Legislative findings and declarations
    The Legislature hereby finds and declares that it is not in the public interest for any citizens of this State to be unemployed solely because of an inability to reach a place of potential employment.  Lack of transportation to job sites in New Jersey is a barrier to employment for many people as evidenced  by a Department of Labor and Industry study in June of 1977 indicating that 23%  of unemployed workers surveyed could not be placed in jobs principally because  they could not reach one or more specific places of employment.  This problem  will be compounded to a greater degree in the future as employers continue to  relocate outside of urban centers, thus becoming relatively more inaccessible  to inner city workers who lack transportation.

     L.1978, c. 41, s. 1.

34:1A-71.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the  "Jobs Transportation Demonstration Act of 1978."

     L.1978, c. 41, s. 2.

34:1A-72.  Demonstration projects to transport persons to job sites, interviews and training;  funding
    The Commissioner of the Department of Labor and Industry is hereby authorized to develop and administer a program to provide funds for demonstration projects to transport persons to job sites, job interviews, and job training to which persons would otherwise have no available transportation.   Such projects may be authorized on an intra- or inter-county basis, or at the  State level, as the commissioner deems feasible and desirable.

     L.1978, c. 41, s. 3.

34:1A-73.  Standards for allocation of funds
    The commissioner shall establish standards for the allocation of funds pursuant to this act which standards shall:

    a.  Be responsive to areas of high unemployment;

     b.  Guarantee that each applicant for a grant receive funds sufficient to operate at least one demonstration vehicle;  and

     c.  Reflect optimal service-delivery regions, be they intra- or inter-county  in nature.

     L.1978, c. 41, s. 4.

34:1A-74.  Authorized intra-state services
    Demonstration projects funded under this act shall be limited to three basic  intra-State services as follows:

    a.  Transporting persons from employment service centers, or other centralized sites to employment interviews;

    b.  Transporting persons to places of employment for a maximum period of 10  weeks during which time said persons shall attempt to arrange for their own  transportation;  provided, however, that the commissioner may provide flexible  standards for extending the 10-week limitation in cases of need; and

    c.  Transporting unemployed workers to job training programs.

     L.1978, c. 41, s. 5.

34:1A-75.  Rules and regulations
    The commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations deemed necessary and  proper to administer the act.

     L.1978, c. 41, s. 6.

34:1A-85  Definitions relative to State's workforce investment system.

	26.	As used in sections 26 through 29 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:1A-85 through C.34:1A-88):

	"Career cluster" means any of the career clusters and related educational programs as defined in the Perkins Act and the federal Department of Education's career cluster taxonomy. 

	"Center for Occupational Employment Information" or "center" means the Center for Occupational Employment Information established pursuant to section 27 of P.L.2005, c.354  (C.34:1A-86).

	"Career pathway" means any of the career pathways and related educational programs as defined in the Perkins Act and the federal Department of Education's career cluster taxonomy. 

	"Federal job training funds" means any moneys expended pursuant to the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, Pub.L.105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2801 et seq.) or any other federal law to obtain employment and training services or other employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities, including employment and training services as defined in section 1 of P.L.1992, c.48, (C.34:15B-35) and employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities as described in sections 2 and 4 of P.L.2004, c.39 (C.34:1A-1.3 and 34:1A-1.5).

	"Occupational license" means a license, registration or certificate which, when issued by an authorized entity of government or recognized industry, enables an individual to work within a recognized occupation in the State of New Jersey.

	"Perkins Act" means the Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Applied Technology Education Amendments of 1998, Pub.L.105-332 (20 U.S.C. s.2301 et seq.).

	"Qualifying agency" means any executive agency of State government, including, but not limited to, the Departments of Community Affairs, Education, Environmental Protection, Health and Senior Services, Human Services, Labor and Workforce Development, Law and Public Safety, Military and Veterans' Affairs and the Commission on Higher Education.  A qualifying agency may include any additional agency of State government, which oversees the operation of, or collects or disseminates information from any qualifying school, or issues an occupational license.

	"Qualifying school" means, except as provided below, a government unit, person, association, firm, corporation, private organization, or any entity doing business or maintaining facilities within the State, whether operating for profit or not for profit which:

	(1)	Offers or maintains a course of instruction or instructional program utilized to prepare individuals for future education or the workplace, including instruction in literacy or basic skills, or provides supplemental instruction in recognized occupational skills, pre-employment skills or literacy skills;

	(2)	Offers instruction by any method including, but not limited to, classroom, shop, laboratory experience, correspondence, Internet and other distance learning media, or any combination thereof;

	(3)	Offers instruction to the general public or in conjunction with New Jersey's workforce investment system; or,

	(4)	Charges tuition or other fees or costs, or receives public funding for the delivery of any of the above types of instruction.

	"Qualifying school" shall not mean:

	(1)	Colleges and universities licensed by the Commission on Higher Education or other schools, institutions and entities which are otherwise regulated and approved pursuant to any other law or rule making process of this State;

	(2)	Employers offering instruction to their employees directly or through a contract instructor, where there is no cost to the employee and no profit to the employer; or

	(3)	Schools offering instruction for the purpose of self-enrichment, avocational, cultural, or recreational in nature.

	"Regional" means a geographic configuration used to aggregate information as designated by the Center for Occupational Employment Information.

	"Service provider," "training provider" or "provider" means a provider of employment and training services including but not limited to a private or public school or institution of higher education, a business, a labor organization or a community-based organization.

	"State Employment and Training Commission" or "commission" means the "State Employment and Training Commission" created pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-2).

	"State job training funds" means any moneys expended from the Workforce Development Partnership Fund created pursuant to section 9 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-9), the Supplemental Workforce Fund for Basic Skills established pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2001, c.152 (C.34:15D-21) or any other source of State moneys to obtain employment and training services or other employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities, including employment and training services as defined in section 3 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-3) and employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities as described in sections 2 and 4 of P.L.2004, c.39 (C.34:1A-1.3 and 34:1A-1.5).

	"Student outcome information" means information pertaining to individual enrollment, participation, and completion in any education or training program designed to provide workforce skills or provide supplemental education or training in a recognized occupation. This information shall include, but not be limited to, the participant's Social Security number, gender, date of birth, date of enrollment, any date of completion, date of termination, date of start in a job, date of application for a license, licensing examination result, date of issue of a license, any credential issued, and other information as specified by the commission or the center.  For any individual who does not have a Social Security number, the qualifying agency may substitute an alternate method of identification.  However, at the time of start into employment the alternate code shall be cross-referenced with the individual's valid Social Security number.

	L.2005,c.354,s.26.

34:1A-86  Center for Occupational Employment Information.
 
 	27.	There is established in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Center for Occupational Employment Information, which shall:
 
	a.	Serve as the entity designated to carry out the State level career information activities prescribed in the Perkins Act. In accordance with that act, the center shall, in cooperation with the New Jersey Department of Education and the Commission on Higher Education:
 
	(1)	Provide support for career guidance and academic counseling programs designed to promote improved career and education decision-making by individuals, especially in areas of career information delivery and use;
 
	(2)	Make information and planning resources that relate educational preparation to career goals and expectations available, on the Internet to the extent possible, to students, parents, teachers, administrators, counselors, job-seekers, workers and other clients of the workforce investment system, including the consumer report card on the effectiveness of qualified schools and other approved training providers placed on the State Eligible Training Provider List provided pursuant to subsection f. of this section and required to be made available pursuant to section 13 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:15C-10.1), section 4 of P.L.1992, c.48 (C.34:15B-38), section 7 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-7) and section 3 of P.L.1992, c.47 (C.43:21-59);
 
	(3)	Equip workforce investment system professionals, including teachers, administrators, and counselors, with the knowledge and skills needed to assist clients of the workforce investment system, including students and parents, with career exploration, educational opportunities and education financing;
 
	(4)	Assist appropriate State entities in tailoring career-related educational resources and training for use by such entities;
 
	(5)	Improve coordination and communication among administrators and planners of programs included in the State's workforce investment system to ensure non-duplication of efforts and the appropriate use of shared information and data; and
 
	(6)	Provide ongoing means for clients of the workforce investment system, including students and parents, to provide comments and feedback on products and services and to update resources, as appropriate, to better meet customer requirements.
 
	b.	Design and implement a comprehensive workforce information system to meet the needs for the planning and operation of all public and private training and job placement programs, which is responsive to the economic demands of the employer community and education and training needs of the State and of Workforce Investment Board areas within the State, as recommended by the commission and designated by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development. In doing so, the center shall insure that the information:
 
	(1)	Is delivered in a user friendly, timely and easily understood manner;
 
	(2)	Pays special attention to the particular needs of each Workforce Investment Board and is consistent with the labor market of each Workforce Investment Board; and
 
	(3)	Is delivered, to the extent possible, on the Internet in a format designed to meet the needs of all user groups.
 
	c.	Use the occupational employment information system to implement an electronic career information delivery system, which shall provide students, parents, counselors and other career decision makers with accurate, timely and locally relevant information on the careers available in the New Jersey labor market.
 
	d.	Analyze, not less than once every two years and on a regional basis, the relationship between the projected need for trained individuals in each of the career clusters and each of the career pathways, and the total number of individuals being trained in the skills or skill sets needed to work in each of the clusters and pathways.  Based on this relationship, the center shall designate as a labor demand occupation any occupation that is in a cluster or pathway for which the number of individuals needed significantly exceeds, or shall exceed, the number being trained, and may designate as a labor demand occupation an occupation for which the center determines that the number of individuals needed significantly exceeds, or will exceed, the number being trained, even if that is not the case for the entire career cluster or pathway to which the occupation belongs.  In cases where a Workforce Investment Board established pursuant to section 18 of P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-15) submits information to the center that there is or is likely to be, in the region for which the board is responsible, a significant excess of demand over supply of adequately trained workers for an occupation, the center may conduct a survey of the need or anticipated need in that region for trained workers in that occupation and, whether or not it conducts that survey, shall, in conjunction with the board, determine whether to designate the occupation to be a labor demand occupation in that region.  The center may utilize survey data obtained by other agencies or from other sources to fulfill its responsibilities under this subsection.
 
	e.	Assist the commission in preparing the New Jersey Unified Workforce Investment Plan pursuant to section 10 of P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-7) by providing information requested by the commission.
 
	f.	Compile information provided to the department by training providers on the State Eligible Training Provider List pursuant to sections 14 and 29 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:15C-10.2 and C.34:1A-88) into a consumer report card on the effectiveness of qualified schools and other approved training providers. The consumer report card shall include, at a minimum, the following information compiled annually: the number of enrollees; the completion rate; placement in employment information, including the names of employers where placements are made ; licensing information; examination results; enrollee demographic information; and information showing the long-term success of former trainees of each provider and school in obtaining permanent employment and increasing earnings over one or more time periods following the completion or other termination of training, including a period of two years following the completion or other termination of training.
 
	g.	 Ensure that the data needed to produce a consumer report card, pursuant to subsection f. of this section, is submitted by the training providers and qualified schools to the department in a timely manner and, for those training providers and qualified schools that do not submit the data in a timely manner, implement and enforce a process to revoke or suspend the entity from the State Eligible Training Provider List, pursuant to section 14 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:15C-10.2).
 
	L.2005, c.354, s.27; amended 2013, c.208, s.1.

34:1A-87  Steering committee to manage center.
 
 	28.	The center shall be managed by a Steering Committee comprised of the Commissioners of Community Affairs, Education, Health and Senior Services, Human Services, and Labor and Workforce Development; the Executive Directors of the Commission on Higher Education, the State Employment and Training Commission; the Executive Director of the New Jersey Commerce Commission; the Director of the Division of Vocational Rehabilitation Services; a director or member of a Workforce Investment Board as designated by the Executive Director of the State Employment and Training Commission; and a One-Stop Career Center operator as designated by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.  The committee shall set policy for the operation of the center and shall have the authority to increase membership of the committee, as it deems necessary, to carry out the purposes of sections 27 through 29 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:1A-86 through C.34:1A-88).
 
	L.2005, c.354, s.28; amended 2007, c.253, s.12.

34:1A-88  Authority to access files, records.

	29. a. The Center for Occupational Employment Information and the State Employment and Training Commission are authorized to access the files and records of other State agencies which administer or distribute State job training funds or federal job training funds or issue any license necessary for an individual to work in a specific occupation.  Student outcomes and licensing information, including individual Social Security numbers, shall be reported to the commission through the center by:

	(1)	Each qualifying agency;

	(2)	Each qualifying school; and

	(3)	Each training provider receiving State job training funds or federal job training funds, including a provider which is not a qualifying school.

	The entities required to report that information shall include, but not be limited to, all post-secondary institutions engaged in any form of workforce preparation or adult literacy education and training.

	b.	The information required by this section shall be provided annually, or on any other mutually agreed schedule, to the center by December 31st, for the preceding 12-month period ending June 30th. 

	c.	The information reported or accessed pursuant to subsection a. of this section may be used by the commission and the center for:

	(1)	The development and analysis of information on the demand 

for trained workers in any of the recognized career clusters, career pathways or occupations at the State and local area level as required or permitted by subsection d. of section 27 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:1A-86).

	(2)	Establishing standards for training and job placement;

	(3)	Evaluating the effectiveness of programs, services and service providers under the State's workforce investment system and providing information regarding those evaluations, including the collection of information used to help produce a consumer report card on service providers showing the long-term success of former trainees of each provider in obtaining permanent employment and increasing earnings;

	(4)	Assisting in determining which training providers to place on the State Eligible Training Provider List;

	(5)	Assisting State agencies in preparing reports to federal grantor agencies; and

	(6)	Any other purpose deemed necessary for the accomplishment of the mission of the center as determined by the center's steering committee or any federal funding agency.

	d.	Information reported to the center by a qualifying agency or school or other training provider shall not be utilized for any purpose other than the governmental purposes authorized in subsection c. of this section.  The center shall only use aggregate statistical summaries of individual data in assessing or evaluating any program at a qualifying school or other training provider.  The commission and the center shall adopt standards and procedures to prevent any State agency from publishing, disclosing or releasing information which could identify any individual and shall not publish, disclose or otherwise release information which could identify any individual, except to an agency of government requiring such information in the performance of its statutory duties.  Any executive agency of State government precluded by law from sharing information on specific individuals may provide student outcome and licensing information through statistical summary or other forms which prevent the identification of specific individuals.

	e.	The commission, the center, each qualifying agency, and any entity which reports student outcome or licensing information to a qualifying agency, shall comply with all pertinent State and federal laws regarding the privacy of students and other participants in employment and training programs, including but not limited to, the Privacy Act of 1974, Pub.L.93-579 (5 U.S.C. s.552 and 20 U.S.C. s.1232g) and shall provide all disclosures to the students and participants required by those laws.
	L.2005,c.354,s.29.

34:1B-1.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as  "The New Jersey Economic Development Authority Act."

     L.1974, c. 80, s. 1, eff. Aug. 7, 1974.

34:1B-2  Legislative findings, determinations.
 
	2.	The Legislature hereby finds and determines that:

	a.	Department of Labor and Workforce Development statistics of recent years indicate a continuing decline in manufacturing employment within the State, which is a contributing factor to the drastic unemployment existing within the State, which far exceeds the national average, thus adversely affecting the economy of the State and the prosperity, safety, health and general welfare of its inhabitants and their standard of living; that there is an urgent need to protect and enhance the quality of the natural environment and to reduce, abate and prevent environmental pollution derived from the operation of industry, utilities and commerce within the State; and that the availability of financial assistance and suitable facilities are important inducements to new and varied employment promoting enterprises to locate in the State, to existing enterprises to remain and expand in the State, and to industry, utilities and commerce to reduce, abate and prevent environmental pollution.
 
	b.	The provision of buildings, structures and other facilities to increase opportunity for employment in manufacturing, industrial, commercial, recreational, retail and service enterprises in the State is in the public interest and it is a public purpose for the State to induce and to accelerate opportunity for employment in such enterprises.
 
	c.	In order to aid in supplying these needs and to assist in the immediate reduction of unemployment and to provide sufficient employment for the citizens of the State in the future, it is necessary and in the public interest to aid and encourage the immediate commencement of new construction projects of all types, to induce and facilitate the acquisition and installation at an accelerated rate of such devices, equipment and facilities as may be required to reduce, abate and prevent environmental pollution by industry, utilities and commerce.
 
	d.	The availability of financial assistance by the State will reduce present unemployment and improve future employment opportunities by encouraging and inducing the undertaking of such construction projects, the location, retaining or expanding of employment promoting enterprises within the State, and the accelerated acquisition and installation of energy saving improvements and pollution control devices, equipment and facilities.
 
	e.	In many municipalities in our State substantial and persistent unemployment exists; and many existing residential, industrial, commercial and manufacturing facilities within such municipalities are either obsolete, inefficient, dilapidated or are located without regard to the master plans of such municipalities; and the obsolescence and abandonment of existing facilities will increase with further technological advances, the provision of modern, efficient facilities in other states and the difficulty which many municipalities have in attracting new facilities; and that many existing and planned employment promoting facilities are far from or not easily accessible to the places of residence of substantial numbers of unemployed and underemployed persons.
 
	f.	By virtue of their architectural and cultural heritage, their positions as principal centers of communication and transportation and their concentration of productive and energy efficient facilities, many municipalities are capable of ameliorating the conditions of deterioration which impede sound community growth and development; and that building a proper balance of housing, industrial and commercial facilities and increasing the attractiveness of such municipalities to persons of all income levels is essential to restoring such municipalities as desirable places to live, work, shop and enjoy life's amenities; that the accomplishment of these objectives is beyond remedy solely by the regulatory process in the exercise of the police power and cannot be dealt with effectively by the ordinary operations of private enterprise without the powers provided herein, and that the exercise of the powers herein provided is critical to continuing the process of revitalizing such municipalities and will serve an urgent public use and purpose.
 
	The Legislature further determines that in order to aid in remedying the aforesaid conditions and to further and implement the purposes of this act, that there shall be created a body politic and corporate having the powers, duties and functions provided in this act; and that the authority and powers conferred under this act, and the expenditure of moneys pursuant thereto constitute a serving of a valid public purpose; and that the enactment of the provisions hereinafter set forth is in the public interest and for the public benefit and good, and is hereby so declared to be as a matter of express legislative determination.
 
	The Legislature further finds and determines that:
 
	g.	It is essential that this and future generations of young people be given the fullest opportunity to learn and develop their intellectual capacities; that institutions of public elementary and secondary education within the State be provided with the appropriate additional means required to assist these young citizens in achieving the required levels of learning and the complete development of their intellectual abilities; and that the resources of the State be employed to meet the tremendous demand for public elementary and secondary educational opportunities.
 
	h.	Public elementary and secondary educational facilities are an integral part of the effort in this State to provide educational opportunities; it is the purpose of P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.) and P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.) to provide a measure of assistance and an alternative method of financing to enable school districts to provide the facilities which are so critically needed; the inventory of public elementary and secondary school buildings and the equipment and capital resources currently available are aging, both chronologically and technologically; and the current funding at the federal, State, and local levels and the current mechanisms for construction of these capital projects are inadequate to meet the demonstrated need for school facilities, and these inadequacies necessitate additional sources of funding and the coordination of construction activities at the State level to meet those needs.
 
	i.	While the credit status of New Jersey's school districts is sound, it can be economically more reasonable to finance the costs of developing the educational infrastructure of the State's public elementary and secondary schools by providing for the funding of capital projects through the issuance of bonds, notes or other obligations by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, to be retired through annual payments made by the State subject to appropriation by the State Legislature, and to provide for the use of the proceeds of those bonds, notes or other obligations to pay for educational infrastructure projects; and such a structure would substantially reduce the costs of financing and provide for a more efficient use of the funds available for the development of the educational infrastructure.
 
	j.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2007, c.137).
 
	L.1974, c.80, s.2; amended 1975, c.32, s.1; 1975, c.253, s.1; 1977, c.393, s.1; 1983, c.282, s.1; 2000, c.72, s.43; 2007, c.137, s.51.

34:1B-3  Definitions.
 
	3.	As used in the provisions of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), P.L.1979, c.303 (C.34:1B-5.1 et seq.), sections 50 through 54 of P.L.2000, c.72 (C.34:1B-5.5 through 34:1B-5.9), P.L.1981, c.505 (C.34:1B-7.1 et seq.), P.L.1986, c.127 (C.34:1B-7.7 et seq.), P.L.1992, c.16 (C.34:1B-7.10 et al.), section 6 of P.L.2001, c.401 (C.34:1B-4.1), and P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.), unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, created by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Bonds" means bonds or other obligations issued by the authority pursuant to P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), "Economic Recovery Bonds or Notes" issued pursuant to P.L.1992, c.16 (C.34:1B-7.10 et al.), or bonds, notes, other obligations and refunding bonds issued by the authority pursuant to P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.) and P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.).
 
	"Cost" means the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, repair, alteration, improvement and extension of any building, structure, facility including water transmission facilities, or other improvement; the cost of machinery and equipment; the cost of acquisition, construction, reconstruction, repair, alteration, improvement and extension of energy saving improvements or pollution control devices, equipment or facilities; the cost of lands, rights-in-lands, easements, privileges, agreements, franchises, utility extensions, disposal facilities, access roads and site development deemed by the authority to be necessary or useful and convenient for any project or school facilities project or in connection therewith; discount on bonds; cost of issuance of bonds; engineering and inspection costs; costs of financial, legal, professional and other estimates and advice; organization, administrative, insurance, operating and other expenses of the authority or any person prior to and during any acquisition or construction, and all such expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing, acquisition, construction or completion of any project or school facilities project or part thereof, and also such provision for reserves for payment or security of principal of or interest on bonds during or after such acquisition or construction as the authority may determine.
 
	"County" means any county of any class.
 
	"County solid waste facility" means a solid waste facility that is designated by a public authority or county in its adopted district solid waste management plan as approved by the department prior to November 10, 1997 as the in-county facility to which solid waste generated within the boundaries of the county is transported for final disposal, or transfer for transportation to an offsite solid waste facility or designated out-of-district disposal site for disposal, as appropriate, pursuant to interdistrict or intradistrict waste flow orders issued by the department, regardless of whether the county solid waste facility was acquired, constructed, operated, abandoned or canceled.
 
	"Department" means the Department of Environmental Protection.
 
	"Development property" means any real or personal property, interest therein, improvements thereon, appurtenances thereto and air or other rights in connection therewith, including land, buildings, plants, structures, systems, works, machinery and equipment acquired or to be acquired by purchase, gift or otherwise by the authority within an urban growth zone.
 
	"Person" means any person, including individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, societies, trusts, public or private corporations, or other legal entities, including public or governmental bodies, as well as natural persons. "Person" shall include the plural as well as the singular.
 
	"Pollution control project" means any device, equipment, improvement, structure or facility, or any land and any building, structure, facility or other improvement thereon, or any combination thereof, whether or not in existence or under construction, or the refinancing thereof in order to facilitate improvements or additions thereto or upgrading thereof, and all real and personal property deemed necessary thereto, having to do with or the end purpose of which is the control, abatement or prevention of land, sewer, water, air, noise or general environmental pollution, including, but not limited to, any air pollution control facility, noise abatement facility, water management facility, thermal pollution control facility, radiation contamination control facility, wastewater collection system, wastewater treatment works, sewage treatment works system, sewage treatment system or solid waste facility or site; provided that the authority shall have received from the Commissioner of the State Department of Environmental Protection or the commissioner's duly authorized representative a certificate stating the opinion that, based upon information, facts and circumstances available to the State Department of Environmental Protection and any other pertinent data, (1) the pollution control facilities do not conflict with, overlap or duplicate any other planned or existing pollution control facilities undertaken or planned by another public agency or authority within any political subdivision, and (2) the facilities, as designed, will be a pollution control project as defined in the provisions of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.) and are in furtherance of the purpose of abating or controlling pollution.
 
	"Project" means: (1) (a) acquisition, construction, reconstruction, repair, alteration, improvement and extension of any building, structure, facility, including water transmission facilities or other improvement, whether or not in existence or under construction, (b) purchase and installation of equipment and machinery, (c) acquisition and improvement of real estate and the extension or provision of utilities, access roads and other appurtenant facilities; and (2) (a) the acquisition, financing, or refinancing of inventory, raw materials, supplies, work in process, or stock in trade, or (b) the financing, refinancing or consolidation of secured or unsecured debt, borrowings, or obligations, or (c) the provision of financing for any other expense incurred in the ordinary course of business; all of which are to be used or occupied by any person in any enterprise promoting employment, either for the manufacturing, processing or assembly of materials or products, or for research or office purposes, including, but not limited to, medical and other professional facilities, or for industrial, recreational, hotel or motel facilities, public utility and warehousing, or for commercial and service purposes, including, but not limited to, retail outlets, retail shopping centers, restaurant and retail food outlets, and any and all other employment promoting enterprises, including, but not limited to, motion picture and television studios and facilities and commercial fishing facilities, commercial facilities for recreational fishermen, fishing vessels, aquaculture facilities and marketing facilities for fish and fish products and (d) acquisition of an equity interest in, including capital stock of, any corporation; or any combination of the above, which the authority determines will: (i) tend to maintain or provide gainful employment opportunities within and for the people of the State, or (ii) aid, assist and encourage the economic development or redevelopment of any political subdivision of the State, or (iii) maintain or increase the tax base of the State or of any political subdivision of the State, or (iv) maintain or diversify and expand employment promoting enterprises within the State; and (3) the cost of acquisition, construction, reconstruction, repair, alteration, improvement and extension of an energy saving improvement or pollution control project which the authority determines will tend to reduce the consumption in a building devoted to industrial or commercial purposes, or in an office building, of nonrenewable sources of energy or to reduce, abate or prevent environmental pollution within the State; and (4) the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, repair, alteration, improvement, extension, development, financing or refinancing of infrastructure, including parking facilities or structures, and transportation facilities or improvements related to economic development and of cultural, recreational and tourism facilities or improvements related to economic development and of capital facilities for primary and secondary schools and of mixed use projects consisting of housing and commercial development; and (5) the establishment, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, improvement, and ownership of port facilities as defined in section 3 of P.L.1997, c.150 (C.34:1B-146).  Project may also include:  (i) reimbursement to any person for costs in connection with any project, or the refinancing of any project or portion thereof, if determined by the authority as necessary and in the public interest to maintain employment and the tax base of any political subdivision and will facilitate improvements thereto or the completion thereof, and (ii) development property and any construction, reconstruction, improvement, alteration, equipment or maintenance or repair, or planning and designing in connection therewith. For the purpose of carrying out mixed use projects consisting of both housing and commercial development, the authority may enter into agreements with the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency for loan guarantees for any such project in accordance with the provisions of P.L.1995, c.359 (C.55:14K-64 et al.), and for that purpose shall allocate to the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency, under such agreements, funding available pursuant to subsection a. of section 4 of P.L.1992, c.16 (C.34:1B-7.13).  Project shall not include a school facilities project.
 
	"Public authority" means a municipal or county utilities authority created pursuant to the "municipal and county utilities authorities law," P.L.1957, c.183 (C.40:14B-1 et seq.); a county improvement authority created pursuant to the "county improvement authorities law," P.L.1960, c.183 (C.40:37A-44 et seq.); or a pollution control financing authority created pursuant to the "New Jersey Pollution Control Financing Law," P.L.1973, c.376 (C.40:37C-1 et seq.) that has issued solid waste facility bonds or that has been designated by the county pursuant to section 12 of P.L.1975, c.326 (C.13:1E-21) to supervise the implementation of the district solid waste management plan.
 
	"Revenues" means receipts, fees, rentals or other payments to be received on account of lease, mortgage, conditional sale, or sale, and payments and any other income derived from the lease, sale or other disposition of a project, moneys in such reserve and insurance funds or accounts or other funds and accounts, and income from the investment thereof, established in connection with the issuance of bonds or notes for a project or projects, and fees, charges or other moneys to be received by the authority in respect of projects or school facilities projects and contracts with persons.
 
	"Resolution" means any resolution adopted or trust agreement executed by the authority, pursuant to which bonds of the authority are authorized to be issued.
 
	"Solid waste" means garbage, refuse, and other discarded materials resulting from industrial, commercial and agricultural operations, and from domestic and community activities, and shall include all other waste materials including liquids, except for source separated recyclable materials or source separated food waste collected by livestock producers approved by the State Department of Agriculture to collect, prepare and feed such wastes to livestock on their own farms.
 
	"Solid waste disposal" means the storage, treatment, utilization, processing, or final disposal of solid waste.
 
	"Solid waste facility bonds" means the bonds, notes or other evidences of financial indebtedness issued by, or on behalf of, any public authority or county related to the planning, design, acquisition, construction, renovation, installation, operation or management of a county solid waste facility.
 
	"Solid waste facilities" means, and includes, the plants, structures and other real and personal property acquired, constructed or operated by, or on behalf of, any county or public authority pursuant to the provisions of the "Solid Waste Management Act," P.L.1970, c.39 (C.13:1E-1 et seq.) or any other act, including transfer stations, incinerators, resource recovery facilities, including co-composting facilities, sanitary landfill facilities or other plants for the disposal of solid waste, and all vehicles, equipment and other real and personal property and rights therein and appurtenances necessary or useful and convenient for the collection or disposal of solid waste in a sanitary manner.
 
	"Energy saving improvement" means the construction, purchase and installation in a building devoted to industrial or commercial purposes of any of the following, designed to reduce the amount of energy from nonrenewable sources needed for heating and cooling that building: insulation, replacement burners, replacement high efficiency heating and air conditioning units, including modular boilers and furnaces, water heaters, central air conditioners with or without heat recovery to make hot water for industrial or commercial purposes or in office buildings, and any solar heating or cooling system improvement, including any system which captures solar radiation to heat a fluid which passes over or through the collector element of that system and then transfers that fluid to a point within the system where the heat is withdrawn from the fluid for direct usage or storage.  These systems shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, systems incorporating flat plate, evacuated tube or focusing solar collectors.	The foregoing list shall not be construed to be exhaustive, and shall not serve to exclude other improvements consistent with the legislative intent of the provisions of P.L.1983, c.282.
 
	"Urban growth zone" means any area within a municipality receiving State aid pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1978, c.14 (C.52:27D-178 et seq.) or a municipality certified by the Commissioner of Community Affairs to qualify under such law in every respect except population, which area has been so designated pursuant to an ordinance of the governing body of such municipality.
 
	"District" means a local or regional school district established pursuant to chapter 8 or chapter 13 of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes, a county special services school district established pursuant to article 8 of chapter 46 of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes, a county vocational school district established pursuant to article 3 of chapter 54 of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes, and a school district under full State intervention pursuant to P.L.1987, c.399 (C.18A:7A-34 et al.).
 
	"Local unit" means a county, municipality, board of education or any other political entity authorized to construct, operate and maintain a school facilities project and to borrow money for those purposes pursuant to law.
 
	"Other facilities" means athletic stadiums, swimming pools, any associated structures or related equipment tied to such facilities including, but not limited to, grandstands and night field lights, greenhouses, facilities used for non-instructional or non-educational purposes, and any structure, building, or facility used solely for school administration.
 
	"Refunding bonds" means bonds, notes or other obligations issued to refinance bonds previously issued by the authority pursuant to P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.) and P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.).
 
	"School facilities project" means the planning, acquisition, demolition, construction, improvement, alteration, modernization, renovation, reconstruction or capital maintenance of all or any part of a school facility or of any other personal property necessary for, or ancillary to, any school facility, and shall include fixtures, furnishings and equipment, and shall also include, but is not limited to, site acquisition, site development, the services of design professionals, such as engineers and architects, construction management, legal services, financing costs and administrative costs and expenses incurred in connection with the project.
 
	"School facility" means and includes any structure, building or facility used wholly or in part for educational purposes by a district and facilities that physically support such structures, buildings, and facilities such as district wastewater treatment facilities, power generating facilities, and steam generating facilities, but shall exclude other facilities.
 
	L.1974, c.80, s.3; amended 1975, c.32, s.2; 1975, c.253, s.2; 1977, c.43; 1977, c.393, s.2; 1978, c.20, s.1; 1979, c.199, s.11; 1983, c.282, s.2; 1992, c.16, s.11; 1995, c.359, s.8; 1997, c.150, s.22; 2000, c.72, s.44; 2001, c.401, s.1; 2007, c.137, s.52; 2009, c.57, s.1.

34:1B-4  "New Jersey Economic Development Authority."
 
	4. a. There is hereby established in, but not of, the Department of the Treasury a public body corporate and politic, with corporate succession, to be known as the "New Jersey Economic Development Authority." The authority is hereby constituted as an instrumentality of the State exercising public and essential governmental functions, and the exercise by the authority of the powers conferred by the provisions of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.) or section 6 of P.L.2001, c.401 (C.34:1B-4.1) shall be deemed and held to be an essential governmental function of the State.
 
	b.	The authority shall consist of the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance, the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, the Commissioner of  Environmental Protection, an officer or employee of the Executive Branch of State government appointed by the Governor, and the State Treasurer, who shall be members ex officio, and eight public members appointed by the Governor as follows: two public members (who shall not be legislators) shall be appointed by the Governor upon recommendation of the Senate President; two public members (who shall not be legislators) shall be appointed by the Governor upon recommendation of the Speaker of the General Assembly; and four public members shall be appointed by the Governor, all for terms of three years.  In addition, a public member of the State Economic Recovery Board established pursuant to section 36 of P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-36) appointed by the board, shall serve as a non-voting, ex officio member of the authority.  Each member shall hold office for the term of the member's appointment and until the member's successor shall have been appointed and qualified.  A member shall be eligible for reappointment.  Any vacancy in the membership occurring other than by expiration of term shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment but for the unexpired term only.  In the event the authority shall by resolution determine to accept the declaration of an urban growth zone by any municipality, the mayor or other chief executive officer of such municipality shall ex officio be a member of the authority for the purpose of participating and voting on all matters pertaining to such urban growth zone.
 
	The Governor shall appoint three alternate members of the authority, of which one alternate member (who shall not be a legislator) shall be appointed by the Governor upon the recommendation of the Senate President, and one alternate member (who shall not be a legislator) shall be appointed by the Governor upon the recommendation of the Speaker of the General Assembly; and one alternate member shall be appointed by the Governor, all for terms of three years.  The chairperson may authorize an alternate member, in order of appointment, to exercise all of the powers, duties and responsibilities of such member, including, but not limited to, the right to vote on matters before the authority.
 
	Each alternate member shall hold office for the term of the member's appointment and until the member's successor shall have been appointed and qualified.  An alternate member shall be eligible for reappointment. Any vacancy in the alternate membership occurring other than by the expiration of a term shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment but for the unexpired term only.  Any reference to a member of the authority in this act shall be deemed to include alternate members unless the context indicates otherwise.
 
	The terms of office of the members and alternate members of the authority appointed by the Governor who are serving on July 18, 2000 shall expire upon the appointment by the Governor of eight public members and three alternate members.  The initial appointments of the eight public members shall be as follows: the two members appointed upon the recommendation of the President of the Senate and the two members appointed upon the recommendation of the Speaker of the General Assembly shall serve terms of three years; two members shall serve terms of two years; and two members shall serve terms of one year.  The initial appointments of the alternate members shall be as follows: the alternate member appointed upon the recommendation of the President of the Senate shall serve a term of three years; the alternate member appointed upon the recommendation of the Speaker of the General Assembly shall serve a term of two years; and one alternate member shall serve a term of one year. No member shall be appointed who is holding elective office.
 
	c.	Each member appointed by the Governor may be removed from office by the Governor, for cause, after a public hearing, and may be suspended by the Governor pending the completion of such hearing. Each member before entering upon his duties shall take and subscribe an oath to perform the duties of the office faithfully, impartially and justly to the best of his ability.  A record of such oaths shall be filed in the office of the Secretary of State.
 
	d.	A chairperson shall be appointed by the Governor from the public members.  The members of the authority shall elect from their remaining number a vice chairperson and a treasurer thereof.  The authority shall employ an executive director who shall be its secretary and chief executive officer.  The powers of the authority shall be vested in the members thereof in office from time to time and seven members of the authority shall constitute a quorum at any meeting thereof; provided, however, that the public member designated by the State Economic Recovery Board pursuant to the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.) shall not count toward the quorum.  Action may be taken and motions and resolutions adopted by the authority at any meeting thereof by the affirmative vote of at least seven members of the authority. No vacancy in the membership of the authority shall impair the right of a quorum of the members to exercise all the powers and perform all the duties of the authority.
 
	e.	Each member of the authority shall execute a bond to be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of such member in such form and amount as may be prescribed by the Director of the Division of Budget and Accounting in the Department of the Treasury.  Such bonds shall be filed in the office of the Secretary of State.  At all times thereafter the members and treasurer of the authority shall maintain such bonds in full force and effect.  All costs of such bonds shall be borne by the authority.
 
	f.	The members of the authority shall serve without compensation, but the authority shall reimburse its members for actual expenses necessarily incurred in the discharge of their duties. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, no officer or employee of the State shall be deemed to have forfeited or shall forfeit any office or employment or any benefits or emoluments thereof by reason of the acceptance of the office of ex officio member of the authority or any services therein.
 
	g.	Each ex officio member of the authority may designate an officer or employee of the member's department to represent the member at meetings of the authority, and each such designee may lawfully vote and otherwise act on behalf of the member for whom the person constitutes the designee. Any such designation shall be in writing delivered to the authority and shall continue in effect until revoked or amended by writing delivered to the authority.
 
	h.	The authority may be dissolved by act of the Legislature on condition that the authority has no debts or obligations outstanding or that provision has been made for the payment or retirement of such debts or obligations.  Upon any such dissolution of the authority, all property, funds and assets thereof shall be vested in the State.
 
	i.	A true copy of the minutes of every meeting of the authority shall be forthwith delivered by and under the certification of the secretary thereof to the Governor.  No action taken at such meeting by the authority shall have force or effect until 10 days, Saturdays, Sundays, and public holidays excepted, after the copy of the minutes shall have been so delivered, unless during such 10-day period the Governor shall approve the same in which case such action shall become effective upon such approval. If, in that 10-day period, the Governor returns such copy of the minutes with veto of any action taken by the authority or any member thereof at such meeting, such action shall be null and void and of no effect.  The powers conferred in this subsection i. upon the Governor shall be exercised with due regard for the rights of the holders of bonds and notes of the authority at any time outstanding, and nothing in, or done pursuant to, this subsection i. shall in any way limit, restrict or alter the obligation or powers of the authority or any representative or officer of the authority to carry out and perform in every detail each and every covenant, agreement or contract at any time made or entered into by or on behalf of the authority with respect to its bonds or notes or for the benefit, protection or security of the holders thereof.
 
	j.	On or before March 31 in each year, the authority shall make an annual report of its activities for the preceding calendar year to the Governor and the Legislature.  Each such report shall set forth a complete operating and financial statement covering the authority's operations during the year.  The authority shall cause an audit of its books and accounts to be made at least once in each year by certified public accountants and cause a copy thereof to be filed with the Secretary of State and the Director of the Division of Budget and Accounting in the Department of the Treasury.
 
	k.	The Director of the Division of Budget and Accounting in the Department of the Treasury and the director's legally authorized representatives are hereby authorized and empowered from time to time to examine the accounts, books and records of the authority including its receipts, disbursements, contracts, sinking funds, investments and any other matters relating thereto and to its financial standing.
 
	l.	No member, officer, employee or agent of the authority shall be interested, either directly or indirectly, in any project or school facilities project, or in any contract, sale, purchase, lease or transfer of real or personal property to which the authority is a party.
 
	L.1974, c.80, s.4; amended 1977, c.393, s.3; 1980, c.50; 1981, c.122, s.13; 1991, c.392; 1992, c.16, s.12; 1995, c.227; 2000, c.72, s.45; 2001, c.401, s.2; 2002, c.43, s.69; 2007, c.253, s.13; 2008, c.27, s.27.

34:1B-4a  NJEDA building designated in memory of Caren S. Franzini.
 	1.	The Governor, or the designee thereof, shall designate the building in which the New Jersey Economic Development Authority is located at 36 West State Street, Trenton, New Jersey in memory of Caren S. Franzini and erect appropriate signs bearing this designation and dedication.
 
	L.2017, c.229, s.1.

34:1B-4b  Funding for signage.
	2.	Except for funds of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, State or other public funds shall not be used for producing, purchasing, or erecting signs bearing the designation established pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2017, c.229 (C.34:1B-4a). The Governor, or the designee thereof, is authorized to receive gifts, grants, or other financial assistance from private sources for the purpose of funding or reimbursing the Governor, or the designee thereof, for the costs associated with producing, purchasing, and erecting signs bearing the designation established pursuant to section 1 of this act and entering into agreements related thereto, with private sources, including but not limited to non-governmental, non-profit, educational, or charitable entities or institutions.  Work shall not proceed and funding shall not be accepted by the Governor, or the designee thereof, until an agreement has been reached with a responsible party for paying the costs associated with producing, purchasing, erecting, and maintaining the signs.
 
	L.2017, c.229, s.2.

34:1B-4.1  Contracts to secure bonds, other obligations.

	6. a. The New Jersey Economic Development Authority and the State Treasurer are hereby authorized to enter into one or more contracts to secure, in whole or in part, any bonds, refunding bonds or other obligations of the authority issued for the purposes set forth in subsection ee. of section 5 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-5), upon such terms and conditions as are determined by the parties; provided, however, that any obligation of the State incurred under the contract or contracts, including any payments to be made thereunder from the General Fund, shall be subject to and dependent upon appropriations being made from time to time by the Legislature for the purposes set forth in subsection ee. of section 5 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-5), as provided by law.

	b.	In any resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds, refunding bonds or other obligations of the authority issued for the purposes set forth in subsection ee. of section 5 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-5), the authority may pledge the contract with the State Treasurer, or any part thereof, for the payment or redemption of the bonds or refunding bonds, and covenant as to the use and disposition of money available to the authority for payments of bonds, refunding bonds or other obligations of the authority.

	c.	The State Treasurer shall pay from the General Fund to the authority in each State fiscal year, in accordance with a contract or contracts between the State Treasurer and the authority, an amount equivalent to the amount due to be paid for debt service incurred in the particular fiscal year on the bonds or refunding bonds of the authority issued pursuant to subsection ee. of section 5 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-5), and any additional costs incurred in connection with any agreements entered into by the authority relating to these bonds or refunding bonds.

	d.	The provisions of any other law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary notwithstanding, the bonds, refunding bonds or other obligations of the authority issued for the purposes set forth in subsection ee. of section 5 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-5) shall be special and limited obligations of the authority, payable from and secured by such funds and moneys as determined by the authority in accordance with the provisions of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.) or section 6 of P.L.2001, c.401 (C.34:1B-4.1), and shall not be in any way a debt or liability of the State or of any political subdivision thereof, except as otherwise provided in this section, and shall not create or constitute any indebtedness, liability or obligation of the State or of any political subdivision thereof, either legal, moral or otherwise, and nothing contained in the provisions of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.) or section 6 of P.L.2001, c.401 (C.34:1B-4.1) shall be construed to authorize the authority to incur any indebtedness on behalf of or in any way to obligate the State or any political subdivision thereof, and all bonds and refunding bonds issued by the authority in connection therewith shall contain on the face thereof a statement to that effect. 

	L.2001,c.401,s.6.

34:1B-4.2  Motion Picture and Television Development Commission, transfer, Business Action Center, Department of State.
	1. a. The Motion Picture and Television Development Commission, established pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1977, c.44 (C.34:1B-24), transferred in, but not of, the Division of Business Assistance, Marketing, and International Trade pursuant to section 24 of P.L.2008, c.27 (C.34:1B-233), and continued and transferred in, but not of, the Business Action Center in the Department of State pursuant to Reorganization Plan No. 003-2011, is transferred in the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.  Notwithstanding the provisions of any law to the contrary, the commission shall operate under the supervision and direction of the Chief Executive Officer of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.
 
	b.	Whenever, in any law, rule, regulation, order, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding or otherwise, reference is made to the Motion Picture and Television Development Commission, the same shall mean and refer to the Motion Picture and Television Development Commission in the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.
 
	c.	The obligation of the Division of Business Assistance, Marketing, and International Trade to provide staff services necessary to support the functions of the Motion Picture and Television Development Commission pursuant to subsection c. of section 24 of P.L.2008, c.27 (C.34:1B-233) is transferred to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.
 
	d.	The transfer directed by this section shall be made in accordance with the "State Agency Transfer Act," P.L.1971, c.375 (C.52:14D-1 et seq.) and shall include all files, books, papers, records, equipment, and other property held by the commission, including, without limitation, funds and other resources, and personnel.  All funds to be transferred shall be deposited in accounts as may be required by law.
 
L.2023, c.97, s.1.

34:1B-4.3  Regulations.
	8.	Notwithstanding the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), to the contrary, the chief executive officer of the authority may adopt, immediately upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, regulations that the chief executive officer, in consultation with the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, deems necessary to implement the provisions of P.L.2023, c.97 (C.34:1B-4.2 et al.), which regulations shall be effective for a period not to exceed 180 days from the date of the filing.  The chief executive officer shall thereafter amend, adopt, or readopt the regulations in accordance with the requirements of P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
L.2023, c.97, s.8.

34:1B-5  Powers.
	5.	The authority shall have the following powers:
 
	a.	To adopt bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its business;
 
	b.	To adopt and have a seal and to alter the same at pleasure;
 
	c.	To sue and be sued;
 
	d.	To acquire in the name of the authority by purchase or otherwise, on such terms and conditions and such manner as it may deem proper, or by the exercise of the power of eminent domain in the manner provided by the "Eminent Domain Act of 1971," P.L.1971, c.361 (C.20:3-1 et seq.), any lands or interests therein or other property which it may determine is reasonably necessary for any project; provided, however, that the authority in connection with any project shall not take by exercise of the power of eminent domain any real property except upon consent thereto given by resolution of the governing body of the municipality in which such real property is located; and provided further that the authority shall be limited in its exercise of the power of eminent domain in connection with any project in qualifying municipalities as defined under the provisions of P.L.1978, c.14 (C.52:27D-178 et seq.), or to municipalities which had a population, according to the latest federal decennial census, in excess of 10,000;
 
	e.	To enter into contracts with a person upon such terms and conditions as the authority shall determine to be reasonable, including, but not limited to, reimbursement for the planning, designing, financing, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipping, furnishing, operation and maintenance of the project and to pay or compromise any claims arising therefrom;
 
	f.	To establish and maintain reserve and insurance funds with respect to the financing of the project or the school facilities project and any project financed pursuant to the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.);
 
	g.	To sell, convey or lease to any person all or any portion of a project for such consideration and upon such terms as the authority may determine to be reasonable;
 
	h.	To mortgage, pledge or assign or otherwise encumber all or any portion of a project, or revenues, whenever it shall find such action to be in furtherance of the purposes of this act, P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.), the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.), and sections 3 through 18 of P.L.2009, c.90 (C.52:27D-489c et al.);
 
	i.	To grant options to purchase or renew a lease for any of its projects on such terms as the authority may determine to be reasonable;
 
	j.	To contract for and to accept any gifts or grants or loans of funds or property or financial or other aid in any form from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or from the State or any agency, instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, or from any other source and to comply, subject to the provisions of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), section 6 of P.L.2001, c.401 (C.34:1B-4.1), P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.), the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), and P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.), with the terms and conditions thereof;
 
	k.	In connection with any action undertaken by the authority in the performance of its duties and any application for assistance or commitments therefor and modifications thereof, to require and collect such fees and charges as the authority shall determine to be reasonable, including but not limited to fees and charges for the authority's administrative, organizational, insurance, operating, legal, and other expenses;
 
	l.	To adopt, amend and repeal regulations to carry out the provisions of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), section 6 of P.L.2001, c.401 (C.34:1B-4.1), P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.), the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), and P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.);
 
	m.	To acquire, purchase, manage and operate, hold and dispose of real and personal property or interests therein, take assignments of rentals and leases and make and enter into all contracts, leases, agreements and arrangements necessary or incidental to the performance of its duties;
 
	n.	To purchase, acquire and take assignments of notes, mortgages and other forms of security and evidences of indebtedness;
 
	o.	To purchase, acquire, attach, seize, accept or take title to any project or school facilities project by conveyance or by foreclosure, and sell, lease, manage or operate any project or school facilities project for a use specified in this act, P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.), the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.), and sections 3 through 18 of P.L.2009, c.90 (C.52:27D-489c et al.);
 
	p.	To borrow money and to issue bonds of the authority and to provide for the rights of the holders thereof, as provided in P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), section 6 of P.L.2001, c.401 (C.34:1B-4.1), P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.), the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.), and sections 3 through 18 of P.L.2009, c.90 (C.52:27D-489c et al.);
 
	q.	To extend credit or make loans to any person for the planning, designing, acquiring, constructing, reconstructing, improving, equipping and furnishing of a project or school facilities project, which credits or loans may be secured by loan and security agreements, mortgages, leases and any other instruments, upon such terms and conditions as the authority shall deem reasonable, including provision for the establishment and maintenance of reserve and insurance funds, and to require the inclusion in any mortgage, lease, contract, loan and security agreement or other instrument, of such provisions for the construction, use, operation and maintenance and financing of a project or school facilities project as the authority may deem necessary or desirable;
 
	r.	To guarantee up to 90% of the amount of a loan to a person, if the proceeds of the loan are to be applied to the purchase and installation, in a building devoted to industrial or commercial purposes, or in an office building, of an energy improvement system;
 
	s.	To employ consulting engineers, architects, attorneys, real estate counselors, appraisers, and such other consultants and employees as may be required in the judgment of the redevelopment utility to carry out the purposes of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), section 6 of P.L.2001, c.401 (C.34:1B-4.1), P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.), the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.), and sections 3 through 18 of P.L.2009, c.90 (C.52:27D-489c et al.), and to fix and pay their compensation from funds available to the redevelopment utility therefor, all without regard to the provisions of Title 11A of the New Jersey Statutes;
 
	t.	To do and perform any acts and things authorized by P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), section 6 of P.L.2001, c.401 (C.34:1B-4.1), P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.), the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.), and sections 3 through 18 of P.L.2009, c.90 (C.52:27D-489c et al.), under, through or by means of its own officers, agents and employees, or by contract with any person;
 
	u.	To procure insurance against any losses in connection with its property, operations or assets in such amounts and from such insurers as it deems desirable;
 
	v.	To do any and all things necessary or convenient to carry out its purposes and exercise the powers given and granted in P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), section 6 of P.L.2001, c.401 (C.34:1B-4.1), P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.), the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.), and sections 3 through 18 of P.L.2009, c.90 (C.52:27D-489c et al.);
 
	w.	To construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate, improve, alter, equip, maintain or repair or provide for the construction, reconstruction, improvement, alteration, equipping or maintenance or repair of any development property and lot, award and enter into construction contracts, purchase orders and other contracts with respect thereto, upon such terms and conditions as the authority shall determine to be reasonable, including, but not limited to, reimbursement for the planning, designing, financing, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipping, furnishing, operation and maintenance of any such development property and the settlement of any claims arising therefrom and the establishment and maintenance of reserve funds with respect to the financing of such development property;
 
	x.	When authorized by the governing body of a municipality exercising jurisdiction over an urban growth zone, to construct, cause to be constructed or to provide financial assistance to projects in an urban growth zone which shall be exempt from the terms and requirements of the land use ordinances and regulations, including, but not limited to, the master plan and zoning ordinances, of such municipality;
 
	y.	To enter into business employment incentive agreements as provided in the "Business Employment Incentive Program Act," P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et al.);
 
	z.	To enter into agreements or contracts, execute instruments, and do and perform all acts or things necessary, convenient or desirable for the purposes of the redevelopment utility to carry out any power expressly provided pursuant to P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.), and P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.), including, but not limited to, entering into contracts with the State Treasurer, the Commissioner of Education, districts, the New Jersey Schools Development Authority, and any other entity which may be required in order to carry out the provisions of P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.), P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.), and sections 3 through 18 of P.L.2009, c.90 (C.52:27D-489c et al.);
 
	aa.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2007, c.137);
 
	bb.	To make and contract to make loans to local units to finance the cost of school facilities projects and to acquire and contract to acquire bonds, notes or other obligations issued or to be issued by local units to evidence the loans, all in accordance with the provisions of P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.), and P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.);
 
	cc.	Subject to any agreement with holders of its bonds issued to finance a project or school facilities project, obtain as security or to provide liquidity for payment of all or any part of the principal of and interest and premium on the bonds of the authority or for the purchase upon tender or otherwise of the bonds, lines of credit, letters of credit, reimbursement agreements, interest rate exchange agreements, currency exchange agreements, interest rate floors or caps, options, puts or calls to hedge payment, currency, rate, spread or similar exposure or similar agreements, float agreements, forward agreements, insurance contract, surety bond, commitment to purchase or sell bonds, purchase or sale agreement, or commitments or other contracts or agreements, and other security agreements or instruments in any amounts and upon any terms as the authority may determine and pay any fees and expenses required in connection therewith;
 
	dd.	To charge to and collect from local units, the State and any other person, any fees and charges in connection with the authority's actions undertaken with respect to school facilities projects, including, but not limited to, fees and charges for the authority's administrative, organization, insurance, operating and other expenses incident to the financing of school facilities projects;
 
	ee.	To make loans to refinance solid waste facility bonds through the issuance of bonds or other obligations and the execution of any agreements with counties or public authorities to effect the refunding or rescheduling of solid waste facility bonds, or otherwise provide for the payment of all or a portion of any series of solid waste facility bonds.  Any county or public authority refunding or rescheduling its solid waste facility bonds pursuant to this subsection shall provide for the payment of not less than fifty percent of the aggregate debt service for the refunded or rescheduled debt of the particular county or public authority for the duration of the loan; except that, whenever the solid waste facility bonds to be refinanced were issued by a public authority and the county solid waste facility was utilized as a regional county solid waste facility, as designated in the respective adopted district solid waste management plans of the participating counties as approved by the department prior to November 10, 1997, and the utilization of the facility was established pursuant to tonnage obligations set forth in their respective interdistrict agreements, the public authority refunding or rescheduling its solid waste facility bonds pursuant to this subsection shall provide for the payment of a percentage of the aggregate debt service for the refunded or rescheduled debt of the public authority not to exceed the percentage of the specified tonnage obligation of the host county for the duration of the loan.  Whenever the solid waste facility bonds are the obligation of a public authority, the relevant county shall execute a deficiency agreement with the authority, which shall provide that the county pledges to cover any shortfall and to pay deficiencies in scheduled repayment obligations of the public authority.  All costs associated with the issuance of bonds pursuant to this subsection may be paid by the authority from the proceeds of these bonds.  Any county or public authority is hereby authorized to enter into any agreement with the authority necessary, desirable or convenient to effectuate the provisions of this subsection.
 
	The authority shall not issue bonds or other obligations to effect the refunding or rescheduling of solid waste facility bonds after December 31, 2002.  The authority may refund its own bonds issued for the purposes herein at any time;
 
	ff.	To pool loans for any local government units that are refunding bonds and do and perform any and all acts or things necessary, convenient or desirable for the purpose of the authority to achieve more favorable interest rates and terms for those local governmental units;
 
	gg.	To finance projects approved by the board, provide staff support to the board, oversee and monitor progress on the part of the board in carrying out the revitalization, economic development and restoration projects authorized pursuant to the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.) and otherwise fulfilling its responsibilities pursuant thereto;
 
	hh.	To offer financial assistance to qualified film production companies as provided in the "New Jersey Film Production Assistance Act," P.L.2003, c.182 (C.34:1B-178 et al.);
 
	ii.	To finance or develop private or public parking facilities or structures, which may include the use of solar photovoltaic equipment, in municipalities qualified to receive State aid pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1978, c.14 (C.52:27D-178 et seq.) and municipalities that contain areas designated pursuant to P.L.1985, c.398 (C.52:18A-196 et al.) as Planning Area 1 (Metropolitan), Planning Area 2 (Suburban), or a town center, and to provide appropriate assistance, including but not limited to, extensions of credit, loans, and guarantees, to municipalities qualified to receive State aid pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1978, c.14 (C.52:27D-178 et seq.) and municipalities that contain areas designated pursuant to P.L.1985, c.398 (C.52:18A-196 et seq.) as Planning Area 1 (Metropolitan), Planning Area 2 (Suburban), or a town center, and their agencies and instrumentalities or to private entities whose projects are located in those municipalities, in order to facilitate the financing and development of parking facilities or structures in such municipalities.  The authority may serve as the issuing agent of bonds to finance the undertaking of a project for the purposes of this subsection;
 
	jj.	To make grants for the planning, designing, acquiring, constructing, reconstructing, improving, equipping, and furnishing of a project, including, but not limited to, grants for working capital and meeting payroll requirements, upon such terms and conditions as the authority shall deem reasonable, during periods of emergency declared by the Governor and for the duration of economic disruptions due to the emergency;
 
	kk.	To purchase and lease real property at a nominal rate when it would result in a net economic benefit to the State, enhance access to employment and investment for underserved populations, or increase investment and employment in high-growth technology sectors; and
 
	ll.	To make investments of capital, not to exceed $10,000,000 per project, in New Jersey film-lease partner facilities, as that term is defined in section 1 of P.L.2018, c.56 (C.54:10A-5.39b) and subsection a. of section 2 of P.L.2018, c.56 (C.54A:4-12b), subject to commercially reasonable and customary terms and conditions as determined by the authority and the New Jersey film-lease partner facility.
 
	L.1974, c.80, s.5; amended 1977, c.393, s.4; 1981, c.462, s.31; 1983, c.282, s.3; 1996, c.26, s.16; 2000, c.72, s.46; 2001, c.401, s.3; 2002, c.42, s.10; 2002, c.43, s.41; 2003, c.182, s.8; 2007, c.137, s.53; 2009, c.57, s.2; 2009, c.90, s.14; 2010, c.28, s.3; 2020, c.8, s.1; 2020, c.156, s.115; 2023, c.97, s.2.

34:1B-5.1  Rules, regulations.
	1. a. The New Jersey Economic Development Authority shall adopt rules and regulations requiring that not less than the prevailing wage rate be paid to workers employed in the performance of any construction contract, including contracts for millwork fabrication, undertaken in connection with authority financial assistance or any of its projects, those projects which it undertakes pursuant to P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), or undertaken to fulfill any condition of receiving authority financial assistance, including the performance of any contract to construct, renovate, or otherwise prepare a facility for operations which are necessary for the receipt of authority financial assistance, unless the work performed under the contract is performed on a facility owned by a landlord of the entity receiving the assistance and less than 35 percent of the facility is leased by the entity at the time of the contract and under any agreement to subsequently lease the facility.  The prevailing wage rate shall be the rate determined by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.).  For the purposes of this section, "authority financial assistance" means any loan, loan guarantee, grant, incentive, tax exemption, or other financial assistance that is approved, funded, authorized, administered, or provided by the authority to any entity and is provided before, during, or after completion of a project, including, but not limited to, all authority financial assistance received by the entity pursuant to the "Business Employment Incentive Program Act," P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et al.) that enables the entity to engage in a construction contract, but this section shall not be construed as requiring the payment of the prevailing wage for construction commencing more than two years after an entity has executed with the authority a commitment letter regarding authority financial assistance and the first payment or other provision of the assistance is received.
 
	b.	The New Jersey Economic Development Authority shall adopt rules and regulations requiring that not less than the prevailing wage rate be paid to workers employed in the performance of any contract, for construction, demolition, remediation, removal of hazardous substances, alteration, custom fabrication, repair work, or maintenance work, including painting and decorating, or excavation, grading, pile driving, concrete form, or other types of foundation work in connection with the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through 34:1B-335), and the "New Jersey Emerge Program Act," sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.).  The requirements of this subsection shall apply to any site preparation work performed 24 months prior to and during the incentive eligibility period of any project receiving tax credits under the  "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through 34:1B-335), and the "New Jersey Emerge Program Act," sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.), in which there is a continuity of ownership in the site of the redevelopment project, including work undertaken to fulfill any condition of receiving tax credits under the programs.  Work that is subject to the requirements of this subsection shall include the performance of any contract for construction, demolition, remediation, removal of hazardous substances, alteration, custom fabrication, repair work, or maintenance work, including painting and decorating, or excavation, grading, pile driving, concrete form, or other types of foundation work undertaken on a facility for operations which are necessary for the receipt of tax credits under the  "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through 34:1B-335), and the "New Jersey Emerge Program Act," sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.), unless the work performed under the contract is performed on a facility owned by a landlord of the entity receiving the tax credit and less than 35 percent of the facility is leased by the entity at the time of the contract and under any agreement to subsequently lease the facility.  The prevailing wage rate shall be the rate determined by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.), and all contractors and subcontractors subject to the prevailing wage requirement set forth in this section shall be registered with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to the provisions of section 5 of P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.52).  An applicant for tax credits under the  "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through 34:1B-335), and the "New Jersey Emerge Program Act," sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.), shall certify under penalty of perjury as part of its application that all construction contracts undertaken on any project in connection with an award under the programs comply with the prevailing wage requirements of this subsection.  If at any time the authority determines that the developer made a material misrepresentation regarding compliance with the provisions of this subsection on the developer's application, the developer shall forfeit 35 percent of the tax credits allowed under the programs, and pay to the affected workers back wages in an amount that compensates the workers at the prevailing wage rate for the work performed.
 
	L.1979, c.303, s.1; amended 2000, c.72, s.47; 2002, c.43, s.58; 2002, c.78, s.1; 2007, c.137, s.54; 2007, c.245; 2020, c.156, s.112; 2025, c.127, s.12.

34:1B-5.2.  Administration and enforcement of rules and regulations

	2.	The rules and regulations adopted under section 1 of this act shall provide for the proper and appropriate administration and enforcement of such regulations.

	L.1979,c.303,s.2; amended 2002, c.78,s.2.

34:1B-5.3.  Violation of rules and regulations
    A violation of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to section 1 of this act shall be deemed to be a violation of P.L.1963, c. 150 (C. 34:11-56.25 et seq.).  The Commissioner of Labor and Industry and any worker shall have the  same powers of enforcement against violations of such rules and regulations as  are provided by Sections 11 through 16, inclusive, of P.L.1963, c. 150 (C.  34:11-56.35--34:11-56.40).

     L.1979, c. 303, s. 3, eff. Jan. 17, 1980.

34:1B-5.4  Rules, regulations relative to establishment of affirmative action program.
  
	4. a. The New Jersey Economic Development Authority shall adopt rules and regulations to establish an affirmative action program for the hiring of minority workers employed in the performance of construction contracts undertaken in connection with any of its projects, and to expand the business opportunities of socially and economically disadvantaged contractors and vendors seeking to provide materials and services for those contracts, consistent with the provisions of the "Law Against Discrimination," P.L.1945, c.169 (C.10:5-1 et seq.) and the authority shall provide for the proper enforcement and administration of such rules and regulations.
 
	b.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2007, c.137).
 
	L.1979, c.303, s.4; amended 2000, c.72, s.48; 2007, c.137, s.55.

34:1B-5.5  Limitation of claims, damages, losses, liabilities, costs for school facilities projects.
  
	50.	In the exercise of powers granted by P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.) and P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.) in connection with any school facilities project, any and all claims, damages, losses, liabilities or costs that the authority may incur shall be payable only from the amounts made available to the authority pursuant to P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.) and P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.).  In connection with any agreement or contract entered into by the authority relating to any school facilities project, there shall be no recovery against the authority for punitive or consequential damages arising out of contract nor shall there be any recovery against the authority for claims based upon implied warranties or upon contracts implied in law.
 
	L.2000, c.72, s.50; amended 2007, c.137, s.56.

34:1B-5.9  Bonds deemed fully negotiable.
 
	54.	Notwithstanding the provisions of any law to the contrary, any bonds issued pursuant to P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.) or P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.) or P.L.2008, c.39 (C.18A:7G-14.1 et al.) shall be fully negotiable within the meaning and for all purposes of Title 12A of the New Jersey Statutes, and each holder or owner of such a bond or other obligation, or of any coupon appurtenant thereto, by accepting the bond or coupon shall be conclusively deemed to have agreed that the bond or coupon is and shall be fully negotiable within the meaning and for all purposes of Title 12A.
 
	L.2000, c.72, s.54; amended 2007, c.137, s.57; 2008, c.39, s.7.

34:1B-6  Determinations prior to commitment for assistance.
 
	6.	Prior to making any commitment for assistance, the authority shall, by resolution duly adopted, find and determine, on the basis of all information reasonably available to it, that such assistance will tend to maintain or provide gainful employment for the inhabitants of the State, or will reduce the consumption, in a building devoted to industrial or commercial purposes, or in an office building, of nonrenewable sources of energy, or will eliminate and reduce environmental pollution derived from the operation of industry, utilities and commerce, and improve living conditions, and shall serve a public purpose by contributing to the prosperity, health and general welfare of the inhabitants of the State, and will tend to aid and assist in the economic growth, development or redevelopment of the political subdivision wherein it is to be located, and such finding and determination shall be conclusive for all purposes of this act.
 
	The authority shall also find and determine, on the basis of all information reasonably available to it, that such assistance, or any part thereof, used to construct, improve or refinance any pollution control facility as defined by this act will not impair any obligation undertaken by any County Industrial Pollution Control Financing Authority created pursuant to P.L.1973, c.376 (C.40:37C-1 et seq.).
 
	L.1974, c.80, s.6; amended 1975, c.32, s.3; 1975, c.253, s.3; 1983, c.282, s.4; 2008, c.27, s.28.

34:1B-6.1  Priority consideration, municipalities in compliance, New Jersey Economic Development Authority.
	2.	Notwithstanding any rule, regulation, or law to the contrary, in awarding grants or other financial assistance through any program through which monies may be provided to a municipality via a competitive process, the New Jersey Economic Development Authority shall give priority consideration to municipalities following the standards set forth in section 1 of P.L.2025, c.142 (C.52:27D-304.4).  The requirements of this section shall not apply to any grant or financial assistance that is intended to assist a municipality in fulfilling the municipality’s fair share housing obligation pursuant to P.L.1985, c.222 (C.52:27D-301 et al.).
 
L.2025, c.142, s.2.

34:1B-7.  Economic development fund
    a.  The authority shall establish and maintain a special fund called the "economic development fund"  into which shall be deposited such moneys (1) as shall be appropriated by the State for the purpose of such fund;  (2) if the authority so determines in any resolution authorizing any particular bonds, as shall be received by the authority from the sale of such bonds as provided by law;  (3) as shall be received by the authority from the repayment of loans made pursuant to this act;  (4) any other moneys or funds of the authority which it determines to deposit therein.  Moneys at any time in the economic development fund may be used by the authority for any purpose of this act, including but not limited to payment of administrative expenses incurred by the  authority in the performance of its duties, subject only to any agreements with  the holders of particular bonds or notes.

    b.  The authority may, in any resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds or notes, create or authorize the creation within said economic development fund of special funds to be held in pledge or otherwise for payment or redemption of such bonds or notes, reserves or other purposes and to covenant as to use and disposition of the moneys held in such funds.

    c.  Moneys at any time in the economic development fund may be used to guarantee loans made to project applicants by persons, provided that the authority determines that there is a reasonable prospect for repayment of such loans.

    d.  Moneys at any time in the economic development fund may be invested in any direct obligations of, or obligations as to which the principal and interest thereof is guaranteed by, the United States of America or such other obligations as the authority may approve.

     L.1974, c. 80, s. 7, eff. Aug. 7, 1974.  Amended by L.1978, c. 20, s. 2, eff.  May 9, 1978.

34:1B-7.1.  Legislative findings and declarations
    The Legislature finds that there continue to exist in the State's urban communities high unemployment, low levels of new capital investment, depressed living and working conditions and deteriorating tax bases;  that vigorous action to effectively utilize their positions as principal centers of communication and transportation and their concentration of productive and energy-efficient facilities can halt the decline in economic activity and the underemployment of economic resources in these communities, reverse the deterioration of the value of existing investment therein and the level of public revenue collection on that investment, and eliminate the disincentive to  new investment;  and that the improvement of these communities is vital to the  safety, health and welfare of the residents thereof and of the State, and constitutes a major opportunity for enhancing the economic condition of the State, for augmenting the fiscal resources of government and for stimulating private and public efforts to enhance the attractiveness and desirability of the State as a place to live and work.

    The Legislature determines that it is a public purpose of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority as articulated in P.L.1977, c. 460 to provide for the acquisition, clearance, construction, and redevelopment of industrial and commercial centers in urban areas within the State in order to induce private business to invest in employment generating facilities in such areas; that the authority, with the direction and assistance of the Legislature, has established a successful model program for the use of public funds to leverage private investment capital for the development of urban communities of the State;  that under this program industrial park improvements to formerly vacant  sites in several urban communities have resulted in modern and secure industrial facilities generating new tax ratables and employment opportunities by attracting substantial private investment;  and that the availability of financial assistance by the State will be a necessary and critical element in the successful undertaking, financing and completion of projects under this program now and in the future.

    The Legislature declares that it is in the public interest of this State to  continue and strengthen the existing program of the authority to undertake industrial and commercial parks in urban communities as part of a general State  effort to provide support for the revitalization and development of communities  of this State;  and that the authority's efforts in this regard provide a most  reasonable and appropriate method of directing public funds available for  community economic development efforts toward their proper ends and purposes.

     L.1981, c. 505, s. 1.

34:1B-7.2.   Fund for community development purposes  
    2.   The economic development fund established in the New Jersey Economic Development Authority under section 7 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-7) shall be a fund for community development purposes with the meaning and intent of the "Community Development Bond Act of 1981," P.L.1981, c.486, and shall be eligible to receive appropriations from the "Community Development Bond Fund" established under that act.  All moneys appropriated to, and deposited in, the economic development fund shall be subject to all terms and conditions of "The New Jersey Economic Development Authority Act," P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), except as otherwise prescribed in this act.  

   L.1981,c.505,s.2.  

34:1B-7.3.  Appropriations to economic development fund;  use
    Amounts appropriated to the economic development fund from the "Community Development Bond Fund"  shall be used for the purpose of paying or financing the costs of projects undertaken by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, including the acquisition, preparation, clearance, and improvement of land, for the development of new industrial and commercial parks and the redevelopment of existing industrial facilities in municipalities qualified to receive State aid pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1978, c. 14 (C. 52:27D-178 et seq.).  Projects so undertaken by the authority shall assist in the location, maintenance and expansion of employment-generating facilities in those municipalities.

     L.1981, c. 505, s. 3.

34:1B-7.4.  Financing of projects;  economic feasibility and recovery of costs
    Financing of projects pursuant to this act shall be in such form, amount and  on such terms as the authority shall believe necessary in order to assure the  economic feasibility of a project and to assure, to the greatest degree compatible with that purpose, the full recovery of costs incurred by the authority in the undertaking of the project.  The authority shall assure by the  terms of the financing of projects that at least 75% of the moneys appropriated  to the economic development fund from the  "Community Development Bond Fund"  shall be recovered and shall continue thereafter to be available for financing  under this act.

     L.1981, c. 505, s. 4.

34:1B-7.5.  Projects;  factors for consideration for financial assistance
    With respect to projects for which costs are to be financed by the authority  pursuant to this act, the authority shall in determining those projects, and in  the planning and undertaking of those projects, consider the following in  addition to any factors required to be considered pursuant to P.L.1974, c. 80  (C. 34:1B-1 et seq.):

    a.  The economic feasibility of the project;

     b.  The extent of economic and related social distress in the municipality and adjacent area to be affected by the project;

     c.  The degree to which the project will advance Statewide and regional strategies and objectives;

     d.  The likelihood that a project shall, after its completion, be able to repay to the fund all or part of any financing costs incurred;

     e.  The relationship of the project to a comprehensive local development strategy, including projects undertaken, or planned to be undertaken, within the municipality pursuant to the  "New Jersey Local Development Financing Fund Act,"  P.L.1983, c.190 (C.34:1B-36 et seq.);  and

    f.  The degree to which the project utilizes, enhances, protects and promotes public transportation systems.

     L.1981, c. 505, s. 5.

34:1B-7.6.  Annual report
    The authority shall annually report to the Governor and the Legislature concerning the financing of projects undertaken, and concerning projects planned to be undertaken, pursuant to this act.  The report shall include a description of consideration given in each project to the factors set forth in section 5 of this act.  The first report shall be made on or before July 1, 1983, and subsequent reports shall be made on July 1 of each year thereafter.

     L.1981, c. 505, s. 6.

34:1B-7.7.   Repayment by Economic Development Authority 
    The New Jersey Economic Development Authority, as successor to the New Jersey State Area Redevelopment Authority through the Executive Reorganization Plan filed February 27, 1978, shall repay without interest to the State Treasurer all moneys realized from borrowers upon loans they obtained through the New Jersey State Area Redevelopment Authority, which loans were made from the sums transferred to the authority under section 10 of P.L.  1962, c. 204, section 1 of P.L.  1970, c. 253, and section 1 of P.L.  1973, c. 75 (C. 2A:37-41.2), from the special trust fund established by N.J.S. 2A:37-41, up to the amounts originally transferred.  The repayment from moneys realized from borrowers shall be considered as cash received from payments of principal and interest from the borrowers and received from the liquidation of collateral securing such loans.  Such repayments shall be net of all direct expenses incurred in servicing the loan or in protecting and collecting the collateral, or both. 

   L.  1986, c. 127, s. 1, eff. Oct. 9, 1986. 

34:1B-7.8.   Funds transferred 
    All sums appropriated or transferred to the New Jersey Area Redevelopment Authority, except those referred to in section 1 of this act, or to the New Jersey Urban Loan Authority, from any source, are transferred to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority economic development fund to carry out the purposes of P.L.  1974, c. 80 (C. 34:1B-1 et seq.). 

   L.  1986, c. 127, s. 2, eff. Oct. 9, 1986. 

34:1B-7.9.   Prepayment at discount 
    The New Jersey Economic Development Authority, as successor to the New Jersey State Area Redevelopment Authority, may, after negotiation and agreement with the State Treasurer, prepay all outstanding appropriations due in future years to the State Treasurer, discounted at an interest rate agreeable to the State Treasurer and the New Jersey Economic Development Authority. 

   L.  1986, c. 127, s. 3, eff. Oct. 9, 1986. 

34:1B-7.10.  Short title  
     1.   Sections one through ten of this act shall be known and may be cited as the "Economic Recovery Fund Act."  

    L.1992,c.16,s.1.  

34:1B-7.11.  Findings, determinations  
     2.   The Legislature finds and determines that limitations on the availability of loan funds from financial institutions has seriously impeded the development and completion of many economic development projects, including the expansion of manufacturing operations and high technology business ventures, the development of infrastructure and transportation improvements to stimulate economic development, and cultural, recreational and tourism facilities or improvements; that it is in the public interest to establish an Economic Recovery Fund to enable the State to make direct investments in economic development projects, to establish new programs to assist small business, and to leverage moneys for economic recovery in the most effective and creative manner through such mechanisms as public-private partnerships, grants, guarantees and direct loans; and that the Economic Development Authority is the appropriate entity to implement the goals of a diverse economic recovery program.  

    L.1992,c.16,s.2.  

34:1B-7.12.  "Economic Recovery Fund" established  
     3. a. The New Jersey Economic Development Authority shall establish and maintain a special nonlapsing fund to be known as the "Economic Recovery Fund," hereinafter the "fund," into which shall be deposited such moneys: (1) as shall be paid to the fund by the State Treasurer pursuant to a contract between the State Treasurer and the authority authorized by this act; (2) as shall be otherwise appropriated by the State for the purpose of such fund; (3) if the authority so determines in any resolution authorizing any particular bonds, as shall be received by the authority from the sale of such bonds as provided by law; (4) as shall be received by the authority from the repayment of loans made from the fund; and (5) any other moneys or funds of the authority which it determines to deposit therein.  

    Moneys in the fund may be invested in such obligations as the authority may approve and interest or other earnings on such investments shall be credited to the fund.  

    b.   In addition to any other powers which may be conferred on the authority by this act, the authority, by resolution, shall have the power to: (1) pay all or part of the cost of any project or projects; (2) make loans, guarantees, equity investments, and grants, or provide other forms of financing for any project; and (3) provide for the funding, or refunding, of any bonds; further, the authority shall have the power to incur indebtedness, borrow money and issue bonds secured wholly by the moneys in the fund for the purpose of providing funds for the powers conferred by this paragraph and any other power of the authority.  

    c.   The authority may, in any resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds or notes, create or authorize the creation within the fund of special program accounts, to be held in pledge or otherwise for payment or redemption of such bonds or notes, revenues or other purposes and to covenant as to the use and disposition of the moneys held in such accounts.  

    L.1992,c.16,s.3.  

34:1B-7.13  Use of moneys in fund.
	4.	The authority may use the moneys in the fund to pay principal of, premium, if any, and interest on bonds or notes, which shall be entitled "Economic Recovery Fund Bonds or Notes," as appropriate, the proceeds, or net proceeds, of which shall be deposited into the fund, or used for purposes of the fund, and moneys in the fund, including money received from the sale of bonds shall, in such manner as is determined by the authority, and pursuant to subsections d., e., and f. of this section, be used for the financing of projects as set forth in section 3 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-3) and to establish:
 
	a.	an economic growth account for programs and initiatives, which will support and invest in small and medium-size businesses and other entities engaged in economic, community, and workforce development that have the greatest potential for creating jobs and stimulating economic growth through such elements including, but not limited to:
 
	(1)	a Statewide lending pool and guarantee pool for small business, whether directly or through a community development financial institution;
 
	(2)	a business composite bond guarantee; 
 
	(3)	a fund to further supplement the export finance program of the authority to provide direct loans and working capital necessary for New Jersey businesses to compete in the global market, real estate partnerships;
 
	(4)	a Statewide composite bond pool to assist municipalities in acquiring needed financing for capital expenditures; 
 
	(5)	financial assistance to assist municipalities, municipal entities, counties, county entities, regional entities, State instrumentalities, and not-for-profit local economic and community development entities to execute programs and initiatives to stimulate community and economic development; 
 
	(6)	a venture, seed, or angel capital fund for start-up costs for businesses developing new concepts and inventions; 
 
	(7)	a fund to assist businesses, either directly or through a not-for-profit or for-profit entity with expansion or transition to a new business model in such areas including, but not limited to, manufacturing retooling to improve quality, to reduce production costs and to train employees to apply the latest technology; 
 
	(8)	a "Main Street Business Assistance Program" to provide guarantees and loans to small and mid-size businesses and not-for-profit entities to stimulate the economy;
 
	(9)	in consultation with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development and the Office of the Secretary of Higher Education, a fund to support and invest in innovative workforce development approaches and programs, including those that could benefit individuals directly, either undertaken directly by the authority or through a governmental, not-for-profit, or for-profit entity, that align with targeted industries as defined by the authority's board or support a high-demand occupation; 
 
	(10) a fund to provide grants, financing, or equity to collaborations between large corporations, small-to-medium sized businesses, academic institutions, government entities, or not-for-profit entities, where one of the purposes of the collaboration is to stimulate community or economic development; 
 
	(11) a fund to provide grants, financing, or equity in innovation centers, research centers, incubators, and accelerators, and other similar innovation-oriented entities, which are focused on the targeted industries as defined by the authority's board or support increasing diversity and inclusion within the State's entrepreneurial economy; the fund may also be used to pay for membership fees, or other similar arrangements, for the authority to join or participate in such innovation-oriented entities;
 
	(12) a fund to provide grants or competition prizes to fund initiative-based activities which stimulate growth in targeted industries as defined by the authority's board or supports increasing diversity and inclusion within the State's entrepreneurial economy; this fund may also support not-for-profit industry, trade, and labor organization initiatives; 
 
	(13) a fund to provide grants or competition prizes, either directly or through a not-for-profit entity, that is consistent with economic development priorities as defined by the authority's board, where funds have been specifically allocated to the economic recovery fund for this purpose, including but not limited to an appropriation or transfer from another government entity;
 
	(14) a fund for real estate partnerships to construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate, improve, alter, equip, maintain, repair, or provide for the construction, reconstruction, improvement, alteration, equipping, maintenance, or repair of any property, and to award and enter into construction contracts, purchase orders, and other contracts with respect thereto, upon such terms and conditions as the authority shall determine to be reasonable.  The authority shall use no less than $35,000,000 from the economic growth account to effectuate the provisions of section 2 of P.L.2024, c.25 (C.34:1B-7.13a); and
 
	(15) a fund for the planning, designing, acquiring, constructing, reconstructing, improving, equipping, and furnishing by small and medium-size businesses and not-for-profit corporations of a project as defined by section 3 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-3), including, but not limited to, grants for working capital and meeting payroll requirements, upon such terms and conditions as the authority shall deem reasonable.
 
	The authority may promulgate rules and regulations for the effective implementation of the "Main Street Business Assistance Program." Notwithstanding any provision of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) to the contrary, the authority may adopt, immediately upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, such regulations as are necessary to implement the provisions of this act, which shall be effective for a period not to exceed 12 months following enactment, and may thereafter be amended, adopted, or readopted by the authority in accordance with the requirements of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.);
 
	b.	an economic development infrastructure program account, which shall provide for the financing and development of infrastructure and transportation projects, including but not limited to ports, terminal and transit facilities, roads and airports, parking facilities used in connection with transit facilities, and related facilities, including public-private partnerships, that are integral to economic growth;
 
	c.	an account for a cultural, recreational, fine and performing arts, military and veterans memorial, historic preservation project and tourism facilities and improvements program, which shall provide for the financing and development of cultural, recreational, fine and performing arts, military and veterans memorial, historic preservation and tourism projects, including partnerships with public, private and nonprofit entities;
 
	d.	an account, into which shall be deposited an amount not less than $45,000,000, out of the total amounts deposited or credited to the fund from the proceeds of the sale of Economic Recovery Fund Bonds or Notes, for the financing of capital facilities for primary and secondary schools in the State for the purpose of the renovation, repair or alteration of existing school buildings, the construction of new school buildings or the conversion of existing school buildings to other instructional purposes.
 
	(1)	Of the amount deposited in the account, not less than $25,000,000 shall be deposited in the "Public School Facilities Code Compliance Loan Fund" established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1993, c.102 (C.34:1B-7.23).
 
	(2)	Of the amount deposited in the account, not less than $20,000,000 shall be deposited in the "Public School Facilities Loan Assistance Fund" established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1993, c.102 (C.34:1B-7.24);
 
	e.	an environmental cleanup assistance account, into which shall be deposited an amount not less than $10,000,000, out of the total amounts deposited or credited to the fund from the proceeds of the sale of Economic Recovery Fund Bonds or Notes, to provide financial assistance to the persons and other entities entitled to apply for financial assistance pursuant to P.L.1993, c.139; and
 
	f.	an account, into which shall be deposited an amount not less than $15,000,000, out of the total amounts deposited or credited to the fund from the proceeds of the sale of Economic Recovery Fund Bonds or Notes, for the financing of shore restoration, maintenance, monitoring, protection and preservation projects pursuant to the shore protection master plan prepared by the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to P.L.1978, c.157.
 
	L.1992, c.16, s.4; amended 1993, c.102, s.11; 1993, c.286, s.1; 2008, c.117, s.2; 2010, c.28, s.2; 2020, c.8, s.2; 2020, c.20, s.2; 2020, c.156, s.116; 2024, c.25, s.1.

34:1B-7.13a  Purchasing properties, certain, maximize development potential.
	2. a. The money made available to the authority by section 4 of P.L.1992, c.16 (C.34:1B-7.13) as amended by section 1 of P.L.2024, c.25 and appropriated pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2024, c.25 shall be used by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority for the purpose of purchasing certain properties from the New Jersey Transit Corporation identified by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority to maximize the development potential of such properties, including, but not limited to, performing site preparation for, developing, redeveloping, constructing, reconstructing, rehabilitating, renovating, selling, leasing, subleasing, or contributing as an investment to a public or private entity such property, and which development may include a project consisting solely of residential units.
 
	b. (1) In accordance with the process set forth in this subsection, the New Jersey Economic Development Authority shall purchase the properties identified pursuant to subsection a. of this section from the New Jersey Transit Corporation for a purchase price based on appraisals obtained by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority of the highest and best use value of the properties.
 
	(2)	Prior to the purchase of New Jersey Transit Corporation properties by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority using the funds made available for such purpose pursuant to the provisions of P.L.2024, c.25 (C.34:1B-7.13a et al.), the authority shall notify the Joint Budget Oversight Committee that the authority has identified properties owned by the New Jersey Transit Corporation for purchase.  Following notification made by the authority, the Joint Budget Oversight Committee shall hold a meeting within 10 State working days from the date of notification for the purpose of receiving a joint presentation from the New Jersey Transit Corporation and the New Jersey Economic Development Authority at which the corporation and the authority shall describe the terms and conditions for the conveyance of the identified properties.  In the event that the Joint Budget Oversight Committee fails to meet within the time prescribed by this paragraph, the conveyance shall proceed in accordance with the terms and conditions agreed to by the corporation and the authority.
 
	(3)	The process set forth in this subsection shall apply only to the conveyance of properties from the New Jersey Transit Corporation to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority using the funds appropriated for such purpose pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2024, c.25 and the funds required from the economic growth account for such purpose pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1992, c.16 (C.34:1B-7.13), as amended by section 1 of P.L.2024, c.25 (C.34:1B-7.13).
 
	c.	The New Jersey Transit Corporation shall maintain a participation interest in the properties sold to the authority, which participation interest shall be determined through an agreement entered into between the New Jersey Transit Corporation and the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.  An agreement entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to the following conditions:  (1) if a property is sold by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority to a public or private entity, the New Jersey Transit Corporation shall receive no less than 33 percent of the proceeds from such sale above the appraised value of the property at the time of its purchase from the New Jersey Transit Corporation by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority; and (2) if a property is leased by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority to a public or private entity, the New Jersey Transit Corporation shall receive no less than 33 percent of the proceeds from such lease.
 
	d.	Prior to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority developing, redeveloping, constructing, reconstructing, rehabilitating, renovating, selling, leasing, subleasing, or contributing as an investment the properties acquired from the New Jersey Transit Corporation pursuant to P.L.2024, c.25 (C.34:1B-7.13a et al.), the authority shall notify the Joint Budget Oversight Committee that the authority intends to develop, redevelop, construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate, renovate, sell, lease, sublease, or contribute as an investment such properties.  Following notification made by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, the Joint Budget Oversight Committee shall hold a meeting within 10 State working days from the date of notification for the purpose of receiving a presentation from the New Jersey Economic Development Authority at which the authority shall describe the intended actions to be taken with respect to the properties.  In the event that the Joint Budget Oversight Committee fails to meet within the time prescribed by this subsection, the authority may proceed with its plans to develop, redevelop, construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate, renovate, sell, lease, sublease, or contribute as an investment such properties.  The process set forth in this subsection shall apply only to the properties acquired by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority from the New Jersey Transit Corporation using the funds appropriated for such purpose pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2024, c.25 and the funds required from the economic growth account for such purpose pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1992, c.16 (C.34:1B-7.13), as amended by section 1 of P.L.2024, c.25.
 
L.2024, c.25, s.2.

34:1B-7.14.  Determination of projects to be financed  
     5.   With respect to projects to be financed by the authority pursuant to this act and undertaken with moneys from the Economic Recovery Fund, the authority shall in determining those projects, and in the planning and undertaking of those projects, consider the following factors:  

    a.   The economic feasibility of the project;

  

    b.   The degree to which the project will advance Statewide and regional strategies and objectives;  

    c.   The degree to which the project maximizes the leveraging of other sources of funds; and  

    d.   The degree to which the project promotes economic development, the creation or retention of jobs, and the stimulation of private sector investment and expansion.  

    L.1992,C.16,s.5.  

34:1B-7.15.  Payments to Economic Recovery Fund  
     6.   Commencing with fiscal year 1992, the State Treasurer shall in each fiscal year pay from the General Fund to the Economic Recovery Fund, in accordance with a contract between the treasurer and the authority, an amount equivalent to the amount due to be paid in that State fiscal year to the State by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey pursuant to the regional economic development agreement dated January 1, 1990 among the States of New York and New Jersey and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, provided that all such payments from the General Fund shall be subject to and dependent upon appropriations being made for such purposes by the Legislature.

    L.1992,c.16,s.6.  

34:1B-7.16.  Contracts for implementation of payment arrangement  
     7.   The State Treasurer and the authority are authorized to enter into one or more contracts to implement the payment arrangement that is provided for in section 6 of this act.  The contract or contracts shall commence with the State fiscal year beginning July 1, 1991 and shall provide for payment by the State Treasurer of the amount provided for in section 6 of this act.  The contract or contracts shall contain terms and conditions as determined by the parties and shall, where appropriate, contain terms and conditions necessary and desirable to secure any bonds, notes and other obligations of the authority issued or incurred pursuant to this act, provided, however, that the incurrence of any obligation by the State under the contract or contracts, including any payments to be made thereunder from the General Fund, shall be subject to and dependent upon appropriations being made from time to time by the Legislature for the purposes of this act.  

    L.1992,c.16,s.7.  

34:1B-7.17.  Report to Governor, Legislature  
     8.   The authority shall report six months after the effective date of this section, and annually thereafter not later than September 15, to the Governor and the Legislature concerning the financing of projects currently under consideration and projects undertaken with moneys in the Economic Recovery Fund during the preceding fiscal year.  The initial report and each annual report required under this section shall include a description of each project funded by such loans, guarantees, grants or other forms of financing as may be made available under section 4 of this act and a detailed analysis of the consideration given in each project to the factors set forth in section 5 of this act.  

    L.1992,c.16,s.8.  

34:1B-7.18.  Legislative approval of certain transactions  
     9.   Notice of loans, guarantees, grants or other forms of financing for projects from such funds as may be made available under subsections a. and e. of section 4 of this act shall be submitted to the Legislature at least 30 days prior to the closing of any transaction but the transaction may proceed subsequent to that notice.  Loans, guarantees, grants or other forms of financing for projects from such funds as may be made available under subsections b. and c. of section 4 of this act shall be submitted to the Legislature for approval at least 45 days prior to the closing of any transaction.  If the Legislature takes no action within that period, the transaction shall be deemed to be approved.  

    L.1992,c.16,s.9.  

34:1B-7.19.  Definitions; program authorized  
     10. a. The following words or terms as used in this section shall have the following meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:  

    "Small business enterprise" shall mean a business which has its principal place of business in this State, is independently owned and operated and meets all other qualifications as may be established in accordance with P.L.1987, c.55 (C.52:27H-21.7 et seq.).  

    "Special assistance small business enterprise" means (1) a small business enterprise having its principal place of business in a municipality in this State in which an urban enterprise zone has been established pursuant to the "New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act," P.L.1983, c.303 (C.52:27H-60 et seq.), or (2) a small business enterprise having at least 50% of its employees who are economically disadvantaged individuals.  

    "Economically disadvantaged individual" means a person who (1) resides in a municipality in this State in which an urban enterprise zone has been established, or (2) has been unemployed or the recipient of public assistance benefits for a period of at least one year immediately prior to accepting employment with a special assistance small business enterprise.  

    b.   The authority may, by resolution, establish a special assistance small business enterprise program for projects to be funded from the accounts established by section 4 of this act.  

    L.1992,c.16,s.10.  

34:1B-7.20.  Short title  
    1.   Sections 1 through 10 of this 1993 amendatory and supplementary act shall be known and may be cited as the "Public School Capital Finance Assistance Act."  

   L.1993,c.102,s.1.  

34:1B-7.21.  Findings, declarations  
    2.   The Legislature finds and declares that the northeastern region of the country and New Jersey, in particular, continues to be seriously affected by the national economic downturn; that public sector involvement to finance urgently needed projects through the Economic Recovery Fund, established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1992, c.16 (C.34:1B-7.13), is necessary to stimulate growth and provide employment during this ongoing recessionary economy; that, as part of this program to boost economic growth in the State, it is essential to address the current estimated unmet need of two billion dollars for the renovation, repair, conversion, alteration and construction of school buildings in the State in order to provide safe and adequate public school buildings; that the limitations on the availability of funds from other sources has impaired the ability of school districts to go forward with financing necessary to complete repairs, renovations, alterations, conversions and construction of school buildings;  that the lack of adequate buildings and facilities has seriously impeded the ability of school districts to provide a thorough and efficient system of education to all pupils as required by the State Constitution; and that the State cannot ignore its obligation to remedy conditions which jeopardize the health, safety and general welfare of our children.  

   L.1993,c.102,s.2.  

34:1B-7.22.  Definitions  
    3.   As used in this act:

  

   "Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4);  

   "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the Department of Education;

  

   "Cost or costs" means the expenses incurred in connection with: the renovation, repair, alteration, construction, or conversion  of any school building or any other project authorized under this 1993 amendatory and supplementary act;  the acquisition and development of any real or personal property for use in connection with any project authorized under this 1993 amendatory and supplementary act, including any rights or interests therein; the execution of any agreements and franchises deemed by the authority to be necessary or useful and convenient in connection with any project authorized under this 1993 amendatory and supplementary act; the procurement of engineering, inspection, planning, legal, financial or other professional services, including the services of a bond registrar or an authenticating agent; the cost of issuance of bonds, including any interest or discount thereon; the administrative, organizational, operating or other expenses incident to the financing, completion and placing into service of projects authorized under this 1993 amendatory and supplementary act; the establishment of a reserve fund or funds for working capital, operating, maintenance or replacement expenses and for the payment or security of principal or interest on bonds, as the authority may determine; and reimbursement to any fund of the State of moneys which may have been transferred or advanced therefrom to any fund created by this act, or of any moneys which may have been expended therefrom for or in connection with any project authorized under this 1993 amendatory and supplementary act;  

   "Department" means the Department of Education;

  

   "Project" means any work which is necessary for the construction, renovation, repair, alteration or conversion of a public school building by the school district;  

   "Public school" means a school, under collegiate grade, which is operated by a school district;  

   "School building" means any structure, building, or facility used wholly or in part for academic purposes by a school district; and  

   "School district" means any local or regional school district established pursuant to chapter 8 or chapter 13 of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes and any county special services or county vocational school districts established pursuant to chapter 46 or chapter 54 of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes.  

   L.1993,c.102,s.3.  

34:1B-7.23.	"Public School Facilities Code Compliance Loan Fund"

	4.  a.  The authority shall establish and maintain a special nonlapsing revolving fund to be known as the "Public School Facilities Code Compliance Loan Fund," hereinafter the "compliance fund," which shall be credited with: (1) the $25 million allocated from the Economic Recovery Fund pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection d. of section 4 of P.L.1992, c.16 (C.34:1B-7:13); (2) any moneys that shall be received by the authority from the repayment of loans made from the compliance fund and interest thereon; and (3) any other moneys which the authority determines to deposit therein.  

	b.   The authority may use the moneys in the compliance fund to finance not less than 25%, and not more than 50%, of the total cost of any project, in accordance with the criteria set forth in this section, for the purpose of providing low-interest loans to school districts, to finance the renovation, repair or other alteration of existing school buildings, the construction of new school buildings or the conversion of existing school buildings to other instructional purposes, if such renovation, repair, alteration, construction or conversion is required to bring buildings that, at the time of application, do not meet State health and safety code requirements, into compliance with those requirements.  

	c.   Upon application by a school district for a low-interest loan, the commissioner is authorized and empowered to determine whether the renovations, repairs, alterations, conversion or construction are necessary to meet State health and safety code requirements.  If the commissioner determines that such work is necessary, the commissioner shall certify that the school district is eligible for a low-interest loan pursuant to this section to finance the renovation, repair, alteration, conversion or construction described in the application.  

	d. (1) Upon certification, the commissioner shall waive the holding of a referendum or the requirement for approval by a board of school estimate pursuant to subsection (d) of N.J.S.18A:20-4.2 or N.J.S.18A:24-5 et seq., as the case may be, or the requirement for approval of the project by a capital projects control board pursuant to P.L.1991, c.139 (C.18A:7A-46.1 et seq.), as appropriate, and the school district may, upon receiving the certification and waiver, apply to the authority for a loan pursuant to this section.  The terms of the loan and the repayment schedule shall be established by the authority. The repayments to the authority by the school districts shall be treated as net debt service by the school districts for school aid purposes.  In addition to the amount of taxes determined by the legal voters of the district at the annual school election, the secretary of the board of education shall certify the amount required for the repayment of the interest and principal of the loan in the same manner required for interest and debt redemption charges pursuant to N.J.S.18A:22-33, and the amount so certified shall be included in the taxes assessed, levied and collected in the municipality or municipalities comprising the school district for such purposes.  

   (2)  All repayments, and interest thereon, shall be deposited by the authority in the compliance fund, for use in the manner provided for in this section, except insofar as the authority may direct that such amounts be deposited in the small projects fund established pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1993, c.102 (C.34:1B-7.25).

	(3)  Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, on and after the effective date of P.L.1996, c.48 (C.34:1B-7.23a et al.), any loan repayments and interest thereon on deposit or deposited into the compliance fund shall be paid by the authority to the State Treasurer for deposit into the General Fund of the State, provided that the payment does not violate any existing agreement of the authority with bondholders.

   e.   The authority, in consultation with the commissioner shall, in determining whether to grant approval of any loan application pursuant to this section, take into consideration the severity of the need for the particular project, the ability of the school district to begin and complete the project in an expeditious manner, the ability of the school district to proceed with the funding of the balance of the funds for the project, and the extent to which the approval of the project contributes to the equable distribution of moneys in the compliance fund.  

   f.   The balance of the moneys needed for a project for which an application for a loan is made pursuant to this section may be funded by the school district by:  (1) the issuance of bonds, or other borrowing, excluding lease-purchase agreements, pursuant to the provisions of subsection (d) of N.J.S.18A:20-4.2, N.J.S.18A:24-5 et seq., or P.L.1991, c.139 (C.18A:7A-46.1 et seq.), as appropriate; except that the commissioner shall waive the holding of a referendum or the requirement for approval by a board of school estimate pursuant to subsection (d) of N.J.S.18A:20-4.2, or N.J.S.18A:24-5 et seq., as the case may be, or the requirement for approval of the project by a capital projects control board pursuant to P.L.1991, c.139 (C.18A:7A-46.1 et seq.), as appropriate; (2) borrowing from the "Public Schools Small Projects Loan Assistance Fund" established pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1993, c.102 (C.34:1B-7.25), if the total cost of the project does not exceed $5,000,000, and in any such case the commissioner shall waive the holding of a referendum or the requirement for approval by a board of school estimate pursuant to subsection (d) of N.J.S.18A:20-4.2 or N.J.S.18A:24-5 et seq., as the case may be, or approval of the project by a capital projects control board pursuant to P.L.1991, c.139 (C.18A:7A-46.1 et seq.), as appropriate; (3) moneys of the school district not necessary for the completion of any other specific projects; and (4) any other lawful source; except that no project funded or approved to be funded by school district bonds authorized, pursuant to law, prior to December 31, 1992 shall be funded pursuant to P.L.1993, c.102 (C.34:1B-7.20 et al.).  

   g.   Any school district shall be eligible to receive additional loans pursuant to this section even if the district has received a previous loan; provided that those additional loans are in conformity with the selection criteria established pursuant to this section.  

   h.   Net earnings received from the investment or deposit of moneys in the compliance fund by the authority shall be redeposited in the fund for use for the purposes of this section.  

L.1993,c.102,s.4; amended 1996, c.48, s.1.  

34:1B-7.24.	 "Public School Facilities Loan Assistance Fund"

	5.  a.  The authority shall establish and maintain a special nonlapsing revolving fund to be known as the "Public School Facilities Loan Assistance Fund," hereinafter the "facilities fund," which shall be credited with: (1) not less than $105,000,000 from the amount of capital funding appropriated for school facilities pursuant to the annual appropriations act for the State fiscal year ending June 30, 1994, P.L.1993  c.155   ; (2) the $20,000,000 allocated from the Economic Recovery Fund pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection d. of section 4 of P.L.1992, c.16 (C.34:1B-7.13); (3) any moneys that shall be received by the authority from the repayment of loans made from the facilities fund and interest thereon; and (4) any other moneys which the authority determines to deposit therein.  

   b.   The authority may use the moneys in the facilities fund to provide for low interest loans to finance not less than 25%, and not more than 50%, of the total cost of any project, in accordance with the criteria set forth in this section, for the purpose of renovation, repair or other alteration of existing school buildings, for construction of new school buildings or for the conversion of existing school buildings to other instructional purposes, whether or not that renovation, repair, alteration, construction or conversion is required to bring buildings that, at the time of application do not meet State health and safety code requirements, into compliance with those requirements.  

   c.   Upon application by any school district to the authority for a loan to be made pursuant to subsection b. of this section, the authority shall, in consultation with the commissioner, determine whether to grant approval for the loan based upon the appropriate authorization for the loan pursuant to subsection (d) of N.J.S.18A:20-4.2, or the project pursuant to P.L.1991, c.139 (C.18A:7A-46.1 et seq.), as the case may be, the relationship of the project to the enhancement of the school's academic programs, the ability of the school district to begin and complete the project in an expeditious manner, the ability of the school district to proceed with the funding of the balance of the moneys needed for the project, and the extent to which approval of the project would contribute to the equable distribution of moneys in the facilities fund.  

   d.   The balance of the moneys needed for a project for which an application for a loan is made pursuant to subsection b. of this section may be funded by the school district by:  (1) the issuance of bonds, or other borrowing, excluding lease-purchase agreements, pursuant to the provisions of subsection (d) of N.J.S.18A:20-4.2, N.J.S.18A:24-5 et seq., or P.L.1991, c.139 (C.18A:7A-46.1 et seq.) as appropriate; (2) if the borrowing of money or the issuance of bonds is authorized pursuant to subsection (d) of N.J.S.18A:20-4.2 or N.J.S.18A:24-5 et seq., as the case may be, or if the project is approved pursuant to P.L.1991, c.139 (C.18A:7A-46.1 et seq.), as appropriate, borrowing from the "Public Schools Small Projects Loan Assistance Fund" established pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1993, c.102 (C. 34:1B-7.25), if the total cost of the project does not exceed $5,000,000;  (3) moneys of the school district not necessary for the completion of any other specific projects; and (4) any other lawful source; except that no project funded or approved to be funded by school district bonds authorized, pursuant to law, prior to December 31, 1992 shall be funded pursuant to P.L.1993, c.102 (C.34:1B-7.20 et al.).  

   e.  (1)  The authority shall establish the terms of the loan which shall include, but not be limited to, the rate of interest, a schedule for drawing down loan funds, and a repayment schedule.  The repayments shall be treated by the school district as net debt service for school aid purposes.  In addition to the amount of taxes determined by the legal voters of the district at the annual school election, the secretary of the board of education shall certify the amount required for the repayment of the interest and principal of the loan in the same manner required for interest and debt redemption charges pursuant to N.J.S.18A:22-33, and the amount so certified shall be included in the taxes assessed, levied and collected in the municipality or municipalities comprising the school district for such purposes.  

   (2)  All repayments, and interest thereon, shall be deposited by the authority in the facilities fund for use in the manner provided for in this section, except insofar as the authority may direct that such amounts be deposited in the small projects fund established pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1993, c.102 (C.34:1B-7.25). 

	(3)  Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary,  on and after the effective date of P.L.1996, c.48 (C.34:1B-7.23a et al.),  any loan repayments and interest thereon on deposit or deposited into the facilities fund shall be paid by the authority to the State Treasurer for deposit into the General Fund of the State, provided that the payment shall not violate any existing agreement of the authority with bondholders.

   f.   Net earnings received from the investment or deposit of moneys in the facilities fund by the authority shall be redeposited in the fund for use for the purposes of this section.  

L.1993,c.102,s.5; amended 1996, c.48, s.2.

34:1B-7.25.  Issuance of bonds; "Public Schools Small Projects Loan Assistance Fund"  
    7.  a.  The New Jersey Economic Development Authority is authorized to issue bonds, in an aggregate amount not exceeding $100,000,000, the proceeds from which shall be used to provide matching funds to assist in the financing of school district projects in accordance with the provisions of this section. The bonds so issued shall be secured by the repayment by school districts of loans made pursuant to this 1993 amendatory and supplementary act, or, in the case of default on any such loan repayment, by the school facilities financing bond reserve established pursuant to section 6 of this 1993 amendatory and supplementary act.  

   b.   The authority shall establish and maintain a special nonlapsing revolving fund to be known as the "Public Schools Small Projects Loan Assistance Fund," hereinafter the "small projects fund," which shall be credited with: (1) the proceeds of the sale of bonds pursuant to subsection a. of this section; (2) any moneys that shall be received by the authority from the repayment of loans made from the small projects fund and interest thereon; and (3) any other moneys which the authority determines to deposit therein.  

   c.   The authority shall use the monies in the small projects fund exclusively for: (1) matching funds to provide market rate loans to school districts to finance an amount up to the remaining balance of the cost of a project approved for funding from the compliance fund pursuant to section 4 of this 1993 amendatory and supplementary act or from the facilities fund pursuant to section 5 of this 1993 amendatory and supplementary act, whether or not the project is required to bring the buildings that, at the time of application do not meet State health and safety code requirements, into compliance with those requirements; provided that the total cost of the project, including moneys received from the compliance fund or the facilities fund, does not exceed $5,000,000; and (2) payment of any principal, interest, premium and expenses incurred in connection with the bonds issued pursuant to subsection a. of this section.  

   d.  (1) The authority shall establish the terms of the market rate loans which shall include, but not be limited to, the actual rate of interest, a schedule for drawing down loan funds, and the repayment schedule for the loans.  The repayments shall be treated by the school district as net debt service for school aid purposes. In addition to the amount of taxes determined by the legal voters of the district at the annual school election, the secretary of the board of education shall certify the amount required for the repayment of the interest and principal of the loan in the same manner required for interest and debt redemption charges pursuant to N.J.S.18A:22-33, and the amount so certified shall be included in the taxes assessed, levied and collected in the municipality or municipalities comprising the school district for such purposes.  

   (2)  All repayments, and interest thereon, shall be deposited by the authority in the small projects fund for use in the manner provided for in this section.  

   e.   Net earnings received from the investment or deposit of monies in the small projects fund by the authority shall be redeposited in the fund for use for the purposes of this section.  

   L.1993,c.102,s.7.  

34:1B-7.26.  Preliminary approval of loan application  
    8.   In the case of a school district that has applied for any loan pursuant to this 1993 amendatory and supplementary act, and that is required to seek authorization for the issuance of bonds, or for other borrowing, or for a project involving the issuance of bonds or other borrowing pursuant to the provisions of subsection (d) of N.J.S.18A:20-4.2, N.J.S.18A:24-5 et seq., or P.L.1991, c.139 (C.18A:7A-46.1 et seq.), as the case may be, or a waiver of any such requirement, as appropriate, the authority may grant preliminary approval of that application, provided that final approval of the application shall be conditioned upon the granting of the appropriate approval to the school district, or the waiver thereof, within a time period to be determined by the authority and stated, in writing, as part of the preliminary approval. No monies shall be disbursed for any project under this 1993 amendatory and supplementary act until final approval of the pertinent application is granted.  

   L.1993,c.102,s.8.  

34:1B-7.27.  Adoption of rules, taking administrative action  
    10.  The authority is hereby empowered and directed to adopt summarily any rule, and to take any administrative action whatsoever, necessary to effectuate the purposes of this 1993 amendatory and supplementary act without being subject to the provisions or requirements of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), except that any rules and regulations so adopted shall be filed with the Secretary of State and shall provide for the prompt publication of the rules and regulations after the filing of same.  

   L.1993,c.102,s.10.  

34:1B-7.28.  Short title  
    1.   This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Boat Industry Loan Guarantee Fund Act."  

   L.1993,c.358,s.1.  

34:1B-7.29.  Findings, declarations  
    2.   The Legislature finds and declares that the regional and national economic downturn which began in late 1989 continues to negatively affect the State, resulting in an alarming number of layoffs in all sectors of the economy; that during this period, one of the hardest hit sectors of the New Jersey economy has been its boat building industry, especially that portion of the industry involved in the construction and distribution of luxury boats; that the reason for this slide in the luxury boat building industry, in addition to the slumping regional economy, has been the drastic fiscal impact of the 10% federal excise tax on the sale of new boats costing over $100,000, imposed in January 1991; that this federal excise tax has further exacerbated these negative economic effects, resulting in a 75% reduction in new boat sales and a similar reduction in the boat building labor force; that while the repeal of the federal excise tax on luxury boats is expected to provide New Jersey's boat building industry with a necessary spark, the industry will still need additional financial assistance to fully recover, having been drained over the past three years of the liquidity necessary to meet payrolls and purchase materials needed to substantially increase production and respond to a three year pent-up demand; that it is in the public interest to establish a program administered by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority designed to provide loan guarantees to manufacturers, assemblers and distributors of luxury boats in New Jersey; and that such a program should be developed through the use of moneys made available for such purposes pursuant to the "Economic Recovery Fund Act," P.L.1992, c.16 (C.34:1B-7.10 et seq.), and any other moneys made available to the authority.  

   L.1993,c.358,s.2.  

34:1B-7.30.  Definitions  
    3.   As used in this act:

  

   "Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).  

   "Boat" means a vessel or watercraft, other than a personal watercraft or sea plane on the water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water, which may be temporarily or permanently equipped with machinery for propulsion.  

   "Boat manufacturer or distributor" means an independently owned and operated business which: (1) manufactures, assembles or distributes boats in this State the retail value of which is at least $100,000 each, or manufactures or provides marine products in this State for such boats and (2) prior to January 1, 1991, manufactured, assembled or distributed boats in this State the retail value of which was at least $100,000 each, or manufactured or provided marine products in this State for such boats.  

   "Cost" means the expenses incurred in connection with the operation of a boat manufacturer or distributor, which can be reasonably expected to be recovered through the financing of the operation, and which shall include, but need not be limited to, the costs of planning, fixed assets, materials, working capital, floor plan funding and any other costs determined by the authority to be necessary to carry out the purposes of this act.  

   "Fixed assets" means any real property, interests in real property, plant, equipment, and other assets commonly accepted as fixed assets.  

   "Marine products" means those parts and materials utilized in the design, construction and maintenance of boats, which shall include, but need not be limited to, parts and materials used in boat engines, generators, transmissions, exhaust systems and electrical, plumbing, heating and cooling systems, except that marine products shall not include any oil or oil-based products or materials.  

   "Participating bank" means a State- or federally-chartered bank, savings bank or savings and loan association, or a bank organized under the laws of a foreign government, deemed eligible by the authority for participation in the program.  

   "Program" means the "New Jersey Boat Industry Loan Guarantee Program" established by the authority pursuant to section 4 of this act.  

   "Working capital" means those liquid capital assets other than fixed assets.

  

   L.1993,c.358,s.3.  

34:1B-7.31.  "New Jersey Boat Industry Loan Guarantee Program" established
    4.   The New Jersey Economic Development Authority shall establish a "New Jersey Boat Industry Loan Guarantee Program" to provide loan guarantees for boat manufacturers or distributors in the State.  

   L.1993,c.358,s.4.  

34:1B-7.32.  "New Jersey Boat Industry Loan Guarantee Fund"  
    5. a.  To implement the program, the authority shall establish and maintain a special revolving fund to be known as the "New Jersey Boat Industry Loan Guarantee Fund," hereinafter the "guarantee fund," which shall be credited with: (1) an amount from the Economic Recovery Fund established pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1992, c.16 (C.34:1B-7.12) which the authority determines is necessary to effectively implement the program, within the limits of funding available from the Economic Recovery Fund; (2) any moneys that shall be received by the authority from the repayment of the moneys in the guarantee fund used to provide loan guarantees pursuant to this act and interest thereon; and (3) other moneys of the authority, including but not limited to, any moneys available from other business assistance programs administered by the authority which it is authorized and determines to deposit therein.  

   b.   The authority shall use the moneys in the guarantee fund to:  (1) enter, within six years of the effective date of this act, into loan guarantee agreements with participating banks and boat manufacturers or distributors qualified pursuant to subsection d. of this section, to guarantee up to 90 percent of the loans or lines of credit provided by participating banks, in accordance with section 7 of this act; and (2) defray the administrative expenses of the authority in carrying out the purposes and provisions of this act.  

   c.   Applications for loan guarantees under this act shall be submitted by boat manufacturers or distributors in a form and manner determined by the authority.  Upon application by a boat manufacturer or distributor for a loan guarantee pursuant to this section, the authority, in consultation with the Office of Labor Statistics in the Division of Planning and Research of the Department of Labor, shall determine whether the loan for which the application for a loan guarantee has been submitted is expected to result in a net increase in the number of jobs provided to New Jersey residents in the State, which may include the re-employment of personnel temporarily discharged by the boat manufacturer or distributor during the years 1990 through 1993, inclusive.  If it is determined by the authority that the loan is likely to meet this goal, the authority shall certify that the boat manufacturer or distributor is eligible to receive a loan guarantee pursuant to this section. 

   d.   In evaluating a loan guarantee application submitted by a boat manufacturer or distributor and certified as eligible by the authority pursuant to subsection c. of this section, the authority shall place primary emphasis on the applicant's record of profitability and financial stability prior to January 1, 1991, and on projections by the applicant, including the data and assumptions forming the basis thereof, of recovered profitability and financial stability over the term of the loan guarantee.  The portion of the direct loans or lines of credit provided by participating banks may be guaranteed by the authority pursuant to section 7 of this act only if an eligible boat manufacturer or distributor has been qualified therefor by demonstrating to the satisfaction of the authority that the eligible boat manufacturer or distributor has the ability, reputation and credit-worthiness necessary to reach a market and generate sales.  

   e.   No loan guarantee entered into pursuant to this section shall be for a period of more than five years.  Upon expiration of the period of all loan guarantees entered into pursuant to this act, all repayments, and interest thereon, and all moneys remaining in the guarantee fund shall be credited to and deposited in the "Economic Recovery Fund," established pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1992, c.16 (C.34:1B-7.12) for any of the purposes thereof.  

   f.   Moneys in the guarantee fund may be invested in such obligations as the authority may approve and, except as otherwise provided in subsection e. of this section, net earnings received from the investment or deposit of moneys in the guarantee fund by the authority shall be redeposited in the guarantee fund for use for the purposes of this act.  

   L.1993,c.358,s.5.
 
34:1B-7.33.  Establishment of reserves  
    6.   The authority shall establish sufficient reserves and liquid reserves to provide a sufficient and actuarially sound basis for its pledges contained in any loan guarantee agreement entered into pursuant to this act.  

   L.1993,c.358,s.6.  

34:1B-7.34.  Agreements  
    7.   The authority shall enter into agreements with participating banks and boat manufacturers or distributors qualified pursuant to subsection d. of section 5 of this act to use the moneys from the guarantee fund to guarantee direct loans or revolving lines of credit provided by participating banks to finance the costs of such qualified boat manufacturers or distributors.  The agreements shall provide that the loans or lines of credit for financing the costs of eligible boat manufacturers or distributors shall come from participating banks.  The agreements shall also provide for any other terms or conditions which the authority and the participating banks stipulate to as being necessary or desirable to make loans, establish and extend lines of credit, guarantee loans and otherwise effectuate the purpose of the program.  

   L.1993,c.358,s.7.  

34:1B-7.35.  Report to Governor, Legislature  
    8.   Within fifteen months following the effective date of this act, and on or before February 15 of each succeeding year in which a loan guarantee agreement entered into under this act is in effect, the authority shall prepare a report on the program.  The report may be issued separately, or in combination with the reports required by law on financial assistance to boat manufacturers or distributors in this State, and shall include, but need not be limited to, a description of the demand for the program from eligible and qualified boat manufacturers and distributors and participating banks, the efforts made by the authority to promote the program, the total amount of loan guarantees approved by the authority pursuant to the program and an assessment of the effectiveness of the program in meeting the goals of this act.  The authority shall submit its report to the Governor and the Legislature, including therein any recommendations for legislation to improve the effectiveness of the program.  

   L.1993,c.358,s.8.  

34:1B-7.36.  Rules, regulations  
    9.   The authority shall adopt, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), any rules and regulations necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act.  In developing procedures and forms to be used in connection with the application for and approval of loan guarantees pursuant to this act, the authority shall consider the special needs and problems of boat manufacturers and distributors in the State.  

   L.1993,c.358,s.9.  

34:1B-7.37.  Short title  
    1.   This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Emerging Technology and Biotechnology Financial Assistance Act."  

   L.1995,c.137,s.1.  

34:1B-7.38.  Findings, declarations  
    2.   The Legislature finds and declares that:

  

   a.   Biotechnology is an emerging technology that holds great promise for designing living organisms that can be used for the treatment of diseases, and improvements to plants and animals, and to otherwise provide for exceptional advances for the betterment of living things;  

   b.   The development and support of biotechnology is especially important in light of the long-established pharmaceutical industry in the State, the many related university research programs on biotechnology, and the sizable investment, to date, of State funds in academic "centers of excellence," and is also vital to the fulfillment of certain responsibilities of the New Jersey Commission on Science and Technology;  

   c.   In order for society to appreciate the anticipated potential rewards from emerging technology and biotechnology research, private industry must have access to sufficient financial resources to conduct research and transfer research discoveries into viable, commercial products;  

   d.   As an emerging technology, biotechnology, the biotechnology industry, and the industry's required concomitant facilities face significant obstacles in obtaining financial assistance because of the perceived risk of investing in such new ventures;  

   e.   Because of the substantial employment opportunities that could be created by successful emerging technology and biotechnology industries and the resulting importance of such industries to the State's economic base, the State can best stimulate and encourage private investment in emerging technology and biotechnology by directing the New Jersey Economic Development Authority to provide financial assistance to emerging technology and biotechnology companies located in the State;  

   f.   In considering how to best allocate its resources pursuant to this act, the authority should give due consideration to further supporting emerging technology or biotechnology joint ventures by providing economic development funds and assistance to help stimulate growth in disadvantaged urban areas of the State, where public-private partnerships have already been formed, or will be formed, to promote emerging technology and biotechnology research and product development initiatives.  

   L.1995,c.137,s.2.  

34:1B-7.39.  Definitions relative to emerging technology, biotechnology. 
    3.   As used in this act:

    "Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4);  

   "Biotechnology" means the continually expanding body of fundamental knowledge about the functioning of biological systems from the macro level to the molecular and sub-atomic levels, as well as novel products, services, technologies and sub-technologies developed as a result of insights gained from research advances which add to that body of fundamental knowledge;  

   "Biotechnology company" means a person, whose headquarters or base of operations is located in New Jersey,  engaged in the research, development, production, or provision of biotechnology for the purpose of developing or providing products or processes for specific commercial or public purposes, including but not limited to, medical, pharmaceutical, nutritional, and other health-related purposes, agricultural purposes, and environmental purposes, or a person, whose headquarters or base of operations is located in New Jersey, engaged in providing services or products necessary for such research, development, production, or provision;  

   "Cost" means the expenses incurred in connection with the operation of an emerging technology or biotechnology company in the State and shall include, but need not be limited to, the expenses of fixed assets, such as the construction, acquisition and development of real estate, materials, start-up, tenant fit-out, working capital, and any other expenses determined by the authority to be necessary to carry out the purposes of this act;  

   "Emerging technology company" means a person, whose headquarters or base of operations is located in New Jersey, and who employs some combination of the following: highly educated or trained managers and workers, or both, employed in New Jersey who use sophisticated scientific research service or production equipment, processes or knowledge to discover, develop, test, transfer or manufacture a product or service;  

   "Financial institution" means an individual or organization deemed eligible by the authority for participation in the program and shall include, but need not be limited to, State-chartered or federally-chartered banks, savings banks or savings and loan associations, banks organized under the laws of a foreign government, private individuals, insurance companies, landlords, finance companies and venture capitalists;  

   "Fixed assets" means any real property, interests in real property, plant, equipment, and any other assets commonly accepted as fixed assets;  

   "Program" means the "New Jersey Emerging Technology and Biotechnology Financial Assistance Program" established by the authority pursuant to section 4 of this act; and  

   "Working capital" means those liquid capital assets other than fixed assets.  

   L.1995,c.137,s.3.  

34:1B-7.40.  "New Jersey Emerging Technology and Biotechnology Financial Assistance Program" established  
    4.   The authority shall establish a "New Jersey Emerging Technology and Biotechnology Financial Assistance Program" to stimulate increased financing to help fund the costs incurred by new or expanding emerging technology and biotechnology companies in the State.  

   L.1995,c.137,s.4.  

34:1B-7.41.  "New Jersey Emerging Technology and Biotechnology Financial Assistance Fund"  
    5.  a.  To implement the program, the authority shall establish and maintain a special account to be known as the "New Jersey Emerging Technology and Biotechnology Financial Assistance Fund," hereinafter the "assistance fund," which shall be credited with: (1) an amount from the Economic Recovery Fund established pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1992, c.16 (C.34:1B-7.12) which the authority determines is necessary to effectively implement the program, within the limits of funding available from the Economic Recovery Fund; (2) any moneys that shall be received by the authority from the repayment of the moneys in the assistance fund used to provide financial assistance pursuant to this act and interest thereon; (3) other moneys of the authority, including but not limited to, any moneys available from other business assistance programs administered by the authority which it determines to deposit therein; and (4) any appropriation made by the Legislature to effectuate the purposes of this act.  

   b.   The authority shall use the moneys in the assistance fund to: (1) provide or participate in the provision of financial assistance to emerging technology or biotechnology companies deemed approved pursuant to section 6 of this act, which assistance may include, but need not be limited to, loan guarantees and assistance in establishing lines of credit, real estate development assistance, and technical advice on locating private and public sources of funding; and (2) defray the administrative expenses of the authority in carrying out the purposes and provisions of this act.  

   c.   The maximum amount and term of a loan, line of credit or other form of financial assistance made pursuant to this act shall be determined by the authority.  

   d.   Moneys in the assistance fund may be invested in such obligations as the authority may approve and net earnings received from the investment or deposit of moneys in the assistance fund by the authority shall be redeposited in the assistance fund for use for the purposes of this act.  

   e.   The authority shall establish sufficient reserves and liquid reserves to provide a sufficient and actuarially sound basis for its pledges contained in any financial assistance agreement entered into pursuant to this act.  

   f.   The authority is authorized to disburse moneys in the assistance fund for purposes unrelated to this act if, for a period of at least three years, no moneys are disbursed from the assistance fund for the purposes set forth pursuant to this act.  

   L.1995,c.137,s.5.  

34:1B-7.42  Applications for money from fund; criteria; agreements.
  
6.  a.  Applications for money from the assistance fund established under this act shall be submitted by emerging technology or biotechnology companies in a form and manner determined by the authority.  The authority shall approve or disapprove applications pursuant to the criteria developed pursuant to subsection c. of this section, and may employ any institution of higher education in this State in the approval process. 
 
b. 	The authority shall enter into written agreements with emerging technology or biotechnology companies approved for financial assistance pursuant to this act, and, as appropriate, with financial institutions concerning the type, amount and terms of the financial assistance provided.
 
c. 	The authority shall, in consultation with the Department of Commerce and Economic Development, the New Jersey Commission on Science and Technology and any institution of higher education in New Jersey, develop criteria for the approval or disapproval of applications submitted pursuant to subsection a. of this section.  Such criteria shall include, but need not be limited to, an evaluation of the emerging technology or biotechnology company's actual or potential scientific and technological viability, a determination that the emerging technology or biotechnology company's principal products or services are sufficiently innovative to provide a competitive advantage, a determination that the proposed financial assistance will result in significant growth in permanent, full-time employment in the State, a determination that the emerging technology or biotechnology company has been unable to secure financial assistance on affordable terms from conventional sources, a determination that the financial assistance provided pursuant to this act demonstrates the prospect of a high rate of return on investment, and the extent to which the applicant's proposed or expanded activities will enhance or diversify the State's capacity and competitiveness in the field of emerging technology or biotechnology. 
 
d. 	The Department of Commerce and Economic Development and the authority may promote economic development in disadvantaged urban areas of the State, where emerging technology or biotechnology joint ventures have been or will be established.
 
	L.1995, c.137, s.6.

34:1B-7.42a  Corporation business tax benefit certificate transfer program.
	1. a. The New Jersey Economic Development Authority shall establish within the New Jersey Emerging Technology and Biotechnology Financial Assistance Program established pursuant to P.L.1995, c.137 (C.34:1B-7.37 et seq.), a corporation business tax benefit certificate transfer program to allow new or expanding emerging technology and biotechnology companies in this State with unused amounts of research and development tax credits otherwise allowable which cannot be applied for the credit's tax year due to the limitations of subsection b. of section 1 of P.L.1993, c.175 (C.54:10A-5.24) and unused prior net operating loss conversion carryover or net operating loss carryover pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-4), to surrender those tax benefits for use by other corporation business taxpayers in this State, provided that the taxpayer receiving the surrendered tax benefits is not affiliated with a corporation that is surrendering its tax benefits under the program established under P.L.1997, c.334.  For the purposes of this section, the test of affiliation is whether the same entity directly or indirectly owns or controls five percent or more of the voting rights or five percent or more of the value of all classes of stock of both the taxpayer receiving the benefits and a corporation that is surrendering the benefits.  The tax benefits may be used on the corporation business tax returns to be filed by those taxpayers in exchange for private financial assistance to be provided by the corporation business taxpayer that is the recipient of the corporation business tax benefit certificate to assist in the funding of costs incurred by the new or expanding emerging technology and biotechnology company. For purposes of this subsection, a member of a combined group may sell prior net operating loss conversion carryover to other members of the combined group, if otherwise applicable and allowable under section 2 of P.L.1997, c.334 (C.54:10A-4.2) and this section, provided, however, such sale of prior net operating loss conversion carryover shall be made at arm's length price at the same rate as though the sale was to an unrelated taxpayer.
 
	b.	The authority, in cooperation with the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, shall review and approve applications by new or expanding emerging technology and biotechnology companies in this State with unused but otherwise allowable carryover of research and development tax credits pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1993, c.175 (C.54:10A-5.24), and unused but otherwise allowable prior net operating loss conversion carryover or net operating loss carryover pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-4), to surrender those tax benefits in exchange for private financial assistance to be made by the corporation business taxpayer that is the recipient of the corporation business tax benefit certificate in an amount equal to at least 80 percent of the amount of the surrendered tax benefit, provided that the amount of the surrendered tax benefit for a surrendered research and development tax credit carryover is the amount of the credit, and provided that the amount of the surrendered tax benefit for a surrendered prior net operating loss conversion carryover or net operating loss carryover is that amount for the tax year in which the benefit is transferred and subsequently multiplied by the corporation business tax rate provided pursuant to subsection (c) of section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5). The authority shall be authorized to approve the transfer of no more than $75,000,000 of tax benefits in a State fiscal year.  If the total amount of transferable tax benefits requested to be surrendered by approved applicants exceeds $75,000,000 for a State fiscal year, the authority, in cooperation with the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, shall not be authorized to approve the transfer of more than $75,000,000 for that State fiscal year and shall allocate the transfer of tax benefits by approved companies using the following method:
 
	(1)	an eligible applicant with $250,000 or less of transferable tax benefits shall be authorized to surrender the entire amount of its transferable tax benefits;
 
	(2)	an eligible applicant with more than $250,000 of transferable tax benefits shall be authorized to surrender a minimum of $250,000 of its transferable tax benefits;
 
	(3)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2009, c.90)
 
	(4)	an eligible applicant with more than $250,000 shall also be authorized to surrender additional transferable tax benefits determined by multiplying the applicant's transferable tax benefits less the minimum transferable tax benefits that company is authorized to surrender under paragraph (2) of this subsection by a fraction, the numerator of which is the total amount of transferable tax benefits that the authority is authorized to approve less the total amount of transferable tax benefits approved under paragraphs (1), (2), and (5) of this subsection and the denominator of which is the total amount of transferable tax benefits requested to be surrendered by all eligible applicants less the total amount of transferable tax benefits approved under paragraphs (1), (2), and (5) of this subsection;
 
	(5)	The authority shall establish the boundaries for three innovation zones to be geographically distributed in the northern, central, and southern portions of this State.  Of the $75,000,000 of transferable tax benefits authorized for each State fiscal year, $15,000,000 shall be allocated for the surrender of transferable tax benefits exclusively by new and expanding emerging technology and biotechnology companies that operate within the boundaries of the innovation zones or opportunity zones, or for new and expanding emerging technology and biotechnology companies that are certified as a woman- or minority-owned business at the time of program application, except that any portion of the $15,000,000 that is not so approved shall be available for that State fiscal year for the surrender of transferable tax benefits by new and expanding emerging technology and biotechnology companies that do not operate within the boundaries of an innovation zone or opportunity zone, or for a new and expanding emerging technology and biotechnology company that is certified as a woman- or minority-owned business at the time of program application.
 
	If the total amount of transferable tax benefits that would be authorized using the above method exceeds $75,000,000 for a State fiscal year, then the authority, in cooperation with the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, shall limit the total amount of tax benefits authorized to be transferred to $75,000,000 by applying the above method on an apportioned basis.
 
	For purposes of this section, transferable tax benefits include an eligible applicant's unused but otherwise allowable prior net operating loss conversion carryover or net operating loss carryover determined pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-4) for the tax year in which the benefit is transferred and subsequently multiplied by the corporation business tax rate as provided in subsection (c) of section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5) plus the total amount of the applicant's unused but otherwise allowable carryover of research and development tax credits.  An eligible applicant's transferable tax benefits shall be limited to net operating losses and research and development tax credits that the applicant requests to surrender in its application to the authority and shall not, in total, exceed the maximum amount of tax benefits that the applicant is eligible to surrender.
 
	No application for a corporation business tax benefit transfer certificate shall be approved in which the new or expanding emerging technology or biotechnology company (1) has demonstrated positive net operating income in any of the two previous full years of ongoing operations as determined on its financial statements issued according to generally accepted accounting standards endorsed by the Financial Accounting Standards Board; or (2) is directly or indirectly at least 50 percent owned or controlled by another corporation that has demonstrated positive net operating income in any of the two previous full years of ongoing operations as determined on its financial statements issued according to generally accepted accounting standards endorsed by the Financial Accounting Standards Board or is part of a consolidated group of affiliated corporations, as filed for federal income tax purposes, that in the aggregate has demonstrated positive net operating income in any of the two previous full years of ongoing operations as determined on its combined financial statements issued according to generally accepted accounting standards endorsed by the Financial Accounting Standards Board.
 
	For purposes of this subsection, a member of a combined group may sell prior net operating loss conversion carryover to other members of the combined group, if otherwise applicable and allowable under section 2 of P.L.1997, c.334 (C.54:10A-4.2) and this section, provided, however, such sale of prior net operating loss conversion carryover shall be made at arm's length price at the same rate as though the sale was to an unrelated taxpayer.
 
	The maximum lifetime value of surrendered tax benefits that a corporation shall be permitted to surrender pursuant to the program is $20,000,000.  Applications must be received on or before June 30 of each State fiscal year.
 
	The authority, in consultation with the Division of Taxation, shall establish rules for the recapture of all, or a portion of, the amount of a grant of a corporation business tax benefit certificate from the new or expanding emerging technology and biotechnology company having surrendered tax benefits pursuant to this section in the event the taxpayer fails to use the private financial assistance received for the surrender of tax benefits as required by this section or fails to maintain a headquarters or a base of operation in this State during the five years following receipt of the private financial assistance; except if the failure to maintain a headquarters or a base of operation in this State is due to the liquidation of the new or expanding emerging technology and biotechnology company.
 
	c.	The authority, in cooperation with the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, shall review and approve applications by taxpayers under the Corporation Business Tax Act (1945), P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-1 et seq.), to acquire surrendered tax benefits approved pursuant to subsection b. of this section which shall be issued in the form of corporation business tax benefit transfer certificates, in exchange for private financial assistance to be made by the taxpayer in an amount equal to at least 80 percent of the amount of the surrendered tax benefit of an emerging technology or biotechnology company in the State.  A corporation business tax benefit transfer certificate shall not be issued unless the applicant certifies that as of the date of the exchange of the corporation business tax benefit certificate it is operating as a new or expanding emerging technology or biotechnology company and has no current intention to cease operating as a new or expanding emerging technology or biotechnology company.
 
	The managerial member of a combined group shall be the member that acquires a corporation business tax benefit certificate on behalf of the combined group for use on the combined return.
 
	The private financial assistance shall assist in funding expenses incurred in connection with the operation of the new or expanding emerging technology or biotechnology company in the State, including, but not limited to, the expenses of fixed assets, such as the construction and acquisition and development of real estate, materials, start-up, tenant fit-out, working capital, salaries, research and development expenditures, and any other expenses determined by the authority to be necessary to carry out the purposes of the New Jersey Emerging Technology and Biotechnology Financial Assistance Program.
 
	The authority shall require a corporation business taxpayer that acquires a corporation business tax benefit certificate to enter into a written agreement with the new or expanding emerging technology or biotechnology company concerning the terms and conditions of the private financial assistance made in exchange for the certificate.  The written agreement may contain terms concerning the maintenance by the new or expanding emerging technology or biotechnology company of a headquarters or a base of operation in this State.
 
	d.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2009, c.90)
 
	e.	Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, if, in any fiscal year, the value of transferable tax benefits transferred pursuant to subsection b. of this section is less than the maximum value of tax benefits that may be transferred pursuant to subsection b. of this section, the authority, in consultation with the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, shall certify the amount of the excess value of transferable tax benefits.  The amount of the excess value of transferable tax benefits shall be added to the cumulative total amount of tax credits authorized pursuant to subsection e. of section 3 of P.L.1997, c.349 (C.54:10A-5.30) and subsection d. of section 4 of P.L.2013, c.14 (C.54A:4-13) for the immediately succeeding calendar year.
 
	L.1997, c.334, s.1; amended 1999, c.140, s.2; 2004, c.65, s.18; 2009, c.90, s.29; 2020, c.118, s.1; 2020, c.156, s.113; 2021, c.160, s.52; 2025, c.71, s.4.

34:1B-7.42b  Definitions relative to certain corporation tax benefit programs.
	1.	As used in P.L.1997, c.334 (C.34:1B-7.42a et al.):

	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Biotechnology" means the continually expanding body of fundamental knowledge about the functioning of biological systems from the macro level to the molecular and sub-atomic levels, as well as novel products, services, technologies and sub-technologies developed as a result of insights gained from research advances that add to that body of fundamental knowledge. This definition may be modified by regulation to conform to definitions in other programs administered by the authority.
 
	"Biotechnology company" means an emerging corporation that has its headquarters or base of operations in this State; that owns, has filed for, or has a valid license to use protected, proprietary intellectual property; and that is engaged in the research, development, production, or provision of biotechnology for the purpose of developing or providing products or processes for specific commercial or public purposes, including but not limited to, medical, pharmaceutical, nutritional, and other health-related purposes, agricultural purposes, and environmental purposes. This definition may be modified by regulation to conform to definitions in other programs administered by the authority.
 
	"Full-time employee" means a person employed by a new or expanding emerging technology or biotechnology company for consideration for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment and whose wages are subject to withholding as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq., or who is a partner of a new or expanding emerging technology or biotechnology company who works for the partnership for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment, and whose distributive share of income, gain, loss, or deduction, or whose guaranteed payments, or any combination thereof, is subject to the payment of estimated taxes, as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq. To qualify as a "full-time employee," an employee shall also receive from the new or expanding emerging technology or biotechnology company health benefits under a health benefits plan authorized pursuant to State or federal law. "Full-time employee" shall not include any person who works as an independent contractor or on a consulting basis for the new or expanding emerging technology or biotechnology company.
 
	"New or expanding" means a technology or biotechnology company that (1) on June 30 of the year in which the company files an application for surrender of unused but otherwise allowable tax benefits under P.L.1997, c.334 (C.34:1B-7.42a et al.) and on the date of the exchange of the corporation business tax benefit certificate, has fewer than 225 employees in the United States of America; (2) on June 30 of the year in which the company files such an application, has at least one full-time employee working in this State if the company has been incorporated for less than three years, has at least five full-time employees working in this State if the company has been incorporated for more than three years but less than five years, and has at least 10 full-time employees working in this State if the company has been incorporated for more than five years; and (3) on the date of the exchange of the corporation business tax benefit certificate, the company has the requisite number of full-time employees in New Jersey that were required on June 30 as set forth in part (2) of this definition.
 
	"Opportunity zone" means a federal population census tract in this State that was eligible to be designated as a qualified opportunity zone pursuant to 26 U.S.C. s.1400Z-1.
 
	"Technology company" means an emerging corporation that has its headquarters or base of operations in this State; that owns, has filed for, or has a valid license to use protected, proprietary intellectual property; and that employs some combination of the following: highly educated or trained managers and workers, or both, employed in this State who use sophisticated scientific research service or production equipment, processes or knowledge to discover, develop, test, transfer or manufacture a product or service. This definition may be modified by regulation to conform to definitions in other programs administered by the authority.
 
	L.1999, c.140, s.1; amended 2009, c.90, s.30; 2010, c.10, s.2; 2020, c.156, s.114; 2021, c.160, s.53.

34:1B-7.42c  Authorization to approve certain transfers of tax benefits.
 
	1.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection b. of section 1 of P.L.1997, c.334 (C.34:1B-7.42a) or the provisions of any other law, rule, or regulation to the contrary, the authority shall be authorized to approve the transfer of no more than $30,000,000 of tax benefits in State Fiscal Year 2011; provided however, that of the $30,000,000 of transferable tax benefits authorized for State Fiscal Year 2011, $5,000,000 shall be allocated by the authority for the surrender of transferable tax benefits exclusively by new or expanding emerging technology and biotechnology companies that operate within the boundaries of an innovation zone; provided further, that any portion of the $5,000,000 that is not so approved by the authority shall be available in State Fiscal Year 2011 for the surrender of transferable tax benefits by new or expanding emerging technology and biotechnology companies that do not operate within the boundaries of an innovation zone. 
 
	L.2010, c.20, s.1.

34:1B-7.43.  Report  
    7.   Not later than one year following the effective date of this act, and for each succeeding year in which a financial assistance agreement entered into under this act is in effect, the authority shall prepare a report on the program.  The report shall include, but need not be limited to, a description of the demand for the program from emerging technology and biotechnology companies and financial institutions, the efforts made by the authority to promote the program, the total amount of financial assistance approved by the authority pursuant to the program and an assessment of the effectiveness of the program in meeting the goals of this act.  The authority shall submit its report to the Governor and the Legislature, including therein any recommendations for legislation to improve the effectiveness of the program.  

   L.1995,c.137,s.7.  

34:1B-7.44.  Rules, regulations.
	8. a. The authority shall adopt, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), any rules and regulations necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act.  In developing procedures and forms to be used in connection with the application for and approval of financial assistance pursuant to this act, the authority shall consider the special needs and problems of emerging technology and biotechnology companies in the State.
 
	b.	Notwithstanding the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) to the contrary, the Chief Executive Officer of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority may adopt, immediately upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, rules and regulations that the chief executive officer deems necessary to implement the provisions of P.L.2025, c.71, which regulations shall be effective for a period not to exceed 365 days from the date of the filing.  The chief executive officer shall thereafter amend, adopt, or readopt the regulations in accordance with the requirements of P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).

   L.1995,c.137,s.8; amended 2025, c.71, s.5.

34:1B-7.45.  Short title

	1.  This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Pension Bond Financing Act of 1997."

	L.1997,c.114,s.1.

34:1B-7.46.  Findings, declarations relative to issuance of bonds, notes, other obligations to fund accrued pension liability

	2.  The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.  The State currently makes contributions on an annual basis to fund the State's obligations under its various pension funds and retirement systems, consisting, in part, of the "unfunded accrued liability contribution" representing pension benefits earned in prior years which, pursuant to standard actuarial practices, are not yet fully funded.

	b.  The State's current unfunded accrued liability is approximately $3.2 billion for the following State pension funds and retirement systems:  the Teachers' Pension and Annuity Fund; the Public Employees' Retirement System - State portion only; the Police and Firemen's Retirement System - State portion only; the State Police Retirement System; the Judicial Retirement System; the Prison Officers' Pension Fund; and the Consolidated Police and Firemen's Pension Fund; and the primary reason for this unfunded accrued liability is the required inclusion of funding for pension adjustment or cost-of-living-adjustment benefits within these funds or systems.

	c.  It is in the public interest to fund this unfunded accrued liability, in full or in part, through the issuance of bonds, notes or other obligations by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority which shall be retired through annual payments to be made by the State, subject to appropriation by the State Legislature.

	d.  By issuing bonds, notes or other obligations to fund, in full or in part, this unfunded accrued liability, the State will achieve significant savings and will eliminate the need for pension contributions on an annual basis to fund this unfunded accrued liability.

	e.  It is intended that the proceeds from sale or sales of bonds, notes or other obligations for the purposes of funding the unfunded accrued pension liability shall not be less than approximately $2.7 billion; provided, however, that notwithstanding the foregoing, any series of bonds, notes or other obligations issued under this act, whether or not yielding proceeds of $2.7 billion or less, shall be authorized and valid if issued in accordance with section 4 of this act.

	f.  It is anticipated that the bonds, notes or other obligations to be issued will be amortized over a shorter period of time than the actuarial amortization of the unfunded liability; and the difference between the payment of principal and interest on the bonds, notes or other obligations and the estimated contributions by the State under the actuarial amortization will provide significant savings to the State.

	L.1997,c.114,s.2.

34:1B-7.47.  Definitions relative to issuance of bonds, notes, other obligations to fund accrued pension liability

	3.  As used in this act:

	a.  "Bonds" means bonds, notes or other obligations issued by the authority pursuant to this act.

	b.  "New Jersey Economic Development Authority" or "authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority created pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).

	c.  "Refunding bonds" means bonds, notes or other obligations issued to refinance bonds, notes or other obligations previously issued by the authority pursuant to section 4 of this act.

	d.  "Unfunded accrued pension liability" means the unfunded accrued liability of the State under: the Teachers' Pension and Annuity Fund, determined as of March 31, 1996 under N.J.S.18A:66-18; the Judicial Retirement System, determined as of June 30, 1996 under section 33 of  P.L.1973, c.140 (C.43:6A-33); the Prison Officers' Pension Fund, determined as of June 30, 1996 under P.L.1941, c.220 (C.42:7-7 et seq.); the Public Employees' Retirement System, determined as of March 31, 1996 under section 24 of P.L.1954, c.84 (C.43:15A-24); the Consolidated Police and Firemen's Pension Fund, determined as of June 30, 1996 under R.S.43:16-5; the Police and Firemen's Retirement System, determined as of June 30, 1995 under section 15 of P.L.1944, c.255 (C.43:16A-15); and the State Police Retirement System, determined as of June 30, 1996 under section 34 of P.L.1965, c.89 (C.53:5A-34), and certified by the State Treasurer and reported to the authority pursuant to section 4 of this act.

	L.1997,c.114,s.3.

34:1B-7.48.  Powers of authority concerning bonds

	4.  Notwithstanding the provisions of any law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary:

	a.  The authority shall have the power, pursuant to the provisions of this act and P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), to issue bonds and refunding bonds, incur indebtedness and borrow money secured, in whole or in part, by moneys received pursuant to sections 5 and 6 of this act, for the purpose of providing funds for the payment, in full or in part, of the unfunded accrued pension liability, as such unfunded accrued pension liability is certified by the State Treasurer and reported to the authority, and any costs related to the issuance thereof.  The authority may establish reserve or other funds to further secure bonds and refunding bonds.  The bonds shall be in the amount to yield proceeds of $2.75 billion to fund, all or in part, the unfunded accrued pension liability, plus additional bonds to pay for the costs of issuance.

	b.  The authority may, in any resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds or refunding bonds, pledge the contract with the State Treasurer, provided for in section 6 of this act, or any part thereof, for the payment or redemption of the bonds or refunding bonds, and covenant as to the use and disposition of money available to the authority for payments of bonds and refunding bonds.  All costs associated with the issuance of bonds and refunding bonds by the authority for the purposes set forth in this act may be paid by the authority from amounts it receives from the proceeds of the bonds or refunding bonds and from amounts it receives pursuant to sections 5 and 6 of this act, which costs may include, but are not limited to, any costs relating to the issuance of the bonds or refunding bonds, administrative costs of the authority attributable to the payment of the unfunded accrued pension liability, and costs attributable to the agreements described in subsection c. of this section.  The bonds or refunding bonds shall be authorized by resolution, which shall stipulate the manner of execution and form of the bonds, whether the bonds are in one or more series, the date or dates of issue, time or times of maturity, which shall not exceed 38 years, the rate or rates of interest payable on the bonds, which may be at fixed rates or variable rates, and which interest may be current interest or may accrue, the denomination or denominations in which the bonds are issued, conversion or registration privileges, the sources and medium of payment and place or places of payment, terms of redemption, privileges of exchangeability or interchangeability, and entitlement to priorities of payment or security in the amounts to be received by the authority pursuant to sections 5 and 6 of this act.  The bonds may be sold at a public or private sale at a price or prices determined by the authority.  The authority is authorized to enter into any agreements necessary or desirable to effectuate the purposes of this section, including agreements to sell bonds or refunding bonds to any person and to comply with the laws of any jurisdiction relating thereto.

	c.  In connection with any bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to this act, the authority may also enter into any revolving credit agreement, agreement establishing a line of credit or letter of credit, reimbursement agreement, interest rate exchange agreement, currency exchange agreement, interest rate floor or cap, options, puts or calls to hedge payment, currency, rate, spread or similar exposure, or similar agreements, float agreements, forward agreements, insurance contract, surety bond, commitment to purchase or sell bonds, purchase or sale agreement, or commitments or other contracts or agreements and other security agreements approved by the authority.

	d.  No resolution adopted by the authority authorizing the issuance of bonds or refunding bonds pursuant to this act shall be adopted or otherwise made effective without the approval in writing of the State Treasurer.  Except as provided by subsection i. of section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4), bonds or refunding bonds may be issued without obtaining the consent of any department, division, commission, board, bureau or agency of the State, other than the approval as required by this subsection, and without any other proceedings or the occurrence of any other conditions or other things other than those proceedings, conditions or things which are specifically required by this act.

	e.  Bonds and refunding bonds issued by the authority pursuant to this act shall be special and limited obligations of the authority payable from, and secured by, such funds and moneys determined by the authority in accordance with this section.  Neither the members of the authority nor any other person executing the bonds or refunding bonds shall be personally liable with respect to payment of interest and principal on these bonds  or refunding bonds.  Bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to the provisions of this act shall not be a debt or liability of the State or any agency or instrumentality thereof, except as otherwise provided by this subsection, either legal, moral or otherwise, and nothing contained in this act shall be construed to authorize the authority to incur any indebtedness on behalf of or in any way to obligate the State or any political subdivision thereof, and all bonds and refunding bonds issued by the authority shall contain a statement to that effect on their face.

	f.  The authority is authorized to engage, subject to the approval of the State Treasurer and in such manner as the State Treasurer shall determine, the services of financial advisors and experts, placement agents, underwriters, appraisers, and such other advisors, consultants and agents as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act.

	g.  The proceeds from the sale of the bonds, other than refunding bonds, issued pursuant to this act, after payment of any costs related to the issuance of such bonds, shall be paid by the authority to the Teachers' Pension and Annuity Fund, the Judicial Retirement System, the Prison Officers' Pension Fund, the Public Employees' Retirement System, the Consolidated Police and Firemen's Pension Fund, the Police and Firemen's Retirement System, and the State Police Retirement System to be applied to the payment, in full or in part, of  the unfunded accrued pension liability of the State under these funds and systems as directed by the State Treasurer, or in such other manner as the State Treasurer and the authority may determine.

	h.  All bonds or refunding bonds issued by the authority are deemed to be issued by a body corporate and politic of the State for an essential governmental purpose, and the interest thereon and the income derived from all funds, revenues, incomes and other moneys received for or to be received by the authority and pledged and available to pay or secure the payment on bonds or refunding bonds and the interest thereon, shall be exempt from all taxes levied pursuant to the provisions of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes or Title 54A of the New Jersey Statutes, except for transfer, inheritance and estate taxes levied pursuant to Subtitle 5 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes.

	i.  The State hereby pledges and covenants with the holders of any bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to the provisions of this act, that it will not limit or alter the rights or powers vested in the authority by this act, nor limit or alter the rights or powers of the State Treasurer in any manner which would jeopardize the interest of the holders or any trustee of such holders, or inhibit or prevent performance or fulfillment by the authority or the State Treasurer with respect to the terms of any agreement made with the holders of these bonds or refunding bonds or agreements made pursuant to subsection c. of section 4 of this act except that the failure of the Legislature to appropriate moneys for any purpose of this act shall not be deemed a violation of this section.

	j.  Notwithstanding any restriction contained in any other law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary, the State and all political subdivisions of this State, their officers, boards, commissioners, departments or other agencies, all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks and institutions, building and loan associations, saving and loan associations, investment companies and other persons carrying on a banking or investment business, and all executors, administrators, guardians, trustees and other fiduciaries, and all other persons whatsoever who now are or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of the State, may properly and legally invest any sinking funds, moneys or other funds, including capital, belonging to them or within their control, in any bonds or refunding bonds issued by the authority under the provisions of this act; and said bonds and refunding bonds are hereby made securities which may properly and legally be deposited with, and received by any State or municipal officers or agency of the State, for any purpose for which the deposit of bonds or other obligations of the State is now, or may hereafter be, authorized by law.

	L.1997,c.114,s.4.

34:1B-7.49.  Payments of debt service to authority; schedule
	5. a. The State Treasurer shall, in each State fiscal year, pay from the General Fund to the authority, in accordance with a contract or contracts between the State Treasurer and the authority, authorized pursuant to section 6 of this act, an amount equivalent to the amount due to be paid in such State fiscal year to pay the debt service incurred for such State fiscal year on the bonds or refunding bonds of the authority issued pursuant to this act and any additional costs authorized by section 4 of this act.

	b. In addition to such terms and conditions as are agreed upon pursuant to section 6 of this act, the contract or contracts shall provide that all such payments from the General Fund shall be subject to, and dependent upon, appropriations being made from time to time by the Legislature for such purposes and shall further provide for a payment schedule and requirements as follows:

	(1)  For State fiscal year 1998, an amount not less than the amount that would be required to be applied in that State fiscal year to the amortization schedule of the unfunded accrued pension liability, as that liability is defined in subsection d. of section 3 of this act and actuarially determined as of the dates specified therein (hereinafter "unfunded accrued pension liability payment");

	(2)  For each of the State fiscal years from 1999 through 2004, inclusive, an amount not less than the sum of the respective unfunded accrued pension liability payment plus $25 million;

	(3)  For each of the State fiscal years from 2005 through 2020, inclusive, an amount not less than the respective unfunded accrued pension liability payment; 

	(4)  For each of the State fiscal years from 2021 through 2035, or such State fiscal year after 2021 and prior to 2035 in which the last of the bonds issued under this act are retired, as appropriate, an amount not less than the unfunded accrued pension liability payment for State fiscal year 2020 and not more than the unfunded accrued pension liability payment for State fiscal year 2021;

	(5)  No payments under the contract or contracts shall be required for bonds that are defeased or bonds for which a deposit sufficient to provide for all payments on the bonds has been made; and

	(6)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, under all payment provisions set forth in this section, annual amounts to be paid shall be sufficient to pay the debt service on the bonds and any refunding bonds, and any additional costs authorized by section 4 of this act for the appropriate years.

	L.1997,c.114,s.5.

34:1B-7.50.  State, authority contracts authorized; terms, conditions
	6.  The State Treasurer and the authority are authorized to enter into one or more contracts to implement the payment arrangement that is provided for in section 5 of this act.  The contract or contracts shall provide for payment by the State Treasurer of the amounts required to be paid pursuant to section 5 of this act and shall set forth the procedure for the transfer of moneys for the purpose of paying such moneys.  The contract or contracts shall contain such terms and conditions as are determined by the parties, and shall include, but not be limited to, terms and conditions necessary and desirable to secure any bonds or refunding bonds of the authority issued pursuant to this act; provided, however, that notwithstanding any other provision of any law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary, the authority shall be paid only such funds as shall be determined by the contract or contracts and further provided that the incurrence of any obligation of the State under the contract or contracts, including any payments to be made thereunder from the General Fund, shall be subject to and dependent upon appropriations being made from time to time by the Legislature for the purposes of this act.

	L.1997,c.114,s.6.

34:1B-7.51.  Annual report, contents

	7.  The State Treasurer shall, on or before April 1 of each year, issue a report on the financing provided for in this act to the Governor, the Senate President, the Speaker of the General Assembly, and the chairs of the Senate Budget and Appropriations Committee and the Assembly Appropriations Committee or the respective successor committees.  The report shall include, but not be limited to:  the outstanding debt and the payments provided for in section 5 of this act for the current State fiscal year; the cumulative amount of debt incurred, debt retired and payments and, as appropriate, debt outstanding from prior State fiscal years for which bonds or refunding bonds have been issued pursuant to this act; and estimates of same for the remainder of time in which any debt incurred pursuant to this act is outstanding.

	L.1997,c.114,s.7.

34:1B-7.52.  Supersedure by act

	8.  It is the intent of the Legislature that in the event of any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this act and any other law pertaining to the purposes of this act, to the extent of the conflict or inconsistency, the provisions of this act shall be enforced and the provisions of the other law shall be of no effect.

	L.1997,c.114,s.8.

34:1B-7.53.  Severability of act

	9.  If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this act shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which the judgment shall have been rendered.

	L.1997,c.114,s.9.

34:1B-8.  Public utility facilities;  definition;  powers
    The authority shall also have power to make reasonable regulations for the installation, construction, maintenance, repair, renewal, relocation, and removal of tracks, pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, towers, poles and other equipment and appliances herein called  "public utility facilities"  of any public utility, as defined in R.S. 48:2-13, in, on, along, over or under any project.

    Whenever the authority shall determine that it is necessary that any such public utility facilities which now are, or hereafter may be, located in, on, along, over or under any project, should be relocated, or should be removed from such project, the public utility owning or operating such facilities shall  relocate or remove the same in accordance with the order of the authority;   provided, however, that the cost and expenses of such relocation or removal,  including the cost of installing such facilities in a new location or new  locations, and the cost of any lands, or any rights or interests in lands, and  any other rights acquired to accomplish such relocation or removal, less the  cost of any lands or any rights of the public utility paid to the public  utility in connection with the relocation or removal of such property, shall be  ascertained and paid by the authority as a part of the cost of such project.   In case of any such relocation or removal of facilities, as aforesaid, the  public utility owning or operating the same, its successors or assigns, may  maintain and operate such facilities, with the necessary appurtenances, in the  new location or new locations, for as long a period, and upon the same terms  and conditions, as it had the right to maintain and operate such facilities in  their former location or locations.

     L.1974, c. 80, s. 8, eff. Aug. 7, 1974.

34:1B-9  Power to authorize issuance of bonds.

	9.	For the purpose of providing funds (a) to pay all or any part of the cost of any project or projects, (b) to make loans in accordance with the provisions of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), and (c) for the funding or refunding any bonds pursuant to P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.) or section 6 of P.L.2001, c.401 (C.34:1B-4.1), the authority shall have power to authorize or provide for the issuance of bonds pursuant to P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.).

	L.1974,c.80,s.9; amended 2001, c.401, s.4.

34:1B-10  Powers of authority by resolution.

	10.	By resolution, the authority shall have power to incur indebtedness, borrow money and issue its bonds for the purposes stated in section 9 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-9).  Except as may otherwise be expressly provided by the authority, or by the provisions of section 6 of P.L.2001, c.401 (C.34:1B-4.1), every issue of its bonds shall be general obligations of the authority payable from any revenues or moneys of the authority, subject only to any agreements with the holders of particular bonds or notes pledging any particular revenues or moneys.  Such bonds shall be authorized by resolution and may be issued in one or more series and shall bear such date or dates, mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from the date thereof, bear interest at a rate or rates, be in such denomination or denominations, be in such form, either coupon or registered, carry such conversion or registration privileges, have such rank or priority, be executed in such manner, be payable from such sources in such medium of payment at such place or places within or without the State, and be subject to such terms of redemption (with or without premium) as such resolution may provide.  Bonds of the authority may be sold by the authority at public or private sale at such price or prices as the authority shall determine.

	L.1974,c.80,s.10; amended 2001, c.401, s.5.

34:1B-11.  Bonds;  negotiability
    Any provision of any law to the contrary notwithstanding, any bond or other  obligation issued pursuant to this act shall be fully negotiable within the  meaning and for all purposes of Title 12A, Commercial Transactions, of the New  Jersey Statutes, and each holder or owner of such a bond or other obligation,  or of any coupon appurtenant thereto, by accepting such bond or coupon shall be  conclusively deemed to have agreed that such bond, obligation or coupon is and  shall be fully negotiable within the meaning and for all purposes of said Title  12A.

     L.1974, c. 80, s. 11, eff. Aug. 7, 1974.

34:1B-12.  Covenants with bondholders
    In order to secure the payment of such bonds and in addition to its other powers, the authority shall have power by resolution to covenant and agree with  the several holders of such bonds, as to:

    a.  The custody, security, use, expenditure or application of the proceeds of the bonds;

    b.  The use, regulation, operation, maintenance, insurance or disposition of  all or any part of any project or projects;

    c.  Payment of the principal of or interest on the bonds, or any other obligations, and the sources and methods thereof, the rank or priority of any such bonds or obligations as to any lien or security, or the acceleration of the maturity of any such bonds or obligations;

    d.  The use and disposition of any moneys of the authority, including all revenues or other moneys derived or to be derived from any project or projects;

    e.  Pledging, setting aside, depositing or trusteeing all or any part of the  revenues or other moneys of the authority to secure the payment of the principal of or interest on the bonds or any other obligations and the powers and duties of any trustee with regard thereto;

    f.  The setting aside out of the revenues or other moneys of the authority of reserves and sinking funds, and the source, custody, security, regulation, application and disposition thereof;

    g.  The rents, fees or other charges for the use of any project or projects,  including any parts thereof theretofore constructed or acquired and any parts,  replacements or improvements thereof thereafter constructed or acquired, and  the fixing, establishment, collection and enforcement of the same;

    h.  Limitation on the issuance of additional bonds or any other obligations  or on the incurrence of indebtedness of the authority;

    i.  Vesting in a trustee or trustees, fiscal or escrow agent or agents within or without the State such property, rights, powers and duties in trust as the authority may determine and limiting the rights, duties and powers of such trustee or agent;

    j.  Payment of costs or expenses incident to the enforcement of the bonds or  of the provisions of the resolution or of any covenant or contract with the  holders of the bonds;

    k.  The procedure, if any, by which the terms of any covenant or contract with, or duty to, the holders of bonds may be amended or abrogated, the amount of bonds the holders of which must consent thereto, and the manner in which such consent may be given or evidenced;  or

      l.    Any other matter or course of conduct which, by recital in the resolution, is declared to further secure the payment of the principal of or interest on the bonds.

    All such provisions of the resolution and all such covenants and agreements  shall constitute valid and legally-binding contracts between the authority and  the several holders of the bonds, regardless of the time of issuance of such  bonds, and shall be enforceable by any such holder or holders by appropriate  action, suit or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction, or by  proceeding in lieu of prerogative writ.

     L.1974, c. 80, s. 12, eff. Aug. 7, 1974.  Amended by L.1975, c. 253, s. 4, eff. Nov. 25, 1975.

34:1B-13.  Pledge of revenues;  lien
    Any pledge of revenues or other moneys made by the authority shall be valid  and binding from the time when the pledge is made;  the revenues or other  moneys so pledged and thereafter received by the authority shall immediately be  subject to the lien of such pledge without any physical delivery thereof or  further act, and the lien of any such pledge shall be valid and binding as  against all parties having claims of any kind in tort, contract or otherwise  against the authority irrespective of whether such parties have notice thereof.   Neither the resolution nor any other instrument by which a pledge is created  need be filed or recorded except in the records of the authority.

     L.1974, c. 80, s. 13, eff. Aug. 7, 1974.

34:1B-14.  Nonliability of members of authority, or of state or political subdivision
    Neither the members of the authority nor any person executing bonds issued pursuant to this act shall be liable personally on the bonds by reason of the issuance thereof.  Bonds or other obligations issued by the authority pursuant to this act shall not be in any way a debt or liability of the State or of any political subdivision thereof and shall not create or constitute any indebtedness, liability or obligation of the State or of any political subdivision, either legal, moral or otherwise, and nothing in this act contained shall be construed to authorize the authority to incur any indebtedness on behalf of or in any way to obligate the State or any political subdivision, and all such bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement to that effect.

     L.1974, c. 80, s. 14, eff. Aug. 7, 1974.

34:1B-15  Powers constitute essential governmental function; tax exempt status.
  
	15.	The exercise of the powers granted by this act, P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.), and P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.) shall constitute the performance of an essential governmental function and the authority shall not be required to pay any taxes or assessments upon or in respect of a project or school facilities project, or any property or moneys of the authority, and the authority, its projects and school facilities projects, property and moneys and any bonds and notes issued under the provisions of this act, P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.), and P.L.2007, c.137 (C.52:18A-235 et al.), their transfer and the income therefrom, including any profit made on the sale thereof, shall at all times be free from taxation of every kind by the State except for transfer, inheritance and estate taxes and by any political subdivision of the State; provided, that any person occupying a project whether as lessee, vendee or otherwise shall, as long as title thereto shall remain in the authority, pay to the political subdivision in which such project is located a payment in lieu of taxes which shall equal the taxes on real and personal property, including water and sewer service charges or assessments, which such person would have been required to pay had it been the owner of such property during the period for which such payment is made and neither the authority nor its projects, properties, money or bonds and notes shall be obligated, liable or subject to lien of any kind for the enforcement, collection or payment thereof. If and to the extent the proceedings under which the bonds authorized to be issued under the provisions of this act so provide, the authority may agree to cooperate with such person occupying a project, in connection with any administrative or judicial proceedings for determining the validity or amount of such payments and may agree to appoint or designate and reserve the right in and for such person to take all action which the authority may lawfully take in respect of such payments and all matters relating thereto, provided such person shall bear and pay all costs and expenses of the authority thereby incurred at the request of such person or by reason of any such action taken by such person in behalf of the authority.  If such person occupying a project has paid the amounts in lieu of taxes required by this section to be paid such person shall not be required to pay any such taxes as to which a payment in lieu thereof has been made to the State or to any political subdivision, any other statute to the contrary notwithstanding.
 
	L.1974, c.80, s.15; amended 2000, c.72, s.49; 2007, c.137, s.58.

34:1B-15.1.  Contiguous municipalities with project;  agreements to share revenues;  reciprocal ordinances
    The governing bodies of any two contiguous municipalities within which is located or is to be located a New Jersey Economic Development Authority project  situated in part within each municipality, may by reciprocal ordinances enter  into agreements with each other to share all tax revenues, payments in lieu of  taxes or other revenues as shall be derived from the entire project, and to  which they are by law entitled, in such proportion as they deem proper.

     L.1977, c. 463, s. 1, eff. March 2, 1978.

34:1B-15.2.  Agreement;  apportionment of costs of services and services to  be supplied
    Any agreement entered into pursuant to section 1 of this act for the sharing  of payments and revenues derived from a project shall also set forth the manner  in which the costs of municipal services to such project are to be apportioned  and specify the services to be supplied by each municipality in sufficient  detail so as to permit the owners, occupants and users of property within the  project to determine the responsibilities of each participating municipality.

     L.1977, c. 463, s. 2, eff. March 2, 1978.

34:1B-16.  Legal investments
    Notwithstanding any restriction contained in any other law, the State and all political subdivisions of this State, their officers, boards, commissioners, departments or other agencies, all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks and institutions, building and loan associations, savings and loan associations, investment companies and other persons carrying on a banking or investment business, all insurance companies, insurance associations and other persons carrying on an insurance business, and all executors, administrators, guardians, trustees and other fiduciaries, and all other persons whatsoever who now are or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of the State, may properly and legally invest any  sinking funds, moneys or other funds, including capital, belonging to them or  within their control in any bonds or notes issued by the authority under the  provisions of this act;  and said bonds and notes are hereby made securities  which may properly and legally be deposited with and received by any State or  municipal officers or agency of the State for any purpose for which the deposit  of bonds or other obligations of the State is now or may hereafter be  authorized by law.

     L.1974, c. 80, s. 16, eff. Aug. 7, 1974.

34:1B-17.  Sureties or collateral for deposits of authority
    All banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks, investment companies and  other persons carrying on a banking business are hereby authorized to give to  the authority a good and sufficient undertaking with such sureties as shall be  approved by the authority to the effect that such bank or banking institution  as hereinbefore described shall faithfully keep and pay over to the order of or  upon the warrant of the authority or its authorized agent all such funds as may  be deposited with it by the authority and agreed interest thereon, at such  times or upon such demands as may be agreed with the authority or in lieu of  such sureties, deposit with the authority or its authorized agent or any  trustee therefor or for the holders of any bonds, as collateral, such  securities as the authority may approve.  The deposits of the authority may be  evidenced by a depository collateral agreement in such form and upon such terms  and conditions as may be agreed upon by the authority and such bank or banking  institution.

     L.1974, c. 80, s. 17, eff. Aug. 7, 1974.

34:1B-18.  Inapplicability of other laws
    The foregoing sections of this act shall be deemed to provide a complete method for the doing of things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as not in conflict with, or as restrictive of, powers conferred by any other laws, and  the provisions of this act shall be complete authority for the issuance of  bonds by the authority and the provisions of any other laws shall not apply to  the issuance of such bonds.

     L.1974, c. 80, s. 18, eff. Aug. 7, 1974.

34:1B-19.  Severability
    If any section, part, phrase, or provision of this act of the application thereof to any person, project or circumstances, be adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the section, part, phrase, provision or application directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and  shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of this act or the  application thereof to other persons, projects or circumstances.

     L.1974, c. 80, s. 19, eff. Aug. 7, 1974.

34:1B-20.  Counties;  contracts with authority;  resolution;  powers for financial aid
    a.  Any county, by resolution of its governing body, shall have power to enter into contracts with the authority relating to any project or projects situated within the county;  provided, however, that any such resolution shall be introduced in writing at a meeting of the governing body and shall be passed  upon first reading which may be by title, and thereafter, the resolution shall  be published with notice of the introduction thereof and of the date, time and  place of further consideration for final passage, and on the date and at the  time and place so advertised, all persons interested shall be given the  opportunity to be heard and after such hearing, the governing body may proceed  to reject or finally adopt the resolution by the recorded affirmative votes of  at least two-thirds of the full membership of the governing body;  and  provided, further, that such resolution shall contain findings and  determinations of the governing body (1) that the project will maintain  employment opportunities in such county or provide new employment opportunities  in such county and (2) that the contract with the authority is a necessary  inducement to the undertaking of such project in that it makes the financing  thereof feasible.  Such contract or contracts may provide for the payment to  the authority by such county annually or otherwise of such sum or sums of  money, computed at fixed amounts or by any formula, or in any other manner as  may be fixed in or pursuant thereto.  Any such contract may be made and entered  into for a term beginning currently or at some future or contingent date and  with or without consideration and for a specified or unlimited time and on any terms and conditions which may be approved by such county and which may be agreed to by the authority in conformity with its contracts with the holders of  any bonds, and shall be valid and binding on such county whether or not an  appropriation is made thereby prior to authorization or execution of such  contract.  Every such county is hereby authorized and directed to do and  perform any and all acts and things necessary, convenient or desirable to carry  out and perform any such contract entered into by it and to provide for the  payment or discharge of any obligation thereunder in the same manner as other  obligations of such county.

    b.  For the purpose of aiding the authority and cooperating in the planning,  designing, acquiring, constructing, reconstructing, improving, equipping and  furnishing of any project situate in any county, any such county, by ordinance  of its governing body, shall have power from time to time and for such period  and upon such terms, with or without consideration, as may be provided by such  ordinance and accepted by the authority (1) to appropriate moneys for the  purposes of the authority with respect to such project, and to loan or donate  such money to the authority in such installments and upon such terms as may be  agreed upon with the authority, (2) upon authorization by it in accordance with  law of the performance of any act or thing which it is empowered by law to  authorize or perform and after appropriation of the moneys, if any, necessary  for such performance, to covenant and agree with the authority to do and perform such act or thing and as to the time, manner and other details of its  doing and performance, and (3) to appropriate money for all or any part of the  cost of the acquisition or construction of such project, and, in accordance  with the limitations and exceptions thereto and in the manner or mode of  procedure prescribed by the local bond law to incur indebtedness, borrow money  and issue its negotiable bonds for the purpose of such project and  appropriation, and to pay the proceeds of such bonds to the authority.

    c.  Any contract, and any instrument making or evidencing the same, may be pledged or assigned by the authority, with the consent of the county executing such contract, to secure its bonds and thereafter may not be modified except as  provided by the terms of such instrument or by the terms of such pledge or assignment.

     L.1975, c. 253, s. 5, eff. Nov. 25, 1975.

34:1B-21.  Property of authority;  exemption from execution or other judicial process
    All property of an authority shall be exempt from levy and sale by virtue of  an execution and no execution or other judicial process shall issue against the  same nor shall any judgment against an authority be a charge or lien upon its  property;  provided, that nothing herein contained shall apply to or limit the  rights of the holder of any bonds to pursue any remedy for the enforcement of  any pledge or lien given by the authority on or with respect to any project or  any revenues or other moneys.

     L.1975, c. 253, s. 6, eff. Nov. 25, 1975.

34:1B-21.1.  Short title  
    1.   This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Good Driver Protection Act of 1994."  

   L.1994,c.57,s.1.  

34:1B-21.2.  Findings, declarations  
    2.   The Legislature hereby finds and declares:

  

   a.   The Market Transition Facility, created pursuant to section 88 of P.L.1990, c.8 (C.17:33B-11) to serve as an interim residual market mechanism and successor to the New Jersey Automobile Full Insurance Underwriting Association created pursuant to P.L.1983, c.65 (C.17:30E-1 et seq.), ceased issuing and renewing private passenger automobile insurance policies on September 30, 1992.  It is expected to have an operating deficit which the facility has projected to be approximately $1.3 billion.  

   b.   The "Fair Automobile Insurance Reform Act of 1990," P.L.1990, c.8 (C.17:33B-1 et al.), provided that any losses sustained in the operation of the facility be apportioned to the member insurers of the facility. Subsequently, certain of these member insurers filed suit against the Commissioner of Insurance, challenging an order of the commissioner which apportioned these losses among the member insurers.  Pending a resolution of the court challenge, the Superior Court has enjoined the use by the facility of the amounts paid by the member insurers in accordance with the commissioner's order; as a result, those persons with claims against the facility have not been paid.  

   c.   In its present financial condition, it is likely that the facility would be declared financially impaired or insolvent under the provisions of P.L.1975, c.113 (C.17:30C-1 et seq.).  Because of the interim nature of the facility, however, initiating proceedings under that law is not in the best interests of the facility's policyholders and other claimants under the policies written by it. Because of this, and given the cost of pursuing protracted litigation with member insurers over this issue, it is deemed to be in the public interest to find a means of providing the necessary money to pay the claims now pending against the facility in the most expeditious manner possible.  

   d.   Moreover, to safeguard the interests of the policyholders and the public, it is deemed to be in the public interest for the Commissioner of Insurance to take immediate possession of the property and assets of the facility, in accordance with the provisions of this act, and for the commissioner to evaluate and monitor the performance of those entities charged with paying claims on the facility's behalf and to make such adjustments to any executory contracts of the facility as he believes are in the best interest of the policyholders and the public, including the modification or termination of such contracts or consolidation of servicing operations.  

   L.1994,c.57,s.2.  

34:1B-21.3.  Definitions  
    3.   For the purposes of sections 1 through 15 of this act:

  

   "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Insurance.

  

   "Division of Motor Vehicles Surcharge Fund" or "DMV Surcharge Fund" means the fund created pursuant to section 12 of this act.  

   "Market Transition Facility" or "facility" means the Market Transition Facility created pursuant to section 88 of P.L.1990, c.8 (C.17:33B-11).  

   "Market Transition Facility Revenue Fund" or "Facility Revenue Fund" means the fund created pursuant to section 7 of this act.  

   "New Jersey Economic Development Authority" or "authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority created pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).  

   L.1994,c.57,s.3.  

34:1B-21.4  Issuance of Market Transition Facility, Motor Vehicle Commission bonds, notes.

	4. a. The authority shall have the power to issue Market Transition Facility bonds or notes in an amount not to exceed $ 750 million, pursuant to the provisions of this act, under the powers given to it by and pursuant to P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), for the purpose of providing funds for the payment of the current and anticipated liabilities and expenses of the facility, as such liabilities and expenses are certified by the commissioner.  Bonds issued for the purpose of refinancing previously issued bonds or notes shall not be included in the calculation of the dollar amount limitation and bonds issued for the purpose of refinancing previously issued bonds or notes shall be approved by the Joint Budget Oversight Committee prior to the refinancing.  The bonds or notes shall be secured wholly or in part by the monies in the Market Transition Facility Revenue Fund.  The authority may establish a debt service reserve fund, which may be augmented or replenished from time to time from funds in the Facility Revenue Fund.  All Market Transition Facility bonds shall have a final maturity of not later than July 1, 2011.

	b.	The authority shall also have the power to issue New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission bonds, notes or other obligations, pursuant to P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.1 et seq.) and to the powers given to it by and pursuant to P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), for the purpose of providing funds for the payment of any and all capital costs of New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission facilities, including, but not limited to, the acquisition, demolition, construction or maintenance of all or any part of a New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission facility; any other personal property necessary for, or ancillary to, any New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission facility, including fixtures, furnishings and equipment, including computer equipment and computer software; site acquisition, site development, acquisition of land or other real property interests necessary in the development of a New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission facility; the services of design professionals, such as engineers and architects; construction management, legal services, financing and administrative costs and expenses incurred in connection with any such project; provided, however, that bonds, notes or other obligations shall not be issued in an amount exceeding $160 million in the aggregate without the prior approval of the Joint Budget Oversight Committee.  Bonds issued for the purpose of refinancing previously issued bonds, notes or other obligations shall not be included in the calculation of the dollar amount limitation.  The bonds, notes or other obligations shall be secured wholly or in part by the monies in the Market Transition Facility Revenue Fund from and after such time as all Market Transition Facility bonds, notes and obligations issued pursuant to the section and the costs thereof are discharged and no longer outstanding.  The authority may establish a debt service reserve fund, which may be augmented or replenished from time to time from monies in the Market Transition Facility Revenue Fund.

	c.	Of the aggregate amount of New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission bonds, notes or other obligations authorized to be issued in subsection b. of this section, $10,000,000 of the proceeds of those bonds, notes or other obligations shall be transferred by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission to the Administrative Office of the Courts for improvements to the Automated Traffic System, which improvements shall be deemed included in the purpose of providing for the payment of the costs of any and all capital costs of the commission facilities.

	L.1994,c.57,s.4; amended 2003, c.13, s.111; 2004, c.83, s.1.

34:1B-21.5  Powers of authority.

	5. a. For the purpose of providing funds for payment of current and anticipated liabilities and expenses of the facility, the authority shall have the power to provide for the funding or refunding of any bonds or notes, incur indebtedness, borrow money and issue bonds or notes secured in whole or in part by the monies in the Facility Revenue Fund.  The bonds or notes shall be payable from the monies in the Facility Revenue Fund.  The bonds or notes shall be authorized by resolution, which shall stipulate the manner of execution and form of the bonds, whether the bonds are in one or more series, the date or dates of issue, time or times of maturity, which shall not exceed 30 years, the rate or rates of interest payable on the bonds, the denomination or denominations in which the bonds are issued, conversion or registration privileges, the sources and medium of payment and place or places of payment, and terms of redemption.  The bonds may be sold at a public or private sale at a price or prices determined by the authority.

	b.	For the purpose of providing funds for payment of any and all capital costs of New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission facilities, including, but not limited to the acquisition, demolition, construction or maintenance of all or any part of a New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission facility; any other personal property necessary for, or ancillary to, any New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission facility, including fixtures, furnishings and equipment, including computer equipment and computer software; site acquisition, site development, acquisition of land or other real property interests necessary in the development of a New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission facility; the services of design professionals, such as engineers and architects; construction management, legal services, financing and administrative costs and expenses incurred in connection with any such project, the authority shall have the power to provide for the funding or refunding of any bonds or notes, incur indebtedness, borrow money and issue bonds or notes secured in whole or in part by the monies in the Facility Revenue Fund from and after such time as all Market Transition Facility bonds, notes and obligations issued pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.4) and the costs thereof are discharged and no longer outstanding. The bonds or notes shall be payable solely from the monies in the Facility Revenue Fund. The bonds and notes shall be authorized by resolution, which shall stipulate the manner of execution and form of the bonds, whether the bonds are in one or more series, the date or dates of issue, time or times of maturity, which shall not exceed 30 years, the rate or rates of interest payable on the bonds, the denomination or denominations in which the bonds are issued, conversion or registration privileges, the sources and medium of payment and place or places of payment, and terms of redemption.  The bonds may be sold at a public or private sale at a price or prices determined by the authority.

	L.1994,c.57,s.5;  amended 2003, c.13, s.112; 2004, c.83, s.2.

34:1B-21.5a  Applicability of P.L.2004, c.83 to prior bond proceeds.

	3. 	Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the provisions of section 4 of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.4) and section 5 of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.5), as amended by this act, shall also apply to the use of the proceeds of bonds issued prior to the effective date of this act.

	L.2004,c.83,s.3.

34:1B-21.6  Payment of redemption of bonds, notes.

	6.	The authority may, in any resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or notes, pledge the Facility Revenue Fund or a portion thereof for payment of the redemption of the Market Transition Facility bonds or notes and, from and after such time as all Market Transition Facility bonds, notes and obligations issued pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.4) and the costs thereof are discharged and no longer outstanding, New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission bonds or notes, and covenant as to the use and disposition of monies in the Facility Revenue Fund. All costs associated with the issuance of the bonds or notes by the authority for the purposes set forth in P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.1 et seq.) may be paid by the authority from the Facility Revenue Fund, which costs may include, but shall not be limited to, any costs related to the issuance of the bonds or notes, operating expenses of the authority attributable to the payment of facility current and anticipated liabilities and expenses, and costs of, and any payment due under, any agreement entered into pursuant to the provisions of subsection b. of section 8 of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.8).  Monies in the Facility Revenue Fund shall not be used for any other project of the authority.

	L.1994,c.57,s.6; amended 2003, c.13, s.113.

34:1B-21.7  "Market Transition Facility Revenue Fund."

	7.	There is created within the authority a special nonlapsing fund, to be known as the "Market Transition Facility Revenue Fund."  The Facility Revenue Fund shall consist of:

	a.	Such moneys as may be transferred to the Facility Revenue Fund by the State Treasurer, upon appropriation by the Legislature, pursuant to section 14 of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.14);

	b.	Such moneys as may be appropriated to the Facility Revenue Fund by the Legislature from surcharges levied pursuant to the provisions of subsection b. of section 6 of P.L.1983, c.65 (C.17:29A-35), except that any such moneys in excess of the amounts required to be used by the authority pursuant to any bond resolutions authorizing the issuance of Market Transition Facility bonds and notes, the authority's agreement with the State Treasurer authorized by section 13 of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.13) and any bond resolutions authorizing the issuance of Motor Vehicle Commission bonds and notes shall be at least annually remitted

	(1)	in each fiscal year commencing prior to July 1, 2006, to the General Fund provided that the first $7,500,000 of such moneys so transferred in each such fiscal year shall be remitted to  the "Alcohol Treatment Programs Fund" created in section 2 of P.L.2001, c.48 (C.26:2B-9.2); and

	(2)	in each fiscal year commencing on or after July 1, 2006, to the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Revenue Fund established pursuant to section 6 of the "Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Act of 2004," P.L.2004, c.70 (C.34:1B-21.28), to be applied as set forth therein, until such time as all bonds, notes and other obligations issued or entered into pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2004, c.70 (C.34:1B-21.26) and the costs thereof are discharged and no longer outstanding;

	c.	Interest or other income derived from the investment of moneys in the Facility Revenue Fund; and

	d.	Any other moneys as may be deposited from time to time, except that such moneys shall not be appropriated from the General Fund.

	Moneys in the Facility Revenue Fund shall be managed and invested by the Division of Investment in the Department of the Treasury.

	L.1994,c.57,s.7;  amended 2003, c.13, s.114; 2004, c.70, s.8.

34:1B-21.8  Use of monies, agreements, exemption from taxation.

	8. a. The authority may use the monies in the Market Transition Facility Revenue Fund to pay the principal and interest and premium, if any, on the Market Transition Facility bonds or notes issued by it pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.4) and, from and after such time as all Market Transition Facility bonds, notes and obligations issued pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.4) and the costs thereof are discharged and no longer outstanding, New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission bonds or notes issued by it pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1994, c.57.  The authority may create any other fund or funds by resolution of the authority which it deems necessary to further secure the Market Transition Facility bonds or notes or the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission bonds or notes or otherwise effectuate the purposes of this act, including a fund for the deposit of the proceeds from Market Transition Facility bonds or notes or the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission bonds or notes provided for in section 4 of P.L.1994, c.57. 

	b.	The authority may, in connection with its duties and responsibilities under P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.1 et seq.), or in connection with any duties and responsibilities provided for in P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), enter into any revolving credit agreement, agreement establishing a line of credit or letter of credit, reimbursement agreement, interest rate exchange agreement, insurance contract, surety bond, commitment to purchase bonds, purchase or sale agreement, or commitments or other contracts or agreements in connection with the authorization, issuance, sale or payment of bonds.

	c.	All Market Transition Facility bonds or notes and New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission bonds or notes issued by the authority are deemed to be issued by a body corporate and politic of the State for an essential governmental purpose, and the interest thereon and the income derived from all funds, revenues, incomes and other monies received or to be received by the authority and pledged and available to pay or secure the payment on Market Transition Facility bonds or notes and the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission bonds or notes or pledged or available to pay or secure payment on such bonds or notes or interest thereon shall be exempt from all taxes levied pursuant to the provisions of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes or Title 54A of the New Jersey Statutes, except for transfer inheritance and estate taxes pursuant to Subtitle 5 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes.

	L.1994,c.57,s.8;  amended 2003, c.13, s.115.

34:1B-21.9  Bonds, notes as special, limited obligations.

	9.	Market Transition Facility bonds and notes issued by the authority shall be special and limited obligations which are payable only from monies on deposit in the Facility Revenue Fund.  New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission bonds and notes issued by the authority shall be special and limited obligations which are payable only from monies on deposit in the Facility Revenue Fund from and after such time as all Market Transition Facility bonds, notes and obligations issued pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.4) and the costs thereof are discharged and no longer outstanding.  Neither the members of the authority nor any other person executing the Market Transition Facility bonds or notes or the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission bonds or notes provided for in section 4 of P.L.1994, c.57, shall be liable personally with respect to payment of interest and principal on these bonds or notes or obligations of the facility.  Market Transition Facility bonds, notes, New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission bonds or notes, or any other obligations issued pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.1 et seq.), shall not be a debt or liability of the State or any agency or instrumentality thereof, either legal, moral, or otherwise, and nothing contained in this act shall be construed to authorize the authority to incur any indebtedness on behalf of or in any way to obligate the State or any political subdivision, and all debt instruments issued by the authority shall contain a statement to that effect on their face.

	L.1994,c.57,s.9;  amended 2003, c.13, s.116.

34:1B-21.10  State pledge regarding bonds, notes, other obligations.

	10.	The State hereby pledges and covenants with the holders of any Market Transition Facility bonds, notes or other obligations and New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission bonds, notes or other obligations issued pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1994, c.57, that it will not limit or alter the rights or powers vested in the authority by this act, nor limit or alter the rights or powers of the State Treasurer in any manner which would jeopardize the interest of the holders or any trustee of such holders, or inhibit or prevent performance or fulfillment by the authority or the State Treasurer with respect to the terms of any agreement made with the holders of these bonds, notes, or other obligations.  The State also pledges and covenants with the holders of any such bonds, notes, or obligations, that it will not act to prevent the authority from obtaining any of the revenues provided for in this act, which shall be sufficient to meet all costs and expenses in connection with the issuance of such obligations, until the bonds, notes, or other obligations, together with interest thereon, are fully met and discharged or payment thereof is fully provided for, except that the failure of the State to appropriate monies for any purpose of this act shall not be deemed a violation of this section.

	L.1994,c.57,s.10; amended 2003, c.13, s.117.

34:1B-21.11. Statement from Department of the Treasury, authority  
    11.  No later than four months following the issuance of any Market Transition Facility bonds or notes, the Department of the Treasury, in conjunction with the authority, shall provide a statement providing:  

   a.   All final costs on an item by item basis associated with the issuance of the Market Transition Facility bonds or notes.  This statement shall be distributed to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the General Assembly.  The statement shall list, as applicable, costs for:  

   (1)  Bond counsel;

  

   (2)  Financial advisors;

  

   (3)  Paying agents and registrars;

  

   (4)  Rating agencies;

  

   (5)  Official statement printing;

  

   (6)  Bond printing;

  

   (7)  Trustees;

  

   (8)  Credit enhancement;

  

   (9)  Liquidity facility; and

  

   (10)         Miscellaneous issuance costs;

  

   b.   The final breakdown of the principal amount of bonds allocated to each senior manager, co-senior manager and manager participating in the bond issuance, and each underwriter's spread, broken down into the following components where applicable, and accompanied by a list of underwriter spreads from recent comparable bond issues:  

   (1)  Management fees;

  

   (2)  Underwriting fees;

  

   (3)  Selling concessions;

  

   (4)  Underwriter's counsel; and

  

   (5)  Other costs.

  

   L.1994,c.57,s.11.  

34:1B-21.12  "Division of Motor Vehicles Surcharge Fund."

	12.	There is created within the Department of the Treasury a special nonlapsing fund to be known as the "Division of Motor Vehicles Surcharge Fund," which, beginning September 1, 1996 or earlier as provided pursuant to this section, shall be comprised of moneys transferred to the DMV Surcharge Fund from the Market Transition Facility which, notwithstanding the provisions of this section to the contrary, may be appropriated, immediately upon receipt from the Market Transition Facility, by the Legislature to the Facility Revenue Fund and all moneys collected pursuant to subsection b. of section 6 of P.L.1983, c.65 (C.17:29A-35) and any interest or other income earned thereon.  Moneys in the DMV Surcharge Fund shall be managed and invested by the Division of Investment in the Department of the Treasury.  Commencing September 1, 1996, or at such earlier time as may be certified by the commissioner that moneys on deposit in the New Jersey Automobile Insurance Guaranty Fund created pursuant to section 23 of P.L.1990, c.8 (C.17:33B-5) are sufficient to satisfy the current and anticipated financial obligations of the New Jersey Automobile Full Insurance Underwriting Association, the moneys in the DMV Surcharge Fund shall be disbursed from time to time by the State Treasurer, upon appropriation by the Legislature, to the Market Transition Facility Revenue Fund, for payment of principal, interest and premium on the Market Transition Facility bonds or notes and New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission bonds or notes issued by the authority pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.4).  From and after such time as all Market Transition Facility bonds, notes and obligations and all New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission bonds, notes and obligations issued pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.4) and the costs thereof are discharged and no longer outstanding, all amounts on deposit in the DMV Surcharge Fund shall be disbursed from time to time by the State Treasurer, upon appropriation by the Legislature, to the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Revenue Fund established pursuant to section 6 of the "Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Act of 2004," P.L.2004, c.70 (C.34:1B-21.28) to be applied as set forth in section 6 of P.L.2004, c.70 (C.34:1B-21.28) until such time as all bonds (including refunding bonds), notes and other obligations issued or entered into pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2004, c.70 (C.34:1B-21.26) and the costs thereof are discharged and no longer outstanding.

	L.1994,c.57,s.12; amended 2001, c.48, s.1; 2003, c.13, s.118; 2004, c.70, s.9.

34:1B-21.13  Agreements between EDA and State; EDA and Motor Vehicle Commission.

	13. a. The State Treasurer and the authority may enter into any agreements as may be necessary to effectuate the provisions of this act, which may include, but not be limited to, procedures for the transfer of monies from the DMV Surcharge Fund to the Market Transition Facility Revenue Fund as provided for in section 12 of this act, commencing with the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1994, with respect to the terms and conditions relative to the securing of Market Transition Facility bonds, notes, and other obligations of the authority and New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission bonds, notes and other obligations of the authority, the pledge and assignment of any agreement or agreements authorized herein, or any payments to the trustees of these bondholders. Notwithstanding any provision of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), this act or any regulation of the authority to the contrary, the authority shall be paid only such fees as shall be determined by the agreement.

	b.	The commissioner and the authority shall also enter into an agreement relative to a procedure for the transfer of monies for the purpose of paying the current and anticipated liabilities and expenses of the facility, including private passenger automobile claims and other claims against the facility.  The agreement shall contain a provision that the commissioner shall certify from time to time, but not more frequently than monthly, an amount necessary to fund payments made, or anticipated to be made by or on behalf of the Market Transition Facility. The commissioner's certification shall be deemed conclusive.  The authority shall cause the transfer to be made to the designated transferee within 15 days of the receipt of the commissioner's certification. 

	c.	The authority is authorized to enter into an agreement with the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission relative to the provision by the authority to the commission of the proceeds from the sale of the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission bonds for the purpose of providing funds for the payment of the costs of any and all capital improvements to or for New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission facilities, including, but not limited to, building improvements and the acquisition and installation of furniture, fixtures, machinery, computers and electronic equipment.

	L.1994,c.57,s.13; amended 2003, c.13, s.119.

34:1B-21.14. Transfer of monies to Facility Revenue Fund  
    14.  The State Treasurer shall, as soon as practicable after the effective date of this act, and upon appropriation by the Legislature, transfer to the Market Transition Facility Revenue Fund $100 million of the monies transferred to the DMV Surcharge Fund by the Market Transition Facility.  

   L.1994,c.57,s.14.  

34:1B-21.15. Semi-annual reports  
    15. a.  The commissioner shall prepare a semi-annual report for the Governor, the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the General Assembly on the financial condition of the New Jersey Automobile Full Insurance Underwriting Association, the Market Transition Facility and the New Jersey Automobile Insurance Guaranty Fund.  

   b.   The authority shall prepare a semi-annual report for the Governor, the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the General Assembly on the receipts and disbursements of the Market Transition Facility Revenue Fund.  

   c.   The State Treasurer shall prepare a semi-annual report for the Governor, the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the General Assembly on the receipts and disbursements of the DMV Surcharge Fund.  

   L.1994,c.57,s.15.  

34:1B-21.16  Short title.

	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Cigarette Tax Securitization Act of 2004."

	L.2004,c.68,s.1.

34:1B-21.17  Definitions relative to issuance of cigarette tax securitization bonds.

	2.	The following words or terms as used in this act shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:

	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority created pursuant to P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.);

	"Bonds" means any bonds, notes or other obligations issued or entered into by the authority pursuant to this act;

	"Cigarette Tax" means the tax imposed by the State pursuant to the "Cigarette Tax Act," P.L.1948, c.65 (C.54:40A-1 et seq.), as amended and supplemented, on the sale, use or possession for sale or use within the State of each cigarette;

	"Cigarette Tax Securitization Fund" means the fund by that name created and established pursuant to section 7 of this act;

	"Cigarette Tax Securitization Proceeds Fund" means the fund by that name created and established pursuant to section 3 of this act;

	"Dedicated Cigarette Tax Revenue Fund" means the fund by that name created and established pursuant to section 5 of this act;

	"Dedicated Cigarette Tax Revenues" means an amount equal to the revenue collected by the State during each State fiscal year beginning on and after July 1, 2006 from $0.0325 of the cigarette tax; and

	"Refunding Bonds" means any bonds, notes or other obligations issued by the authority to refinance bonds, notes or other obligations previously issued or entered into by the authority pursuant to this act.

	L.2004,c.68,s.2.

34:1B-21.18  "Cigarette Tax Securitization Proceeds Fund."

	3. a. The authority shall establish and maintain a special nonlapsing fund to be known as the "Cigarette Tax Securitization Proceeds Fund" into which shall be deposited the following moneys:

	(1)	the proceeds from the sale of all bonds (other than refunding bonds) issued by the authority pursuant to this act which are remaining after any required deposit to any reserve or other fund established for such bonds or any refunding bonds in accordance with subsection a. of section 4 of this act and after the payment of all costs, fees and other expenses related to, or incurred by the authority or the State in connection with, the issuance of such bonds or any refunding bonds;

	(2)	any amounts which shall be appropriated by the Legislature for the purposes of such fund; and

	(3)	any other amounts or funds which the authority shall determine to deposit into such fund.

	Moneys on deposit in the Cigarette Tax Securitization Proceeds Fund shall be invested in such obligations as the authority may determine or as shall otherwise be provided in any contract between the authority and the State Treasurer authorized and entered into pursuant to section 6 of this act, and interest or other earnings on any such investments shall be credited to such fund.

	b.	Amounts on deposit in the Cigarette Tax Securitization Proceeds Fund shall be withdrawn by the authority from time to time, upon written request of the State Treasurer or as otherwise provided in any contract between the authority and the State Treasurer authorized and entered into pursuant to section 6 of this act, and paid to the State Treasurer for deposit into either the General Fund of the State or the Cigarette Tax Securitization Fund, as determined by the State Treasurer, and used for any lawful purpose of the State for which moneys on deposit in the General Fund may be used.  All amounts withdrawn from the Cigarette Tax Securitization Proceeds Fund and deposited into the General Fund of the State as provided in this subsection shall represent financial resources and revenues of the State from that fund as certified by the Governor pursuant to Article VIII, Section II, paragraph 2 of the State Constitution for the State annual appropriation act for such State fiscal year, and as may be applicable for such annual appropriation act as may be amended and supplemented from time to time.  Notwithstanding any provision of this subsection to the contrary, the State Treasurer shall not request the authority to pay, and the authority shall not pay, to the State Treasurer during any State fiscal year amounts on deposit in the Cigarette Tax Securitization Proceeds Fund which are in excess of the amounts anticipated as revenues from such fund.

	L.2004,c.68,s.3.

34:1B-21.19  Powers of authority.

	4.	Notwithstanding the provisions of any law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary:

	a.	The authority shall have the power, pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of this act and P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), to issue bonds and refunding bonds, incur indebtedness and borrow money secured, in whole or in part, by money received pursuant to this act for the purpose of providing funds

	(1)	for deposit into the Cigarette Tax Securitization Proceeds Fund;

	(2)	in the case of refunding bonds, to apply to the refunding, purchase or payment of any bonds issued pursuant to this act;

	(3)	to fund any capitalized interest on such bonds or refunding bonds;

	(4)	to fund any reserve or other fund as may be established by the authority for such bonds or refunding bonds and to further secure such bonds and refunding bonds as may be determined by the authority; and

	(5)	to pay all costs, fees and other expenses related to, or incurred by the authority or the State in connection with, the issuance of such bonds or refunding bonds.

	b.	The authority may, in any resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds or refunding bonds issued by the authority pursuant to this act, pledge any contract entered into with the State Treasurer pursuant to section 6 of this act, or any part thereof, to secure the payment, purchase or redemption of bonds or refunding bonds or any obligations of the authority under any contract or agreement entered into by the authority pursuant to subsection c. of this section 4, and covenant as to the use and disposition of money available to the authority for the payment, purchase or redemption of bonds and refunding bonds and the payment of any obligations of the authority under any contract or agreement entered into by the authority pursuant to subsection c. of this section 4.  All costs, fees and other expenses related to, or incurred by the authority or the State in connection with, the issuance of bonds or refunding bonds by the authority for the purposes set forth in this act may be paid by the authority from amounts it receives from the proceeds of the bonds or refunding bonds and from amounts it receives pursuant to sections 5 and 6 of this act, which costs, fees and other expenses may include, but are not limited to, any initial or annual administrative costs and fees of the authority attributable to any bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to this act, all legal, accounting, trustee or other professional fees, costs and expenses, and all other costs, fees, expenses, liabilities or obligations attributable to any agreement, contract or other commitment described in subsection c. of this section and any required rebate or other payment to the United States of America.  The bonds or refunding bonds shall be authorized by resolution adopted by the authority, which shall stipulate the manner of execution and form of the bonds, whether the bonds or refunding bonds are to be issued in one or more series, the date or dates of issue, time or times of maturity, which shall not exceed 40 years, the rate or rates of interest payable on the bonds, which may be at fixed rates or variable rates, and which interest may be current interest or may accrue, the denomination or denominations in which the bonds are issued, conversion or registration privileges, the sources and medium of payment and place or places of payment, terms of redemption, privileges of exchangeability or interchangeability, and entitlement to priorities of payment or security in the amounts to be received by the authority pursuant to sections 5 and 6 of this act.  The bonds may be sold at a public or private sale at a price or prices determined by the authority.  The authority is authorized to enter into any agreements necessary or desirable to effectuate the purposes of this section, including agreements to sell bonds or refunding bonds to any person and to comply with the laws of any jurisdiction relating thereto.

	c.	In connection with any bonds or refunding bonds issued or to be issued pursuant to this act, the authority may also enter into any revolving credit agreement, agreement establishing a line of credit or letter of credit, reimbursement agreement, interest rate exchange agreement, currency exchange agreement, interest rate floor or cap, options, puts or calls to hedge payment, currency, rate, spread or similar exposure, or similar agreements (and in connection therewith, agreements establishing a line of credit, letter of credit, insurance or relating to the collateralization of the obligations thereunder), float agreements, forward agreements, insurance contract, surety bond, commitment to purchase or sell bonds, purchase or sale agreement, or commitments or other contracts or agreements and other security agreements as shall be determined and approved by the authority.

	d.	No resolution adopted by the authority authorizing the issuance of bonds or refunding bonds pursuant to this act shall be adopted or otherwise made effective without the approval in writing of the State Treasurer.  Except as provided by subsection i. of section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4), bonds or refunding bonds may be issued without obtaining the consent of any department, division, commission, board, bureau or agency of the State, other than the approval as required by this subsection, and without any other proceedings or the occurrence of any other conditions or other things other than those proceedings, conditions or things which are specifically required by this act.

	e.	Bonds and refunding bonds issued by the authority pursuant to this act shall be special and limited obligations of the authority payable from, and secured by, such funds and moneys determined by the authority in accordance with this section.  Neither the members of the authority nor any other person executing the bonds or refunding bonds shall be personally liable with respect to payment of interest and principal on these bonds or refunding bonds.  Bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to the provisions of this act shall not be a debt or liability of the State or any agency or instrumentality thereof, other than a special and limited obligation of the authority, either legal, moral or otherwise, and nothing contained in this act shall be construed to authorize the authority to incur any indebtedness on behalf of or in any way to obligate the State or any political subdivision thereof other than the authority, and all bonds and refunding bonds issued by the authority shall contain a statement to that effect on their face.

	f.	The authority is authorized to engage, subject to the approval of the State Treasurer and in such manner as the State Treasurer shall determine, the services of bond counsel, financial advisors and experts, placement agents, underwriters, trustees, verification agents, remarketing agents, auction agents, broker-dealers, appraisers, and such other advisors, consultants and agents as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act.

	g.	All bonds or refunding bonds issued by the authority pursuant to this act are deemed to be issued by a body corporate and politic of the State for an essential governmental purpose, and the interest thereon and the income derived from all funds, revenues, incomes and other moneys received for or to be received by the authority and pledged and available to pay or secure the payment of bonds or refunding bonds and the interest thereon, shall be exempt from all taxes levied pursuant to the provisions of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes or Title 54A of the New Jersey Statutes, except for transfer inheritance and estate taxes levied pursuant to Subtitle 5 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes.

	h.	The State hereby pledges and covenants with the holders of any bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to the provisions of this act, that it will not limit or alter the rights or powers vested in the authority by this act, nor limit or alter the rights or powers of the State Treasurer in any manner which would jeopardize the interest of the holders or any trustee of such holders, or inhibit or prevent performance or fulfillment by the authority or the State Treasurer with respect to the terms of any agreement made with the holders of these bonds or refunding bonds or agreements made pursuant to subsection c. of this section, except that the failure of the Legislature to appropriate moneys for any purpose of this act shall not be deemed a violation of this section.

	i.	Notwithstanding any restriction contained in any other law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary, the State and all political subdivisions of the State, their officers, boards, commissioners, departments or other agencies, all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks and institutions, building and loan associations, saving and loan associations, investment companies and other persons carrying on a banking or investment business, all insurance companies, insurance associations and other persons carrying on an insurance business, and all executors, administrators, guardians, trustees and other fiduciaries, and all other persons whatsoever who now are or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of the State, may properly and legally invest any sinking funds, moneys or other funds, including capital, belonging to them or within their control, in any bonds or refunding bonds issued by the authority under the provisions of this act; and said bonds and refunding bonds are hereby made securities which may properly and legally be deposited with, and received by any State or municipal officers or agency of the State, for any purpose for which the deposit of bonds or other obligations of the State is now, or may hereafter be, authorized by law.

	L.2004,c.68,s.4.

34:1B-21.20  "Dedicated Cigarette Tax Revenue Fund."
 
	5. a. There is hereby created and established in the Department of the Treasury a separate nonlapsing fund to be known as the "Dedicated Cigarette Tax Revenue Fund."  During the State fiscal year beginning July 1, 2006 and during each succeeding State fiscal year in which the authority has outstanding bonds or refunding bonds which have been issued pursuant to this act or is obligated to make any payments under any contract or agreement entered into by the authority pursuant to subsection c. of section 4 of this act, the State Treasurer shall credit to such Fund, on a monthly basis, an amount equivalent to the dedicated cigarette tax revenues received by the State during each calendar month of such fiscal year.  Provided however, that:
 
	(1)	no credits of dedicated cigarette tax revenues shall be made to the Dedicated Cigarette Tax Revenue Fund in any State fiscal year until the deposits of $150,000,000 of revenue from the cigarette tax required by section 4 of P.L.1997, c.264 (C.26:2H-18.58g) into the Health Care Subsidy Fund have been fully made in such fiscal year,
 
	(2)	in each month of a State fiscal year beginning after the month in which the final deposits of $150,000,000 of revenue from the cigarette tax required by section 4 of P.L.1997, c.264 (C.26:2H-18.58g) into the Health Care Subsidy Fund have been fully made for such fiscal year, the State Treasurer shall credit to the Dedicated Cigarette Tax Revenue Fund an amount equivalent to all revenue collected by the State from the cigarette tax during such calendar month until the amount credited to the Dedicated Cigarette Tax Revenue Fund from the beginning of such fiscal year equals the amount that would have been credited to such Fund since the beginning of such fiscal year in accordance with the preceding sentence if the deposits of $150,000,000 of revenue from the cigarette tax required by section 4 of P.L.1997, c.264 (C.26:2H-18.58g) into the Health Care Subsidy Fund were not required to have been made, and
 
	(3)	thereafter, in each month of a State fiscal year, the State Treasurer shall credit (a) to the Dedicated Cigarette Tax Revenue Fund an amount equivalent to the dedicated cigarette tax revenues and (b) to the Health Care Subsidy Fund an amount equivalent to all remaining revenue collected by the State from the cigarette tax during such calendar month; provided, however, that the amount so credited to the Health Care Subsidy Fund shall not exceed $215,000,000 in the aggregate for all such months in the State fiscal year, and shall not exceed $241,500,000 in the aggregate for all such months in State fiscal years commencing on or after July 1, 2009.
 
	b.	In each State fiscal year during which the authority has outstanding bonds or refunding bonds which have been issued pursuant to this act or is obligated to make any payments under any contract or agreement entered into by the authority pursuant to subsection c. of section 4 of this act, the State Treasurer shall pay to the authority solely from the Dedicated Cigarette Tax Revenue Fund in accordance with the provisions of any contract between the authority and the State Treasurer authorized and entered into pursuant to section 6 of this act, an amount equal to the debt service payable on the authority's then outstanding bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to this act during such fiscal year and any amounts required to be paid by the authority during such fiscal year under any contract or agreement entered into by the authority pursuant to subsection c. of section 4 of this act and such other additional amounts as shall be authorized by this act and required to be paid to the authority pursuant to any contract between the authority and the State Treasurer authorized and entered into pursuant to section 6 of this act; provided, however, that the payment of all such amounts to the authority shall be subject to and dependent upon appropriations being made from time to time by the Legislature of the amounts thereof for the purposes of this act.  Notwithstanding any other provision of any law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary, the authority shall be paid only such amounts as shall be required by the provisions of any contract between the authority and the State Treasurer authorized and entered into pursuant to section 6 of this act and the incurrence of any obligation of the State under any such contract, including any payments to be made thereunder from the Dedicated Cigarette Tax Revenue Fund, shall be subject to and dependent upon appropriations being made from time to time by the Legislature for the purposes of this act.
 
	c.	If the authority no longer has outstanding bonds or refunding bonds which have been issued pursuant to this act and is no longer obligated to make any payments under any contract or agreement entered into by the authority pursuant to subsection c. of section 4 of this act or to pay any other costs, fees, expenses, liabilities and other obligations incurred by the authority and the State pursuant to this act, then all monies on deposit in the Dedicated Cigarette Tax Revenue Fund shall be transferred to the General Fund.
 
	L.2004, c.68, s.5; amended 2006, c.98, s.2; 2009, c.70, s.4.
 
34:1B-21.21  Contracts to implement payment arrangement.

	6.	The State Treasurer and the authority are authorized to enter into one or more contracts to implement the payment arrangement that is provided for in section 5 of this act.  The contract or contracts shall provide for payment by the State Treasurer of the amounts required to be paid from the Dedicated Cigarette Tax Revenue Fund pursuant to section 5 of this act and shall set forth the procedure for the transfer of moneys for the purpose of paying such amounts.  The contract or contracts shall contain such terms and conditions as are determined by the authority and the State Treasurer, and shall include, but not be limited to, terms and conditions necessary and desirable to secure any bonds or refunding bonds of the authority issued pursuant to this act or any obligations of the authority under any contract or agreement entered into by the authority pursuant to subsection c. of section 4 of this act; provided however, that notwithstanding any other provision of any law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary, the authority shall be paid only such amounts as shall be required by the provisions of any contract or contracts, and the incurrence of any obligation of the State under any such contract or contracts, including any payments to be made thereunder from the Dedicated Cigarette Tax Revenue Fund, shall be subject to and dependent upon appropriations being made from time to time by the Legislature for the purposes of this act.

	L.2004,c.68,s.6.

34:1B-21.22  "Cigarette Tax Securitization Fund."

	7.	There is hereby created and established in the Department of the Treasury a separate non-lapsing fund to be known as the "Cigarette Tax Securitization Fund."  Revenue derived from the proceeds of bonds issued by the authority pursuant to this act may be deposited into the Cigarette Tax Securitization Fund and balances therein may be transferred to the General Fund.

	L.2004,c.68,s.7.

34:1B-21.23  Short title.

	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Act of 2004."

	L.2004,c.70,s.1.

34:1B-21.24  Definitions relative to motor vehicle surcharges securitization bonds.

	2.	The following words or terms as used in this act shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:

	"Agency" means the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency created pursuant to P.L.1983, c.530 (C.55:14K-1 et seq.);

	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority created pursuant to P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.);

	"Bonds" means any bonds, notes or other obligations issued or entered into by the authority, bearing either a fixed rate or a variable rate of interest, issued by the authority pursuant to the "Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Act of 2004," P.L.2004, c.70 (C.34:1B-21.23 et al.), the proceeds of which shall be applied in accordance with that act and P.L.2005, c.163 (C.34:1B-21.25a et al.);

	"Community residences" means group homes, supervised apartments, and other types of shared living environments that provide housing and treatment or specialized services needed to assist individuals with special needs to live in community settings;

	"Cost of special needs housing project" means any and all expenses reasonably incurred by a project sponsor in connection with the acquisition, construction, improvement, or rehabilitation of property which is or shall be used for a special needs housing project, including, but not limited to, the costs and expenses of engineering, inspection, planning, legal, financial, or other professional services; the funding of appropriate reserves to address the anticipated future capital needs of a special needs housing project; and the administrative, organizational, or other expenses incident to the financing, completing, and placing into service of any special needs housing project authorized by P.L.2005, c.163 (C.34:1B-21.25a et al.);

	"Dedicated Motor Vehicle Surcharge Revenues" means:

	a.	on and after July 1, 2006, moneys required to be transferred to the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Revenue Fund from the Facility Revenue Fund pursuant to subsection b. of section 7 of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.7),

	b.	on and after July 1, 2006, all Unsafe Driving Surcharges required to be transferred to the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Revenue Fund from the Unsafe Driving Surcharges Fund pursuant to section 5 of this act, and

	c.	after such time as all Market Transition Facility bonds, notes and obligations and all New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission bonds, notes and obligations issued pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.4), and the costs thereof are discharged and no longer outstanding, all other plan surcharges collected by the commission pursuant to subsection b. of section 6 of  P.L.1983, c.65 (C.17:29A-35) and required to be transferred to the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Revenue Fund from the DMV Surcharge Fund pursuant to section 12 of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.12);

	"Division of Motor Vehicles Surcharge Fund" or "DMV Surcharge Fund" means the fund created pursuant to section 12 of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.12);

	"Individuals with mental illness" means individuals with a psychiatric disability or individuals with a mental illness eligible for housing or services funded by the Division of Mental Health Services in the Department of Human Services;

	"Individuals with special needs" means individuals with mental illness, individuals with physical or developmental disabilities and individuals in other emerging special needs groups identified by State agencies;

	"Market Transition Facility Revenue Fund" or "Facility Revenue Fund" means the fund created pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.7);

	"Motor Vehicle Surcharges Revenue Fund" means the fund within the authority created and established pursuant to section 6 of this act;

	"Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Proceeds Fund" means the fund created and established pursuant to section 3 of this act;

	"Permanent supportive housing" means a range of permanent housing options such as apartments, condominiums, townhouses, single and multi-family homes, single room occupancy housing, shared living and supportive living arrangements that provide access to on-site or off-site supportive services for individuals and families who can benefit from housing with services;

	"Project sponsor" means any person, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association, whether organized as for profit or not for profit, or any governmental entity to which the agency has made or proposes to make a loan or a grant, or otherwise to provide assistance, to finance a special needs housing project;

	"Refunding Bonds" means any bonds, notes or other obligations issued by the authority to refinance bonds, notes or other obligations previously issued by the authority pursuant to this act;

	"Special needs housing project" means a housing development, or such portion of a housing development, that is permanent supportive housing or a community residence that is primarily for occupancy by individuals with special needs who shall occupy such housing as their usual and permanent residence, together with any structures or facilities, appurtenant or ancillary thereto, and shall include the planning, development, acquisition, construction and rehabilitation of structures, and residences undertaken by a project sponsor for such purposes, including the cost of land and structures, construction, rehabilitation or any interest therein;

	"Unsafe Driving Surcharges Fund" means the fund within the Department of the Treasury created and established pursuant to section 5 of this act; and

	"Unsafe Driving Surcharges" means the revenues received by the State resulting from the plan surcharges established as such pursuant to subparagraph (a) of paragraph (2) of subsection b. of section 6 of P.L.1983, c.65 (C.17:29A-35) and assessed and collected pursuant to subsection f. of section 1 of P.L.2000, c.75 (C.39:4-97.2) for convictions for unsafe driving pursuant to that section.

	L.2004,c.70,s.2; amended 2005, c.163, s.4.

34:1B-21.25  "Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Proceeds Fund."

	3. a. The authority shall establish and maintain a special nonlapsing fund to be known as the "Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Proceeds Fund" into which shall be deposited the following moneys:

	(1)	the proceeds from the sale of all bonds (other than refunding bonds) issued by the authority pursuant to this act which are remaining after any required deposit to any reserve or other fund established for such bonds or refunding bonds in accordance with subsection a. of section 4 of this act and after the payment of all costs, fees and other expenses related to, or incurred by the authority or the State in connection with, the issuance of such bonds or refunding bonds;

	(2)	any amounts which shall be appropriated by the State Legislature for the purposes of such fund; and

	(3)	any other amounts or funds which the authority shall determine to deposit into such fund.  Moneys on deposit in the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Proceeds Fund shall be invested in such obligations as the authority may determine or as shall otherwise be provided in any contract between the authority and the State Treasurer authorized and entered into pursuant to section 7 of this act, and interest or other earnings on any such investments shall be credited to such fund.

	b.	Amounts on deposit in the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Proceeds Fund shall be withdrawn by the authority from time to time, and applied as set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection.

	(1)	Upon written request of the State Treasurer or as otherwise provided in any contract between the authority and the State Treasurer authorized and entered into pursuant to section 7 of this act, and paid to the State Treasurer for deposit either into the General Fund of the State or into the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Fund, as determined by the State Treasurer, and used for any lawful purpose of the State for which moneys on deposit in the General Fund may be used. All amounts withdrawn from the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Proceeds Fund and deposited into the General Fund of the State as provided in this paragraph shall represent financial resources and revenues of the State upon deposit into the General Fund. Notwithstanding any provision of this paragraph to the contrary, the State Treasurer shall not request the authority to pay, and the authority shall not pay, to the State Treasurer during State fiscal year 2005 for deposit into the General Fund of the State, amounts on deposit in the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Proceeds Fund which are in excess of the amounts anticipated as revenues from that fund as certified by the Governor pursuant to Article VIII, Section II, paragraph 2 of the State Constitution for the State annual appropriation act for State fiscal year 2005.

	(2)	Upon written request of the agency or as otherwise provided in any contract between the authority and the agency authorized and entered into pursuant to P.L.2005, c.163 (C.34:1B-21.25a et al.), an amount not to exceed $200,000,000 in the aggregate from the proceeds of bonds authorized under the "Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Act of 2004," P.L.2004, c.70 (C.34:1B-21.23 et al.), shall be paid to the agency for deposit into the Special Needs Housing Trust Fund to fund the costs of special needs housing projects authorized pursuant to P.L.2005, c.163 (C.34:1B-21.25a et al.).

	L.2004,c.70,s.3; amended 2005, c.163, s.5.

34:1B-21.25a  Findings, declarations relative to special needs housing; trust fund, established; use.
	1. a. The Legislature finds and declares that:
	(1) The State of New Jersey has the responsibility of providing for and assuring the continued operation of safe and humane residences for individuals who require supportive housing or extended care in a community residence;
	(2) The State of New Jersey requires additional funding to continue efforts to create permanent supportive housing and community residences as alternatives to institutionalization or homelessness for those who would benefit from these programs;
	(3) The State of New Jersey requires immediate programs: (i) to create additional units of permanent supportive housing and community residences through new construction or substantial rehabilitation; and (ii) to support community grants and loans to develop and ensure the long-term viability of such housing and residential opportunities for individuals with special needs with priority given to individuals with mental illness;
	(4) Implementation of these programs will be a substantial step toward meeting the immediate and critical need of the people of New Jersey, will substantially further the public interest, and can most economically be financed through a bond issue;
	(5) The establishment of the Special Needs Housing Trust Fund under the auspices of the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency, funded through the issuance of bonds by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority under the already authorized "Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Act of 2004," P.L.2004, c.70 (C.34:1B-21.23 et al.), is the most desirable means to provide funding and to implement the programs.
	b.	There is established in the agency a special nonlapsing, revolving fund to be known as the Special Needs Housing Trust Fund.  The proceeds from the sale of bonds issued by the authority pursuant to the "Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Act of 2004," P.L.2004, c.70 (C.34:1B-21.23 et al.), to finance special needs housing projects pursuant to P.L.2005, c.163 (C.34:1B-21.25a et al.) and deposited into the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Proceeds Fund, together with such other funds as may be authorized by law, shall be paid by the authority to the agency for deposit into the Special Needs Housing Trust Fund based upon executed agreements between the authority and the State Treasurer.  For the purpose of obtaining moneys from the authority to be deposited into the Special Needs Housing Trust Fund, the agency may enter into agreements with the authority to receive moneys from the authority for any purposes authorized by P.L.2005, c.163 (C.34:1B-21.25a et al.) and specified in the agreements between the agency and the authority.  The proceeds of this fund shall be deposited in those depositories as may be selected by the agency to the credit of the fund.
	c.	Funds deposited into the Special Needs Housing Trust Fund shall be used by the agency to make loans, grants or other investments to finance or otherwise pay the costs of special needs housing projects, upon such terms as the agency shall determine.  In making any of the foregoing loans, grants or other investments, the agency shall not be limited by any of the restrictions imposed by P.L.1983, c.530 (C.55:14K-1 et seq.) on eligible loans, funding or financial assistance for housing projects, or other financing vehicles, and shall give priority to special needs housing projects benefiting persons with mental illness.  Special needs housing projects funded from the Special Needs Housing Trust Fund shall be eligible for exemption from real property taxation pursuant to subsection b. of section 37 of P.L.1983, c.530 (C.55:14K-37).
	d.	Pending their application to the purposes provided in P.L.2005, c.163 (C.34:1B-21.25a et al.), the moneys in the Special Needs Housing Trust Fund may be invested and reinvested as are other trust funds in the custody of the agency, in the manner provided by law.  Net earnings received from the investment or deposit of moneys in the Special Needs Housing Trust Fund shall remain in such fund and be applied to the purposes set forth in P.L.2005, c.163 (C.34:1B-21.25a et al.).
	e.	The agency is authorized to promulgate the rules and regulations, policies and procedures necessary to effectuate the provisions and purposes of P.L.2005, c.163 (C.34:1B-21.25a et al.) in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).

	L.2005, c.163, s.1; amended 2021, c.126, s.2.

34:1B-21.26  Powers of authority.

	4.	Notwithstanding the provisions of any law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary:

	a.	The authority shall have the power, pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of this act and P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), to issue bonds and refunding bonds, incur indebtedness and borrow money secured, in whole or in part, by money received pursuant to this act for the purpose of providing funds:

	(1)	for deposit into the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Proceeds Fund;

	(2)	in the case of refunding bonds, to apply to the refunding, purchase or payment of any bonds issued pursuant to this act;

	(3)	to fund any capitalized interest on such bonds or refunding bonds;

	(4)	to fund any reserve or other fund as may be established by the authority for such bonds or refunding bonds and to further secure such bonds and refunding bonds as may be determined by the authority; and

	(5)	to pay all costs, fees and other expenses related to, or incurred by the authority or the State in connection with, the issuance of such bonds or refunding bonds.

	b.	The authority may, in any resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds or refunding bonds issued by the authority pursuant to this act, or the execution and delivery of any agreement authorized pursuant to subsection c. of this section, pledge the amounts from time to time on deposit in the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Revenue Fund and any contract entered into with the State Treasurer pursuant to section 7 of this act, or any part thereof, to secure the payment, purchase or redemption of the bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to this act or any obligations of the authority under any agreement entered into pursuant to subsection c. of this section, and covenant as to the use and disposition of money on deposit in the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Revenue Fund for payments of bonds and refunding bonds.  All costs, fees and other expenses related to, or incurred by the authority or the State in connection with, the issuance of bonds or refunding bonds by the authority for the purposes set forth in this act may be paid by the authority from amounts it receives from the proceeds of the bonds or refunding bonds and from amounts it receives pursuant to sections 5 and 7 of this act, section 7 of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.7) and section 12 of P.L.1994, c.57 (C.34:1B-21.12), which costs, fees and other expenses may include, but are not limited to, any initial or annual administrative costs and fees of the authority attributable to any bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to this act, all legal, accounting, trustee or other professional fees, costs and expenses, all other costs, fees and expenses (including, but not limited to, termination payments) attributable to any agreement, contract or other commitment described in subsection c. of this section and any required rebate or other payment to the United States of America.  The bonds or refunding bonds shall be authorized by resolution adopted by the authority, which shall stipulate the manner of execution and form of the bonds, whether the bonds or refunding bonds are to be issued in one or more series, the date or dates of issue, time or times of maturity, which shall not exceed 40 years, the rate or rates of interest payable on the bonds, which may be at fixed rates or variable rates, and which interest may be current interest or may accrue, the denomination or denominations in which the bonds are issued, conversion or registration privileges, the sources and medium of payment and place or places of payment, terms of redemption, privileges of exchangeability or interchangeability, and entitlement to priorities of payment or security in the amounts to be received by the authority pursuant to sections 5 and 6 of this act.  The bonds may be sold at a public or private sale at a price or prices determined by the authority.  The authority is authorized to enter into any agreements necessary or desirable to effectuate the purposes of this section, including agreements to sell bonds or refunding bonds to any person and to comply with the laws of any jurisdiction relating thereto.

	c.	In connection with any bonds or refunding bonds issued or to be issued pursuant to this act, the authority may also enter into any revolving credit agreement, agreement establishing a line of credit or letter of credit, reimbursement agreement, interest rate exchange agreement, currency exchange agreement, interest rate floor or cap, options, puts or calls to hedge payment, currency, rate, spread or similar exposure, or similar agreements, float agreements, forward agreements, insurance contract, surety bond, commitment to purchase or sell bonds, purchase or sale agreement, or commitments or other contracts or agreements and other security agreements approved by the authority.

	d.	No resolution adopted by the authority authorizing the issuance of bonds or refunding bonds pursuant to this act shall be adopted or otherwise made effective without the approval in writing of the State Treasurer.  Except as provided by subsection i. of section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4), bonds or refunding bonds may be issued without obtaining the consent of any department, division, commission, board, bureau or agency of the State, other than the approval as required by this subsection, and without any other proceedings or the occurrence of any other conditions or other things other than those proceedings, conditions or things which are specifically required by this act.

	e.	Bonds and refunding bonds issued by the authority pursuant to this act shall be special and limited obligations of the authority payable from, and secured by, such funds and moneys determined by the authority in accordance with this section.  Neither the members of the authority nor any other person executing the bonds or refunding bonds shall be personally liable with respect to payment of interest and principal on these bonds or refunding bonds.  Bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to the provisions of this act shall not be a debt or liability of the State or any agency or instrumentality thereof, other than a special and limited obligation of the authority, either legal, moral or otherwise, and nothing contained in this act shall be construed to authorize the authority to incur any indebtedness on behalf of or in any way to obligate the State or any political subdivision thereof, other than the authority, and all bonds and refunding bonds issued by the authority shall contain a statement to that effect on their face.

	f.	The authority is authorized to engage, subject to the approval of the State Treasurer and in such manner as the State Treasurer shall determine, the services of bond counsel, financial advisors and experts, placement agents, underwriters, trustees, verification agents, remarketing agents, auction agents, broker-dealers, appraisers, and such other advisors, consultants and agents as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act.

	g.	All bonds or refunding bonds issued by the authority pursuant to this act are deemed to be issued by a body corporate and politic of the State for an essential governmental purpose, and the interest thereon and the income derived from all funds, revenues, incomes and other moneys received for or to be received by the authority and pledged and available to pay or secure the payment of bonds or refunding bonds and the interest thereon, shall be exempt from all taxes levied pursuant to the provisions of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes or Title 54A of the New Jersey Statutes, except for transfer inheritance and estate taxes levied pursuant to Subtitle 5 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes.

	h.	The State hereby pledges and covenants with the holders of any bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to the provisions of this act, that it will not limit or alter the rights or powers vested in the authority by this act, nor limit or alter the rights or powers of the State Treasurer in any manner which would jeopardize the interest of the holders or any trustee of such holders, or inhibit or prevent performance or fulfillment by the authority or the State Treasurer with respect to the terms of any agreement made with the holders of these bonds or refunding bonds or agreements made pursuant to subsection c. of this section, except that the failure of the State Legislature to appropriate moneys for any purpose of this act shall not be deemed a violation of this section.

	i.	Notwithstanding any restriction contained in any other law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary, the State and all political subdivisions of this State, their officers, boards, commissioners, departments or other agencies, all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks and institutions, building and loan associations, saving and loan associations, investment companies and other persons carrying on a banking or investment business, all insurance companies, insurance associations and other persons carrying on an insurance business, and all executors, administrators, guardians, trustees and other fiduciaries, and all other persons whatsoever who now are or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of the State, may properly and legally invest any sinking funds, moneys or other funds, including capital, belonging to them or within their control, in any bonds or refunding bonds issued by the authority under the provisions of this act; and said bonds and refunding bonds are hereby made securities which may properly and legally be deposited with, and received by any State or municipal officers or agency of the State, for any purpose for which the deposit of bonds or other obligations of the State is now, or may hereafter be, authorized by law.

	L.2004,c.70,s.4.

34:1B-21.27  "Unsafe Driving Surcharges Fund."

	5.	There is hereby established in the Department of the Treasury a special nonlapsing fund to be known as the "Unsafe Driving Surcharges Fund" which, beginning July 1, 2006, shall be comprised of all unsafe driving surcharges and any interest or other income earned thereon.  Moneys in the Unsafe Driving Surcharges Fund shall be managed and invested by the Division of Investment in the Department of the Treasury.  All moneys in the Unsafe Driving Surcharges Fund shall be disbursed not less frequently than monthly by the State Treasurer, upon appropriation, to the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Revenue Fund until all bonds and refunding bonds issued or entered into pursuant to section 4 of this act and the costs thereof have been paid in full.

	L.2004,c.70,s.5.

34:1B-21.28  "Motor Vehicle Surcharges Revenue Fund."

	6. a. There is created within the authority a special nonlapsing fund, to be known as the "Motor Vehicle Surcharges Revenue Fund." The Motor Vehicle Surcharges Revenue Fund shall consist of:

	(1)	such moneys as may be appropriated to the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Revenue Fund by the Legislature and paid to the authority by the State Treasurer from Dedicated Motor Vehicle Surcharges Revenues;

	(2)	interest or other income derived from the investment of moneys in the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Revenue Fund; and

	(3)	any other moneys as may be deposited from time to time, except that such moneys shall not be appropriated from the General Fund.

	b.	In each State fiscal year during which the authority has outstanding bonds or refunding bonds which have been issued pursuant to this act, moneys in the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Revenue Fund may be used by the authority, in accordance with the provisions of any bond resolutions authorizing the issuance of bonds or refunding bonds pursuant to this act and any contract between the authority and the State Treasurer authorized and entered into pursuant to section 7 of this act, to pay debt service payable on the authority's then outstanding bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to this act and any amounts due in connection with any agreements entered into pursuant to subsection c. of section 4 of this act due in such fiscal year, to replenish any reserve or other fund established for such bonds or refunding bonds issued in accordance with subsection a. of section 4 of this act, and to pay any and all other additional amounts as shall be authorized by this act and required to be paid by the authority during such fiscal year, provided however, that the payment of all such amounts to the authority by the State Treasurer shall be subject to and dependent upon appropriations being made from time to time by the Legislature of the amounts thereof for the purposes of this act.  Notwithstanding any other provision of any law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary, the authority shall be paid only such amounts as shall be required by the provisions of any contract between the authority and the State Treasurer authorized and entered into pursuant to section 7 of this act and the incurrence of any obligation of the State under any such contract, including any payments to be made thereunder, shall be subject to and dependent upon appropriations being made from time to time by the Legislature for the purposes of this act.

	c.	In each fiscal year beginning on or after July 1, 2006, all amounts on deposit in the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Revenue Fund in excess of the amount necessary to pay any amounts required to be paid by the authority pursuant to any bond resolutions authorizing the issuance of bonds or refunding bonds pursuant to this act or pursuant to any contract between the authority and the State Treasurer authorized or entered into pursuant to section 7 of this act and payable during such fiscal year shall be transferred to the General Fund, provided that the first $7,500,000 of such moneys so transferred in each fiscal year shall be remitted to the "Alcohol Treatment Programs Fund" created in section 2 of P.L.2001, c.48 (C.26:2B-9.2).

	L.2004,c.70,s.6.

34:1B-21.29  Contracts to implement payment arrangement.

	7.	The State Treasurer and the authority are authorized to enter into one or more contracts to implement the payment arrangement that is provided for in section 5 of this act.  The contract or contracts shall provide for payment by the State Treasurer of the dedicated motor vehicle surcharge revenues and shall set forth the procedure for the transfer of moneys for the purpose of paying such amounts.  The contract or contracts shall contain such terms and conditions as are determined by the authority and the State Treasurer, and shall include, but not be limited to, terms and conditions necessary and desirable to secure any bonds or refunding bonds of the authority issued under and pursuant to this act and the obligations of the authority under any agreement entered into pursuant to subsection c. of section 4 of this act; provided however, that notwithstanding any other provision of any law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary, the authority shall be paid only such amounts as shall be required by the provisions of any contract or contracts, and the incurrence of any obligation of the State under any such contract or contracts, including any payments to be made thereunder from the dedicated motor vehicle surcharge revenues, shall be subject to and dependent upon appropriations being made from time to time by the Legislature for the purposes of this act.

	L.2004,c.70,s.7.

34:1B-21.30  Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Fund.

	11.	There is hereby created in the Department of the Treasury a separate nonlapsing fund to be known as the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Fund.  Revenue derived from bonds issued under the "Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Act of 2004," P.L.2004, c.70 (C.34:1B-21.23 et al.) may be deposited into the Motor Vehicle Surcharges Securitization Fund and balances therein may be transferred to the General Fund.

	L.2004,c.70,s.11.

34:1B-21.31  Definitions relative to financing of certain stem cell, life sciences, and biomedical research facilities.
  
	1.	As used in this act, the following words or terms shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority created pursuant to P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.);
 
	"Biomedical research facilities" means one or more facilities owned by Rutgers, the State University, located in Camden, New Jersey, and operated by a consortium of Rutgers, The State University, The Coriell Institute for Medical Research, the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School at Camden, and the Cancer Institute of New Jersey, South Jersey, which will be utilized for biomedical research and related activities, including all facilities ancillary thereto;
 
	"Blood collection facilities" means one or more facilities located in the State that will be utilized by the Elie Katz Umbilical Cord Blood Program at Community Blood Services located in Allendale, New Jersey, for cord blood collection to support stem cell research and related activities, including all facilities ancillary thereto;
 
	"Bonds" means any bonds, notes or other obligations issued or entered into by the authority pursuant to this act;
 
	"Cancer research facilities" means one or more facilities located in Belleville, New Jersey, that will be utilized by the Garden State Cancer Center for cancer research and related activities, including all facilities ancillary thereto;
 
	"Capital cost" means the expenses incurred in connection with: the planning, construction, reconstruction, development, erection, acquisition, extension, improvement, rehabilitation and equipping of State capital construction projects authorized by this act; the acquisition by purchase, lease, or otherwise, and the development of any real or personal property, and the acquisition and construction of new structures and equipment for use in connection with a State capital construction project authorized by this act, including any rights or interests therein, the execution of any agreements and franchises deemed to be necessary or useful and convenient in connection with any State capital construction project authorized by this act; the procurement of engineering, inspection, planning, legal, financial, or other professional services; the administrative, organizational, operating or other expenses incident to the financing, completing, and placing into service of any State capital construction project authorized by this act;
 
	"Refunding bonds" means any bonds, notes or other obligations issued by the authority to refinance bonds, notes or other obligations previously issued or entered into by the authority pursuant to this act;
 
	"State capital construction project" means a project that includes the acquisition of land, and the acquisition and construction of new structures and equipment for capital facilities by grant of the authority for State use and use by other units of government, which use shall include the occupancy by the State and other units of government, and the leasing and licensing of facilities to other entities by the State or other units of government, including stem cell research facilities - New Brunswick and stem cell research facilities - Newark, biomedical research facilities, blood collection facilities and cancer research facilities, whose estimated cost of land, planning, acquisition, construction, furnishing and equipping is estimated to be $50,000 or more;
 
	"Stem cell research facilities - New Brunswick" means facilities located in New Brunswick, New Jersey, which shall be only utilized for stem cell research, including all facilities ancillary thereto; and
 
	"Stem cell research facilities - Newark" means facilities operated by the New Jersey Institute of Technology and located in Newark, New Jersey, which shall be only utilized for stem cell research, including all facilities ancillary thereto.
 
	L.2006,c.102,s.1.

34:1B-21.32  Findings, declarations relative to certain stem cell, life sciences, and biomedical research.
 
 	2.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	Millions of people suffer from currently incurable diseases and injuries, and recent medical science, including the use of new regenerative medical therapies such as the use of a special type of human cells called "stem cells," provides indications that cures and treatments for certain of these diseases and injuries can be developed;
 
	The development of such cures and treatments will improve New Jersey's health care system, can reduce long-term health care costs, and can benefit the New Jersey economy by creating projects, jobs and therapies;
 
	The State of New Jersey is home to many of the leading life sciences, biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies and the State seeks to preserve its leading role, attract investment, attract scientists, enhance research and, toward that end, seeks to finance facilities for entities involved in stem cell research, life sciences and biomedical research;
 
	Financing stem cell research facilities and life sciences and   biomedical research facilities will substantially further the public interest and can most economically be financed through a bond issue; and
 
	The State of New Jersey has determined that bonds issued by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority are the most desirable means to provide funding for such facilities and projects.
 
	L.2006,c.102,s.2.

34:1B-21.33  Powers of authority.
 
 	3.	Notwithstanding the provisions of any law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary:
 
	a.	The authority shall have the power, pursuant to the provisions of this act and P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), to issue bonds and refunding bonds, incur indebtedness and borrow money secured, in whole or in part, by money received pursuant to this act for the purpose of providing funds for State capital construction projects and any costs related to the issuance of such bonds.  The authority may establish reserve or other funds to further secure bonds and refunding bonds.  The bonds shall be in the amount to yield proceeds to fund, all or in part, the payment of State capital construction projects plus additional bonds to pay for the costs of issuance.
 
	b.	The authority may, in any resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds or refunding bonds, pledge the contract with the State Treasurer, provided for in section 4 of P.L.2006, c.102 (C.34:1B-21.34), or any part thereof, to secure the payment, purchase or redemption of the bonds or refunding bonds or any obligations of the authority under any contract or agreement entered into by the authority pursuant to subsection c. of this section, and covenant as to the use and disposition of money available to the authority for the payment, purchase or redemption of bonds and refunding bonds and the payment of any obligations of the authority under any contract or agreement entered into by the authority pursuant to subsection c. of this section. All costs, fees and other expenses related to, or incurred by the authority or the State in connection with, the issuance of bonds and refunding bonds by the authority for the purposes set forth in this act may be paid by the authority from amounts it receives from the proceeds of the bonds or refunding bonds and from amounts it receives pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2006, c.102 (C.34:1B-21.34), which costs, fees and other expenses may include, but are not limited to, any initial or annual administrative costs and fees of the authority attributable to any bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to this act, all legal, accounting, trustee or other professional fees, costs or expenses, any costs and fees relating to the issuance of the bonds or refunding bonds, the fees and costs of bond counsel and any other professional fees and costs attributable to the agreements described in subsection c. of this section.  The bonds or refunding bonds shall be authorized by resolution, which shall stipulate the manner of execution and form of the bonds, whether the bonds are in one or more series, the date or dates of issue, time or times of maturity, which shall not exceed 20 years, the rate or rates of interest payable on the bonds, which may be at fixed rates or variable rates, and which interest may be current interest or may accrue, the denomination or denominations in which the bonds are issued, conversion or registration privileges, the sources and medium of payment and place or places of payment, terms of redemption, privileges of exchangeability or interchangeability, and entitlement to priorities of payment or security in the amounts to be received by the authority pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2006, c.102 (C.34:1B-21.34).  The bonds may be sold at a public or private sale at a price or prices determined by the authority.  The authority is authorized to enter into any agreements necessary or desirable to effectuate the purposes of this section, including agreements to sell bonds or refunding bonds to any person and to comply with the laws of any jurisdiction relating thereto.
 
	c.	In connection with any bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to this act, the authority may also enter into any revolving credit agreement, agreement establishing a line of credit or letter of credit, reimbursement agreement, interest rate exchange agreement, currency exchange agreement, interest rate floor or cap, options, puts or calls to hedge payment, currency, rate, spread or similar exposure, or similar agreements, float agreements, forward agreements, insurance contract, surety bond, commitment to purchase or sell bonds, purchase or sale agreement, or commitments or other contracts or agreements and other security agreements approved by the authority.
 
	d.	No resolution adopted by the authority authorizing the issuance of bonds or refunding bonds pursuant to this act shall be adopted or otherwise made effective without the approval in writing of the State Treasurer and the Joint Budget Oversight Committee.  Except as provided by subsection i. of section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4), bonds or refunding bonds may be issued without obtaining the consent of any department, division, commission, board, bureau or agency of the State, other than the approval as required by this subsection, and without any other proceedings or the occurrence of any other conditions or other things other than those proceedings, conditions or things which are specifically required by this act.
 
	e.	Bonds and refunding bonds issued by the authority pursuant to this act shall be special and limited obligations of the authority payable from, and secured by, such funds and moneys determined by the authority in accordance with this section.  Neither the members of the authority nor any other person executing the bonds or refunding bonds shall be personally liable with respect to payment of interest and principal on these bonds or refunding bonds.  Bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to the provisions of this act shall not be a debt or liability of the State or any agency or instrumentality thereof, except as otherwise provided by this subsection, either legal, moral or otherwise, and nothing contained in this act shall be construed to authorize the authority to incur any indebtedness on behalf of or in any way to obligate the State or any political subdivision thereof, and all bonds and refunding bonds issued by the authority shall contain a statement to that effect on their face.
 
	f.	The authority is authorized to engage, subject to the approval of the State Treasurer and in such manner as the State Treasurer shall determine, the services of bond counsel, financial advisors and experts, placement agents, underwriters, trustees, verification agents, remarketing agents, broker-dealers, appraisers, and such other advisors, consultants and agents as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act.
 
	g.	The proceeds from the sale of the bonds, other than refunding bonds, issued pursuant to this act, after payment of any costs related to the issuance of such bonds, shall be paid by the authority to be applied to the payment, in full or in part, for the purposes set forth in subsection a. of this section as directed by the State Treasurer.
 
	h.	All bonds or refunding bonds issued by the authority are deemed to be issued by a body corporate and politic of the State for an essential governmental purpose, and the interest thereon and the income derived from all funds, revenues, incomes and other moneys received for or to be received by the authority and pledged and available to pay or secure the payment on bonds or refunding bonds and the interest thereon, shall be exempt from all taxes levied pursuant to the provisions of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes or Title 54A of the New Jersey Statutes, except for transfer inheritance and estate taxes levied pursuant to Subtitle 5 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes.
 
	i.	The State hereby pledges and covenants with the holders of any bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to the provisions of this act, that it will not limit or alter the rights or powers vested in the authority by this act, nor limit or alter the rights or powers of the State Treasurer in any manner which would jeopardize the interest of the holders or any trustee of such holders, or inhibit or prevent performance or fulfillment by the authority or the State Treasurer with respect to the terms of any agreement made with the holders of these bonds or refunding bonds or agreements made pursuant to subsection c. of this section except that the failure of the Legislature to appropriate moneys for any purpose of this act shall not be deemed a violation of this section.
 
	j.	Notwithstanding any restriction contained in any other law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary, the State and all political subdivisions of this State, their officers, boards, commissioners, departments or other agencies, all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks and institutions, building and loan associations, saving and loan associations, investment companies and other persons carrying on a banking or investment business, all insurance companies, insurance associations and other persons carrying on an insurance business, and all executors, administrators, guardians, trustees and other fiduciaries, and all other persons whatsoever who now are or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of the State, may properly and legally invest any sinking funds, moneys or other funds, including capital, belonging to them or within their control, in any bonds or refunding bonds issued by the authority under the provisions of this act; and said bonds and refunding bonds are hereby made securities which may properly and legally be deposited with, and received by any State or municipal officers or agency of the State, for any purpose for which the deposit of bonds or other obligations of the State is now, or may hereafter be, authorized by law.
 
	L.2006,c.102,s.3.

34:1B-21.34  Appropriations for payment of obligations incurred.
  
	4.	In each State fiscal year during which the authority has outstanding bonds or refunding bonds which have been issued pursuant to this act, or is obligated to make any payments under any contract or agreement entered into by the authority pursuant to subsection c. of section 3 of P.L.2006, c.102 (C.34:1B-21.33), the State Treasurer shall pay from the General Fund to the authority, in accordance with a contract or contracts between the State Treasurer and the authority, authorized pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2006, c.102 (C.34:1B-21.35), an amount equivalent to the debt service payable on the authority's then outstanding  bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to this act during such fiscal year and any amounts required to be paid by the authority during such fiscal year under any contract or agreement entered into by the authority pursuant to subsection c. of section 3 of P.L.2006, c.102 (C.34:1B-21.33).  Notwithstanding any other provision of any law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary, the authority shall be paid only such funds as shall be required by the provisions of any  contract between the State Treasurer authorized and entered into pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2006, c.102 (C.34:1B-21.35) and further provided that the incurrence of any obligation of the State under any such contract, including any payments to be made thereunder from the General Fund, shall be subject to and dependent upon appropriations being made from time to time by the Legislature for the purposes of this act.
 
	L.2006,c.102,s.4.

34:1B-21.35  Contracts to implement payment arrangement.
  
	5.	The State Treasurer and the authority are authorized to enter into one or more contracts to implement the payment arrangement that is provided for in section 4 of P.L.2006, c.102 (C.34:1B-21.34).  The contract or contracts shall provide for payment by the State Treasurer of the amounts required to be paid pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2006, c.102 (C.34:1B-21.34) and shall set forth the procedure for the transfer of moneys for the purpose of paying such amounts.  The contract or contracts shall contain such terms and conditions as are determined by the authority and the State Treasurer, and shall include, but not be limited to, terms and conditions necessary and desirable to secure any bonds or refunding bonds of the authority issued pursuant to this act or any obligations of the authority under any contract or agreement entered into by the authority pursuant to subsection c. of section 4 of P.L.2006, c.102 (C.34:1B-21.34); provided however, that notwithstanding any other provision of any law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary, the authority shall be paid only such amounts as shall be required by the provisions of any contract or contracts and further provided that the incurrence of any obligation of the State under any such contract or contracts, including any payments to be made thereunder from the General Fund, shall be subject to and dependent upon appropriations being made from time to time by the Legislature for the purposes of this act.
 
	L.2006,c.102,s.5.

34:1B-21.36  Amounts provided by authority; projects, amounts, certain.
 
 	6.	From the proceeds of the bonds issued pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2006, c.102 (C.34:1B-21.33) for State capital construction projects, the following amounts shall be provided by the authority from time to time, and applied as set forth in this section upon written request of the State Treasurer pursuant to an agreement between the authority and the State Treasurer authorized and entered into pursuant to this section:
 
	a.	From $270,000,000 in the aggregate from the proceeds of bonds issued after enactment of this act:
 
	(1)	an amount not to exceed $150,000,000 shall be utilized by the authority, pursuant to an agreement between the State Treasurer and the authority, to fund the capital costs of stem cell research facilities - New Brunswick;
 
	(2)	an amount not to exceed $50,000,000 shall be utilized by the authority, pursuant to an agreement between the State Treasurer and the authority, to fund the capital costs of biomedical research facilities;
 
	(3)	an amount not to exceed $50,000,000 shall be utilized by the authority, pursuant to an agreement between the State Treasurer and the authority, to fund the capital costs of stem cell research facilities - Newark;  
 
	(4)	an amount not to exceed $10,000,000 shall be utilized by the authority, pursuant to an agreement between the State Treasurer and the authority, to fund the capital costs of blood collection facilities; and
 
	(5)	an amount not to exceed $10,000,000 shall be utilized by the authority, pursuant to an agreement between the State Treasurer and the authority, to fund the capital costs of cancer research facilities.
 
	b.	Any agreement entered into pursuant to this section shall specify the scope of the State capital construction project, the use of the proceeds of the bonds, the acquisition plan for the State capital construction project site, the proposed occupants and permitted uses of the State capital construction project, the proposed operational plan and operating budget for the project including any rental income from the project, and such other matters as the State Treasurer shall determine.
 
	L.2006,c.102,s.6.

34:1B-21.37  Definitions.
	30.  As used in sections 31 through 34 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.38 through 34:1B-21.41):
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Charter school" means a school established pursuant to P.L.1995, c.426 (C.18A:36A-1 et seq.).
 
	"Charter school development corporation" means a non-profit corporation established pursuant to Title 15 of the Revised Statutes, Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes, any other law of this State, or is otherwise qualified to do business in New Jersey and has a primary purpose of providing operational, development, fundraising, real estate, or other supporting services to charter schools or renaissance school projects, or other non-profit entity with experience undertaking facilities construction, development, rehabilitation, leasing and financing, and acquisition of real estate for community development or charter schools.
 
	"Community Development Financial Institution" means an entity designated and certified by the United States Department of the Treasury as a Community Development Financial Institution pursuant to 12 C.F.R. Part 1805.
 
	"Department" means the Department of Education.
 
	"Eligible borrower" means a non-profit charter school, non-profit renaissance school project, community development financial institution, charter school development corporation, eligible lender, a non-profit entity with expertise in charter school lending that can leverage the loan, and any other entity designated an eligible borrower by the authority.  Eligible borrower shall not include a charter school or renaissance school project that is operated by a for-profit management company.
 
	"Eligible lender" means any lawfully constituted nonprofit mortgage lender.
 
	"Loan fund" means the "Charter School and Renaissance School Project Facilities Loan Fund" established pursuant to section 33 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.40).
 
	"Loan program" means the "Charter School and Renaissance School Project Facilities Loan Program" established pursuant to section 32 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.39).
 
	"Renaissance school project" has the same meaning as defined in section 3 of P.L.2011, c.176 (C.18A:36C-3).
 
	"School facility" means any structure, building, or facility used wholly or in part for educational purposes that is owned or leased from a nonprofit entity, its wholly owned subsidiary, or government agency and operated by a charter school or renaissance school project.
 
	"School facilities project" means the planning, acquisition of new land or building in the municipality in which the charter school or renaissance school project's charter has permitted them to operate, demolition, construction, improvement, alteration, modernization, renovation, reconstruction, or capital maintenance of all or any part of a school facility or of any other personal property necessary for, or ancillary to, any school facility, and shall include fixtures, furnishings, and equipment, and shall also include, but is not limited to, refinancing short-term bridge funding to commence construction, site acquisition, site development, services of design professionals, such as engineers and architects, construction management, legal services, financing costs, and administrative costs and expenses incurred in connection with the project.
 
	"SDA district" is a district that received education opportunity aid or preschool expansion aid in the 2007-2008 school year.
 
	"Title" means ownership, simple or in fee, or a 99-year ground leasehold.
 
L.2023, c.311, s.30.

34:1B-21.38  School facilities projects, charter school, renaissance school project, eligible borrower, subject to public bidding requirements.
	31.	Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10 of P.L.1995, c.426 (C.18A:36A-10), section 7 of P.L.2011, c.176 (C.18A:36C-7), or any other law, rule, or regulation to the contrary:
 
	a.	a charter school, renaissance school project, or any other eligible borrower authorized to undertake a school facilities project pursuant to sections 30 through 34 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.37 through 34:1B-21.41) shall be subject to the public bidding requirements provided pursuant to the "Public School Contracts Law," N.J.S.18A:18A-1 et seq.;
 
	b.	a charter school, renaissance school project, or any other eligible borrower may accept public funds in the form of a loan for a school facilities project pursuant to the provisions of sections 30 through 34 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.37 through 34:1B-21.41);
 
	c.	a charter school board of trustees may incur debt for a period greater than 12 months provided that the debt incurred is used in connection with a school facilities project pursuant to the provisions of sections 30 through 34 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.37 through 34:1B-21.41); and
 
	d.	a school facilities project funded by a loan pursuant to the provisions of sections 30 through 34 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.37 through 34:1B-21.41) shall adhere to all public school facilities regulations pertaining to the health and safety of pupils.
 
	e.	Nothing in sections 30 through 34 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.37 through 34:1B-21.41) shall be construed to prohibit an eligible borrower who receives a loan pursuant to those provisions from simultaneously seeking or accepting private funding to support the undertaking of a school facilities project of a charter school or renaissance school project.
 
L.2023, c.311, s.31.

34:1B-21.39  "Charter School and Renaissance School Project Facilities Loan Program" established.
	32. a. The authority shall establish and administer a loan program to be known as the "Charter School and Renaissance School Project Facilities Loan Program" to provide eligible borrowers with a loan, including, but not limited to, subordinate loans, to undertake or facilitate school facilities projects for non-profit charter schools and non-profit renaissance school projects located in an SDA district.
 
	b. (1) The authority, in consultation with the department, shall annually review the applications for school facilities projects submitted pursuant to subsection c. of this section and may approve applications for loans on a quarterly basis.  The authority, in consultation with the department, shall consider the critical need of a school facilities project in making a determination on a submitted application.  At a minimum, the criteria and methodology for determining critical need shall prioritize, in order from highest to lowest priority:
 
	(a)	school facilities projects that address critical operational building needs related to health and safety issues and program mandates, which projects shall include, in order from highest to lowest priority:
 
	(i)	essential building systems upgrades, including finishing work and the repair or replacement of structural, mechanical, heating and cooling, electrical, and plumbing systems;
 
	(ii)	building skin, including the repair or replacement of roofs, windows, and masonry;
 
	(iii) improvements or other modifications and alterations needed to address appropriate building code issues;
 
	(iv) upgrades required for a school facility to meet the standards of the "Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990" (42 U.S.C. s.12101 et seq.);
 
	(v)	hazardous material abatement and required refinishing work, which hazardous material may include radon, lead, and asbestos;
 
	(vi) security and communication systems upgrades;
 
	(vii) technology infrastructure upgrades, which shall not include technology equipment with a useful life of less than five years; and
 
	(viii) site drainage related to the remediation of an existing issue and not in conjunction with new construction; 
 
	(b) new construction projects of a charter school or renaissance school project offering programs within grade levels permitted by the school's charter and within the municipality in which the charter school or renaissance school project's charter has permitted them to operate; and
 
	(c)	major renovation and rehabilitation projects, including projects that seek to expand the capacity of a charter school or renaissance school project facility used for educational purposes of a charter school or renaissance school project that operates grade levels permitted within the school's charter and within the municipality in which the charter school or renaissance school project's charter has permitted them to operate.
 
	(2)	In the event that a school facilities project for which an eligible borrower is seeking a loan pursuant to this section is requested for a leased facility in which the charter school or renaissance school project is the sole lessee, the eligible borrower shall submit the lease agreement or lease agreement addendum as part of the application.  The lease agreement or lease agreement addendum shall demonstrate that the lessor of the facility is a non-profit entity or government agency and that the term of the lease is no less than 10 years, inclusive of all lease renewal options.  An eligible borrower shall not receive a loan pursuant to this section in the event that the school facilities project for which the eligible borrower is seeking funds is requested for a leased facility in which the lessor is a for-profit entity.
 
	(3)	In the event that a school facilities project for which an eligible borrower is seeking a loan pursuant to this section is requested for a leased facility in which the charter school or renaissance school project is not the only lessee, the eligible borrower shall not seek a loan for any costs related to the improvement, alteration, modernization, renovation, reconstruction, maintenance, or capital maintenance of all or any part of the shared spaces of the facility, which shared spaces shall include elevators, stairs, roofs, and common areas.
 
	c.	An eligible borrower seeking a loan for a school facilities project pursuant to the provisions of this section shall apply to the authority and department in a form and manner prescribed by the authority in consultation with the department.  In the case of a charter school or renaissance school project established after the effective date of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.18A:7G-5b et al.), the authority shall not approve a loan for a school facilities project until after the charter school's first renewal pursuant to section 17 of P.L.1995, c.426 (C.18A:36A-17) or after the renaissance school project's first renewal under section 10 of P.L.2011, c.176 (C.18A:36C-10) or of a charter school or renaissance school project placed on probationary status by the Commissioner of Education.  In addition to any other information the authority and department deem appropriate, the application shall require the eligible borrower to submit a detailed plan of the anticipated use of loan proceeds, full project costs, and all sources of funding.
 
	d. (1) The authority and department may approve applications for loans on a quarterly basis, subject to the availability of funds in the loan fund established pursuant to section 33 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.40).  Upon approval of the application, the authority shall provide loans with an interest rate that is equal to the lower of one-half of the Triple A Bond Rate available on the date of loan approval or 1.75 percent to eligible borrowers seeking to undertake school facilities projects for charter schools and renaissance school projects located in SDA districts.  The terms of the loan and the repayment schedule shall be established by the authority.
 
	(2)	All loan repayments, and interest thereon, shall be deposited by the authority in the loan fund established pursuant to section 33 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.40), for use in the manner provided for in this section.
 
	e. (1) The authority shall require, as a condition of a loan for a school facilities project pursuant to the provisions of sections 30 through 34 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.37 through 34:1B-21.41) on a school facility owned by the charter school or renaissance school project, that, notwithstanding the provisions of section 7 of P.L.2013, c.149 (C.18A:36C-16) or any other law, rule, or regulation to the contrary, in the event the authorization to operate a charter school is revoked, not renewed, or surrendered or the authorization to operate a renaissance school project is terminated or expires for any reason, and no substitute or replacement owner or operator for that charter school or renaissance school project has been approved prior to the date that the operations of the charter school or renaissance school project cease, the title to the charter school or renaissance school project shall revert to another eligible borrower or the Department of the Treasury, except as provided pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection, for consideration in an amount calculated as follows:
 
	(a) if the principal and interest due on any outstanding debt used to finance a school facilities project pursuant to the provisions of sections 30 through 34 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.37 through 34:1B-21.41) of a charter school or renaissance school project is equal to or greater than the fair market value of the charter school or renaissance school project, as determined by a certified appraiser agreed to by the board of education of the district in which the charter school or renaissance school project is located and the owner of the charter school or renaissance school project, an eligible borrower or the Department of the Treasury shall assume any outstanding debt used to finance the school facilities project of the charter school or renaissance school project, and thereafter an eligible borrower or the State shall be legally obligated for the payment thereof; or
 
	(b) if the fair market value of the charter school or renaissance school project is greater than the amount of the principal and interest due on the outstanding debt used to finance a school facilities project pursuant to the provisions of sections 30 through 34 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.37 through 34:1B-21.41) of a charter school or renaissance school project, the State shall pay to the owner of the charter school or renaissance school project the fair market value of the charter school or renaissance project, provided that, to the extent that any debt used to finance the school facilities project pursuant to the provisions of sections 30 through 34 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.37 through 34:1B-21.41) of a charter school or renaissance school project is then outstanding, the owner of the charter school or renaissance school project shall utilize the funds received from the State pursuant to this subparagraph to retire the outstanding debt.  If the school district in which the charter school or renaissance school project is located does not exercise its right of first refusal established pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection, the Department of the Treasury may sell the property to another charter school or renaissance school project or another eligible borrower.
 
	(2) The authority shall require as a condition of a loan for a school facilities project pursuant to the provisions of sections 30 through 34 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.37 through 34:1B-21.41) on a school facility owned by the charter school or renaissance school project that, notwithstanding the provisions of section 7 of P.L.2013, c.149 (C.18A:36C-16) or any other law, rule, or regulation to the contrary, in the event the authorization to operate a charter school is revoked, not renewed, or surrendered or the authorization to operate a renaissance school project is terminated or expired for any reason, and no substitute or replacement owner or operator for that charter school or renaissance school project has been approved prior to the date that the operations of the charter school or renaissance school project cease, the board of education of the district in which the charter school or renaissance school project is located shall have the right of first refusal of the title to the charter school or renaissance school project school facility.  If the title transfers to the board of education, the State shall assume, pursuant to subparagraph (a) of paragraph (1) of this subsection, or pay, any outstanding debt used to finance a school facilities project of the charter school or renaissance school project pursuant to the provisions of sections 30 through 34 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.37 through 34:1B-21.41).
 
	f.	The authority, in consultation with the department, shall promulgate within 12 months following the date of enactment of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.18A:7G-5b et al.), pursuant to the "Administrative Procedures Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this section, which rules and regulations shall at a minimum establish:
 
	(1)	the process for review and approval of charter school and renaissance school project school facilities projects; and
 
	(2)	the process for the reversion to the board of education of the district in which the charter school or renaissance school project is located, an eligible borrower, or the State of a school facilities project pursuant to subsection e. of this section, which shall be consistent with the requirements of section 7 of P.L.2013, c.149 (C.18A:36C-16).
 
	g.	Not less than the prevailing wage rate determined by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) shall be paid to workers employed in the performance of construction contracts in connection with any charter school or renaissance school project school facilities project undertaken pursuant to sections 30 through 34 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.37 through 34:1B-21.41).
 
	h.	The authority shall not approve a second or subsequent loan pursuant to the provisions of the loan program to an eligible borrower who is in arrears or default of a prior loan issued pursuant to the provisions of the loan program.
 
	i.	In the event that the aggregate amount of a loan provided pursuant to this section exceeds $5,000,000 for a school facilities project approved pursuant to the provisions of sections 30 through 34 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.37 through 34:1B-21.41), the authority shall require as a condition of the loan that the school facilities project be subject to the provisions of a project labor agreement.
 
L.2023, c.311, s.32.

34:1B-21.40  "Charter School and Renaissance School Project Facilities Loan Fund" established, maintained, non-lapsing, revolving fund.
	33. a. The authority shall establish and maintain the "Charter School and Renaissance School Project Facilities Loan Fund," which shall be a non-lapsing, revolving fund that shall serve as the repository of all monies used to support the loan program.
 
	b.	All loans provided under section 32 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.39) shall be issued from monies held in the loan fund.  All monies received by the authority from the repayment of loans and the interest thereon shall be deposited into the loan fund.
 
L.2023, c.311, s.33.

34:1B-21.41  Annual appropriations, New Jersey Economic Development Authority.
	34.  The Legislature shall annually appropriate to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority for deposit into the "Charter School and Renaissance School Project Facilities Loan Fund" such funds as are necessary for the implementation of sections 30 through 33 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.37 through 34:1B-21.40) until such time as the loan program becomes self-sustaining.  The New Jersey Economic Development Authority may also utilize such other funds, including federal funds, as available, for deposit into the "Charter School and Renaissance School Project Facilities Loan Fund."

L.2023, c.311, s.34.

34:1B-21.42  Charter school, SDA district, construction of facility with public funds other than federal.
	35.  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10 of P.L.1995, c.426 (C.18A:36A-10) or any other law, rule, or regulation to the contrary, a charter school located in an SDA district may construct a facility with public funds other than federal funds, including loan funds received pursuant to the provisions of sections 30 through 34 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.37 through 34:1B-21.41), and be subject to the provisions of the "Public School Contracts Law," N.J.S.18A:18A-1 et seq., provided that the public funds are provided for a school facilities project approved pursuant to section 32 of P.L.2023, c.311 (C.34:1B-21.39).
 
L.2023, c.311, s.35.

34:1B-22.  Short title
    This act shall be known as the  "Motion Picture and Television Development Act" .

     L.1977, c. 44, s. 1, eff. March 22, 1977.

34:1B-23.  Legislative findings and determinations
    The Legislature finds and determines that the economy of the State of New Jersey has suffered considerably in recent years because of the inflation and employment problems confronting this Nation;  that the development of a strong motion picture and television industry would contribute substantially to the improvement of the State's economy;  that the development of a strong motion picture and television industry would contribute to the social well-being of the State and its people;  that New Jersey offers outstanding and unique human and natural resources for the development of a strong motion picture and television industry;  that New Jersey's efforts and programs in the production of motion picture and television enjoy great public support and encouragement; and that the State requires an agency to promote the development of a viable State motion picture.

     L.1977, c. 44, s. 2, eff. March 22, 1977.

34:1B-24  Motion Picture and Television Development Commission.
	3. a. There is hereby established in the New Jersey Economic Development Authority a Motion Picture and Television Development Commission.
 
	b.	The commission shall consist of 10 public members, who shall be appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate, and the Chief Executive Officer of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, the Secretary of State, the Chairman of the New Jersey State Council on the Arts, and the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development or their designees serving in an ex officio capacity.  The Governor shall appoint from the 14 members a chairman who shall serve in that office at the pleasure of the Governor.
 
	c.	The public members of the commission shall be appointed initially for the following terms: three members for a term of two years; three members for a term of three years; and two members for a term of four years.  The two public members appointed pursuant to P.L.2023, c.97 (C.34:1B-4.2 et al.) shall be appointed for an initial term of four years.  The initial members shall serve from the date of the original appointment for the aforementioned specified terms and until their respective successors shall be duly appointed and qualified.  The term of each such appointed member shall be designated by the Governor at the time of his appointment.  The successors to the initially appointed members shall each be appointed for a term of four years, except that any person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve only for the unexpired term.
 
	d.	The members of the commission shall serve without compensation, but the commission may reimburse its members for necessary expenses incurred in the discharge of their duties.
 
	e.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection b. of this section, or of any other law to the contrary, the Governor shall directly appoint the two public members added by P.L.2023, c.97 (C.34:1B-4.2 et al.) to the commission.  Upon the expiration of the initial term of each public member appointed pursuant to this subsection, members of the commission shall be appointed pursuant to subsections b. and c. of this section.
 
	L.1977, c.44, s.3; amended 1979, c.199, s.72; 2023, c.97, s.3.

34:1B-25.  Organization;  vote required;  executive director and other employees
    The Motion Picture and Television Development Commission shall organize itself in such manner as it deems desirable and necessary, but no action shall be taken or motion or resolution adopted by the commission except by an affirmative vote of a majority of the authorized members of said body. The commission may appoint and employ an executive director and such other professional, technical, and clerical assistants as it may require, without regard to the provisions of Title 11, Civil Service, of the Revised Statutes.

     L.1977, c. 44, s. 4, eff. March 22, 1977.

34:1B-26.  Annual report
    On or before December 31 of each year, the Motion Picture and Television Development Commission shall make an annual report of its activities for the Governor and the Legislature.

     L.1977, c. 44, s. 5, eff. March 22, 1977.

34:1B-27  Powers.

	6.	The Motion Picture and Television Development Commission shall have the following powers:

	a.	To adopt such rules and regulations as it deems advisable with respect to the conduct of its own affairs.

	b.	To hold hearings, and to do or perform any acts which may be necessary,  desirable or proper to carry out the purposes of this act.

	c.	To request and obtain from any department, division, board, bureau, commission, or other agency of the State or of any county, municipality, authority or other political subdivision within the State such assistance and data as will enable it properly to carry out its powers and duties hereunder.

	d.	To accept any federal funds granted, by act of Congress or by Executive  Order, for all or any of the purposes of this act.

	e.	To accept any gifts, donations, bequests, or grants of funds from private and public agencies for all or any of the purposes of this act.

	f.	To coordinate the activities of similar councils or boards appointed by  any city or county within the State for all or any of the purposes of this act.

	g.	To create advisory councils necessary for the performance of responsibilities pursuant to this act and to appoint members thereto.

	h.	To directly secure any and all location permits from any department, division, board, bureau, commission, or other agency of the State or from any county, municipality, authority, or other political subdivision within the State for applicants interested in motion picture and television production within the State.

	i.	 to establish reasonable fees, pursuant to the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," for the services provided by the commission.

	L.1977,c.44,s.6; amended 2003, c.117, s.44.

34:1B-28.  Programs to promote motion picture and television industry
    The Motion Picture and Television Development Commission shall prepare and implement programs to promote a motion picture and television industry within the State.  Such a program shall include but not be limited to:

    a.  The preparation and distribution of appropriate promotional and informational materials pointing out desirable locations within the State, explaining the benefits and advantages of producing within the State, and detailing the services available at the State and local level and within industry;

    b.  Facilitate cooperation from local government, State and Federal government agencies and private sector groups in regard to applications, locations, production, and ancillary facilities;

    c.  Cooperate with all sections of management and labor engaged in the motion picture and television industry.

     L.1977, c. 44, s. 7, eff. March 22, 1977.

34:1B-29.  Severability
    If any section, part, phrase, or provision of this act or the application thereof to any person, project or circumstances, be adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the section, part, phrase, provision or application directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and  shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of this act or the  application thereof to other persons, projects or circumstances.

     L.1977, c. 44, s. 8, eff. March 22, 1977.

34:1B-30.  Legislative findings
    The Legislature finds:

    a.  During the past decade, a number of industrial plants and other facilities located in this State have permanently terminated operations or relocated operations to sites in other states or abroad;  and,

    b.  These terminations and relocations have had a serious and undesirable impact upon the economies of the communities in which they have occurred and upon the State as a whole, lowering the value of land and improvements which are abandoned or devoted to less intensive uses than formerly;  reducing employment, business and personal income, and the resources of the State to the  extent these depend thereon;  and increasing claims upon those resources; and,

    c.  Even more important than the impact of these closings on the general State economy and the public sector are the social and personal costs to working persons and their families of confronting the forbidding alternatives of, on the one hand, permanent unemployment, and on the other, either extensive  mid-career retraining or forced relocation or both;  and,

    d.  In a small number of cases across the nation, employees have met the threat of plant shutdown by collectively establishing a stock ownership trust to purchase the facility in question and to continue its operations under the direction of a trusteeship acting on behalf of the employee owners;  and,

    e.  These trusts can serve to save jobs, continue economic development otherwise likely to be suspended and promote within the private enterprise system the goal or worker participation in the risks and rewards of equity ownership;  and

    f.  In view of the facts hereinabove cited, and further in view of the avowed public policy of the Executive and Legislative branches to preserve and expand manufacturing and other economic activity in the State, the Legislature finds that a high priority must be given by relevant State agencies to the provision of technical and administrative assistance to workers seeking to save  jobs by forming employee stock ownership trusts.

     L.1981, c. 82, s. 1, eff. March 25, 1981.

34:1B-31.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the  "Worker Owned Corporation Study Act" .

     L.1981, c. 82, s. 2, eff. March 25, 1981.

34:1B-32.  Study of best means to encourage employee stock ownership plans
    The Department of Labor and Industry is directed to undertake a study as to  the best means of providing encouragement and assistance to the formulation of  employee stock ownership plans providing for the partial or total acquisition,  through purchase, distribution in lieu of compensation or a combination of  these or any other lawful means, of shares of stock or other instruments of  equity in facilities by persons employed at these facilities in cases in which  operations at these facilities would, absent employee equity ownership, be  terminated, relocated outside of the State, or so reduced in volume as to  entail the permanent layoff of a substantial number of the employees.

     L.1981, c. 82, s. 3, eff. March 25, 1981.

34:1B-33.  Conduct of study;  considerations, consultations and investigations
    In conducting its study, the department shall:  a. consider Federal and State law relating directly or indirectly to these plans, and to the organization and operation of any trusts established pursuant thereto, including but not limited, to the Federal Internal Revenue Code and any regulations promulgated thereunder, the Federal Securities Act of 1933 and other Federal statutes providing for regulation of the issuance of securities, the Federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, the Chrysler loan guarantee legislation enacted by the United States Congress in 1979, and other Federal and State laws relating to employment, compensation, taxation and retirement;  b. consult with relevant persons in the public sector, including but not limited to, officers and employees of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority and of the Division of Economic Development in the Department of Labor and Industry, with relevant persons in the private sector, including trustees of any existing employee stock ownership trust and employees  of any firm operating under such a trust, and with members of the academic  community and of relevant branches of the legal profession;  c. examine the  experience of trusts organized pursuant to an employee stock ownership plan in  this State or in any other state;  and, d. make other investigations as it may  deem necessary in carrying out the purposes of this act.

     L.1981, c. 82, s. 4, eff. March 25, 1981.

34:1B-34.  Development of plan
    Pursuant to the findings and conclusions of the study conducted as provided  in sections 3. and 4. of this act, the Department of Labor and Industry shall  develop a plan to encourage and assist the formulation of employee stock  ownership plans providing for the acquisition by employees thereof of  facilities in this State which are subject to closure or drastically curtailed  operation and shall determine the amount of any costs of implementing the  plan.

     L.1981, c. 82, s. 5, eff. March 25, 1981.

34:1B-35.  Annual reports to legislature
    The Commissioner of the Department of Labor and Industry shall within 1 year  of the effective date of this act report the findings and conclusions of the  study, together with details of the plan developed pursuant thereto, to the  Legislature, and shall include in his report any recommendations for legislation which he deems appropriate.  Thereafter the commissioner shall annually submit to the Legislature a report concerning the formation of new employee stock ownership trusts and the operation of existing employee stock ownership trusts in this State, and shall include in the report on account of State activity, during the previous year, in connection with these trusts.

     L.1981, c. 82, s. 6, eff. March 25, 1981.

34:1B-36.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the  "New Jersey Local Development Financing Fund Act."

     L.1983, c. 190, s. 1, eff. May 23, 1983.

34:1B-37.  Legislative findings and declaration
    The Legislature finds that there continue to exist in the State areas of high unemployment, low levels of new capital investment, depressed living and working conditions, and a deteriorating tax base;  that vigorous action can halt the decline or threat of decline in economic activity and the underemployment of economic resources in these areas, avert economic losses, reverse the deterioration of the value of existing investment therein and the level of public revenue collections on that investment, and eliminate the disincentive to new investment;  and that the improvement of these areas is vital to the safety, health and welfare of the residents thereof and of the State, and constitutes a major opportunity for enhancing the economic condition  of the State, for augmenting the fiscal resources of government and for  assisting private and public efforts on behalf of community development.

    The Legislature determines that the development and redevelopment of these areas require substantial private capital spending;  that the stimulation of that spending in turn requires the leadership of the State and of the citizens of the municipalities concerned as to financial commitment and as to public participation in the planning of the course of economic renewal;  that many municipalities, counties, local development corporations and other entities engaged in economic development in these areas of the State have shown a willingness to cooperate with the private sector, the dynamism and discipline of which are essential to reviving all aspects of a community, and to help the private sector make the necessary financial commitment to undertake economic enterprises in older communities;  that many entrepreneurs, and the public entities for economic development which work with them, have experienced difficulty in raising start-up money for projects of relative risk which are justified both on economic grounds and on grounds of their potential contribution to the welfare of the communities in which they are located; that  expanded activity by entrepreneurs and these entities is necessary to the  commercial and industrial redevelopment of these communities;  and that the  problems posed by the decline of these communities is beyond remedy solely  through the exercise by government of its regulatory and police power and,  because of the greater relative risk, have not been effectively addressed by  the operations of private enterprise.

    The Legislature, therefore, declares that in order to aid in remedying the aforesaid conditions of underemployment and underinvestment as they obtain in certain urban municipalities of the State, and to further the purposes of this act, there shall be created a State fund, under the supervision of the Department of Commerce and Economic Development, to provide direct State financial assistance to local commercial and industrial projects as provided in  this act, that the authority and powers conferred hereunder and the expenditure  of public moneys as provided herein are in service of a valid public purpose  and that the enactment of the provisions hereinafter set forth is in the public  interest and for the public benefit and good and is so declared as a matter of  express legislative determination.

     L.1983, c. 190, s. 2, May 23, 1983.

34:1B-38.  Definitions
    As used in this act:

    a.   "Fund"  means the New Jersey Local Development Financing Fund established in section 4 of this act.

    b.   "Commissioner"  means the Commissioner of the Department of Commerce and Economic Development or his designated representative, which may be the New  Jersey Economic Development Authority.

    c.   "Sponsor"  means the governing body of a municipality or, with the approval of the government of a municipality, a local development corporation, community development corporation, municipal port authority established pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1960, c. 192 (C. 40:68A-29 et seq.), or governing body of a county, or, with the approval of the government of a county, a county development corporation or other public entity designated by the commissioner as a sponsor.

    d.   "Municipality"  means a municipality qualifying for aid pursuant to P.L.1978, c. 14 (C. 52:27D-178 et seq.) or which would qualify under that act except for the population criterion.

    e.   "Project"  means an industrial or commercial enterprise within a municipality that would not be undertaken in its intended scope without the provision of financial assistance pursuant to this act and will be economically  viable with the assistance.

    f.   "Eligible project"  means a project which has been approved by the commissioner to receive financial assistance from the New Jersey Local Development Financing Fund.

    g.   "Eligible project cost"  means the cost of planning, developing, executing, and making operative an industrial or commercial redevelopment project.  Eligible project cost includes the cost:

    (1) Of purchasing, leasing, condemning, or otherwise acquiring land or other  property, or an interest therein, in the designated project area or as necessary for a right-of-way or other easement to or from the project area;

    (2) Incurred for, or in connection with or incidental to, acquiring and managing the land, property or interest;

    (3) Incurred for or in connection with the relocating and moving of persons  displaced by the acquisition;

    (4) Of development or redevelopment, including:

     (a) The comprehensive renovation or rehabilitation of the land, property or  interest;

     (b) The cost of equipment and fixtures which are part of the real estate and  the cost of production machinery and equipment necessary for the operation of  the project;

    (c) The cost of energy conservation improvements designed to encourage the efficient use of energy resources, including renewable and alternative energy resources and cogenerating facilities;  and

    (d) The disposition of land or other property for these purposes;

     (5) Of demolishing, removing, relocating, renovating, altering, constructing, reconstructing, installing or repairing any land or any building,  street, highway, alley, utility, service or other structure or improvement;

    (6) Of acquisition, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or installation of public facilities and improvements necessary to a project; and

    (7) Incurred for or incidental to doing anything enumerated in this subsection, including the cost and expense of securing:

    (a) Administrative, appraisal, economic and environmental analyses;

     (b) Engineering service;

     (c) Planning service;

     (d) Design service;

     (e) Architectural service;

     (f) Surveying service; and

     (g) Other professional service.

     L.1983, c. 190, s. 3, eff. May 23, 1983.  Amended by L.1983, c. 326, s. 1, eff. Sept. 1, 1983.

34:1B-39.  Establishment of fund;  source of deposits;  use of funds
    There is established the New Jersey Local Development Financing Fund, a special depository fund into which shall be deposited moneys for carrying out the purposes of this act.  The fund shall be continuing and nonlapsing. The State Treasurer shall hold and account for the fund.  The State Treasurer shall  upon certification of the commissioner and warrant of the Director of the  Division of Budget and Accounting pay from the fund to a sponsor the amount of  moneys approved by the commissioner to be used for the support of projects as  provided in this act.  Moneys which may be deposited into the fund shall  include, but are not limited to, the following:

    (1) Proceeds from the sale of bonds which may be authorized by the State;

     (2) Appropriations made by the Legislature;

     (3) Funds provided by the Federal Government;

     (4) Loan repayments, dividends and interest received in connection with loans and investments made pursuant to the provisions of this act;  and

     (5) Other funds which may be made available for the purpose of carrying out  the provisions of this act.

     Moneys deposited in the fund may be used for any purpose of this act, including, but not limited to, the payment, if approved by the State Treasurer,  of reasonable and necessary administrative expenses incurred by the Department  of Commerce and Economic Development, but not to exceed in any fiscal year 1%  of the amount authorized to the fund pursuant to the "Community Development  Bond Act of 1982"  (P.L.1981, c. 486), and not provided by line item  appropriation, in carrying out the provisions of this act, subject only to any  agreements with the holders of particular bonds or notes.  Moneys deposited in  the fund may be invested in any direct obligations of, or obligations as to  which the principal and interest thereof is guaranteed by, the United States of  America or in such other obligations as the State Treasurer may approve.

    Moneys deposited in the fund shall be used to provide financial assistance to sponsors for the implementation of projects.  Financial assistance provided by the fund shall be used to meet eligible project costs.

     L.1983, c. 190, s. 4, eff. May 23, 1983.

34:1B-40.  Form, amount and terms of financial assistance;  repayment
    Financial assistance provided from the fund shall include, but not be limited to, loans, loan guarantees, grants, secondary mortgages and equity participation.  The form, amount and terms of financial assistance provided shall be determined by the commissioner, subject to the availability of funds and requirements of this act.  No more than 20% of the total financial assistance provided from the fund shall be in the form of grants or other nonlending assistance.  Lending assistance from the fund shall be made on a revolving loan basis in order to assure the continued reutilization of the fund's resources.  Any financial assistance provided from the fund to a participant through a sponsor shall be repaid to the fund by the participant on  such terms as the commissioner shall determine.

     L.1983, c. 190, s. 5, eff. May 23, 1983.

34:1B-41.  Criteria for evaluating and ranking applications for financial assistance
    The commissioner shall evaluate and rank each application for financial assistance for a project in accordance with the following criteria:

    a.  Primary criterion:

     (1) The number of unemployed persons in the municipality in which the project is to be located.

     b.  Secondary criteria:

     (1) The number of permanent jobs to be created or maintained directly by the  project, excluding the period of construction or development;

     (2) The number of jobs preserved by the completion of the project in the case of an existing enterprise;

     (3) The increase in the valuation of real property in the municipality as a  result of the completion of the project;

     (4) The percentage of the total eligible project cost to be financed from private resources;

     (5) The percentage of total eligible project cost to be financed by federal  aid;  and

     (6) Whether the project will result in the maintenance or provision of at least the same number of housing units at comparable rates as exists prior to the undertaking of the project.

     c.  Other criteria:

     (1) Whether the project will be located in an area targeted for economic development and receiving federal, State or local development incentives under other programs;

     (2) The extent to which the project will contribute to an economic revitalization of a municipality or region;

     (3) The extent to which the project will promote the rehabilitation of the physical environment of the immediate area in which it is to be located;

     (4) The degree to which the project will advance State or regional planning  and development strategies;

     (5) The extent to which the location of the project is accessible to and promotes the use of public transportation;  and

     (6) The degree of community support for and participation in the planning of  the project.

     L.1983, c. 190, s. 6, eff. May 23, 1983.

34:1B-42.  Schedule of application periods;  ranking of applications; finding of feasibility
    The commissioner shall annually establish a schedule of discrete application  periods for the next year, provided that no period shall be less than one month  nor more than six months.  At the end of each application period, the  commissioner shall rank and order all applications received during the period,  after evaluation of each application in accordance with the specific criteria  provided in section 6 of this act and, if a project is justified in relation to  competing applications and the amount of funds available, the commissioner  shall make a preliminary finding of feasibility and communicate to the  applicant sponsor any recommended changes in the project plan and any  conditions to the provision of assistance under this act, not inconsistent with  this act or any other law.  An application which does not receive a preliminary  finding of feasibility within an application period shall be considered  rejected, and shall be eligible for consideration in any future evaluation of  projects only upon the submission of a new application.

     L.1983, c. 190, s. 7, eff. May 23, 1983.

34:1B-43.  Project plan;  contents;  determinations prior to final approval
    a.  Prior to final approval of financial assistance under this act, the project sponsor shall file with the commissioner a project plan which shall provide such information as the commissioner deems necessary, and which shall include:

    (1) A marketability and proposed land-use study supported by appropriate appraisal reports;

    (2) A plan for the utilization of minority contractors and assurance of equal opportunity for employment in connection with the project;

    (3) A statement of the impact of the project on the natural, historic and social environment;

    (4) Where applicable, a plan for relocating project area residents;

     (5) Any additional information, drawings, plans, reports, or estimates which  the commissioner may require;

     (6) A statement of the impact of the project on the State transportation system, including provisions concerning access to public transportation and impact on highway capacity and traffic flow;

    (7) A statement of the impact of the project on energy consumption and of measures included to promote energy conservation;

    (8) Evidence of the fiscal stability of the participants in the project, other than the sponsor, including the posting of a bond by the participants, and such other evidence as the commissioner shall require;  and

    (9) A resolution in support of the project by the governing body of the municipality in which the project is to be located.

    b.  Prior to the issuance of final approval of financial assistance under this act, the commissioner shall determine:  (1) that the commitment of private  resources to the project is guaranteed as to the amount of these resources and  as to the schedule of their availability for meeting project costs and that  these private resources will provide at least 50% of the total eligible project  cost;  (2) that the project has met or is reasonably assured of meeting the  requirements of any pertinent law, ordinance and administrative regulation,  including but not limited to environmental protection and affirmative action  requirements;  (3) that the project would not be undertaken but for the  provision of that financial assistance and that the project would not be  undertaken in its intended scope without the provision of financial assistance  pursuant to this act and will be economically viable with this assistance;  (4)  that there exists adequate assurance of repayment of financial assistance where  repayment is required; and (5) that the participants in the project are of a  good moral character. At the same time he shall furnish his findings to the  presiding officers of both houses of the Legislature and to the Director of the  Division of Budget and Program Review in the Office of Legislative Services.

     L.1983, c. 190, s. 8, eff. May 23, 1983.

34:1B-44.  Approval or disapproval of application;  notice
    Upon receipt of any revised project plan prepared as a result of any recommendations made pursuant to the provisions of section 7 of this act, and of any information required pursuant to the provisions of section 8 of this act, the commissioner shall approve or disapprove any application by a sponsor for designation of a project as an eligible project and for assistance to that project under this act.  The commissioner shall within 10 days of his approval or disapproval:  (1) transmit notice thereof to the sponsor, to the presiding officers of both houses of the Legislature and to the Director of the Division of Budget and Program Review in the Office of Legislative Services;  and (2) in  the case of the approval of a project as an eligible project, transmit to the  State Treasurer a copy of the notice of his approval, together with a statement  of his determination, pursuant to section 5 of this act, of the terms of  financial assistance.

     L.1983, c. 190, s. 9, eff. May 23, 1983.

34:1B-45.  Arrangement for financial assistance;  repayment
    Upon receipt of a copy of the notice of approval of a project as an eligible  project and accompanying statement of the terms of financial assistance, the  State Treasurer shall arrange with the sponsor of the eligible project the  provision of financial assistance for which the project has been approved.  The  terms of financial assistance shall require that any assistance from the fund  provided by the sponsor to a participant shall be repaid to the fund by the  participant.

     L.1983, c. 190, s. 10, eff. May 23, 1983.

34:1B-46.  Report
    The commissioner shall require each sponsor of an eligible project receiving  assistance from the New Jersey Local Development Financing Fund pursuant to the  provisions of this act annually to submit a report of the sponsor's activities  undertaken in furtherance of the purposes of this act.

     L.1983, c. 190, s. 11, eff. May 23, 1983.

34:1B-47.    Findings, declarations 
    The Legislature finds and declares: 

   a.   That entrepreneurship is a vital component of the national heritage that fosters the health and dynamism of the overall economy; 

   b.   That despite their contribution as major generators of employment, small businesses are struggling to survive in the private sector; 

   c.   That due to a historical legacy of disregard and discrimination, minorities and women control a disproportionately small fraction of the productive resources of the State and are therefore largely excluded from the mainstream of the overall economy; 

   d.   That the problems of inadequate capital and management expertise that pertain to businesses owned by minorities and women are the same problems that pertain, in varying degrees, to all small businesses; 

   e.   That the public sector at both the national and State levels has recognized the appropriateness of the role of encouraging small businesses generally and women and minorities in particular; 

   f.   That the continuing disparity of capital accumulation in the South Jersey region has hampered the survival of small entrepreneurs and the economic development and independence of minorities and women, and has limited opportunities for enterprise development by individuals from each of these populations; 

   g.   That economic development within the small business and minority communities and among women increases the prosperity of the entire State by generating revenues and reducing the State burden of unemployment, welfare and other supportive social services; 

   h.   That in order to promote these goals it is necessary to establish a permanent government entity, an authority, with a long-term mandate for the delivery of financial and overall assistance to small businesses and businesses owned by minorities and women; 

   i.   That the authority shall focus efforts clearly on areas of greatest need and shall have a commitment toward the establishment of quality programs;

   j.   That the authority shall be responsible, both directly and as an intermediary, for providing financing and for coordinating a wide range of intensive and ongoing business expertise; 

   k.   That the authority shall pursue its mandate in accordance with a well-conceived business strategy and underwriting standards that approximate those utilized by traditional lenders; 

   L.   That the authority's success in fulfilling its mandate shall be measured by the ultimate viability of the enterprises it assists. 

   L.  1985, c. 386, s. 1, eff. Dec. 18, 1985. 

34:1B-48.    Definitions 
    For the purposes of this act: 

   a.   "Authority" means the New Jersey Development Authority for Small Businesses, Minorities and Women's Enterprises established pursuant to the provisions of this act; 

   b.   "Board" means the board of directors of the New Jersey Development Authority for Small Businesses, Minorities and Women's Enterprises established pursuant to the provisions of this act; 

   c.   "Eligible business" means a small business or a minority or women's business determined to be eligible to receive assistance and participate in programs according to the standards established pursuant to this act; 

   d.   "Minority" means a person who is: 

   (1)  Black, which is a person having origins in any of the black racial groups in Africa; or 

   (2)  Hispanic, which is a person of Spanish or Portuguese culture, with origins in Mexico, South or Central America, or the Caribbean islands, regardless of race; or 

   (3)  Asian-American, which is a person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, and Indian subcontinent, Hawaii, or the Pacific Islands; or 

   (4)  American Indian or Alaskan native, which is a person having origins in any of the original peoples of North America; 

   e.   "Minority business" means a business in which at least 51% of the beneficial ownership of the business is held by minorities, and in which the majority of the management are minorities; 

   f.   "Small business" means a business in which at least 51% of the beneficial ownership of the business is held by persons other than minorities or women and the majority of the management of which is other than minorities or women, and which business is of a type and size defined by the Commissioner of the Department of Commerce and Economic Development as a small business, which definition shall be similar to that of the federal Small Business Administration; 

   g.   "Women" means a woman, regardless of race; 

   h.   "Women's business" means a business in which at least 51% of the beneficial ownership of the business is held by women, and in which the majority of the management are women. 

   L.  1985, c. 386, s. 2, eff. Dec. 18, 1985. 

34:1B-49.    Development Authority for Small Businesses, Minorities and Women's Enterprises 
    a.   There is established in but not of the Department of Commerce and Economic Development the New Jersey Development Authority for Small Businesses, Minorities' and Women's Enterprises, which shall assist in providing financing and other services to eligible businesses.  The board of directors of the authority shall consist of six members appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate.  The Executive Director of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, the Commissioner of the Department of Commerce and Economic Development, and the State Treasurer, or their designees, shall be members ex officio.  At least one member of the board shall be an investment banker, one member shall have experience in small business finance, and one member shall have experience in market analysis.  At least one member of the board shall be a minority, and one member shall be a woman.  One member of the board shall be a resident of Atlantic City.  In addition to the six members of the board, the Governor shall appoint a nonvoting member who represents the casino industry. Initially, the Governor shall appoint two members for a term of one year, two members for a term of two years, and three members for a term of three years.  Thereafter, all members appointed by the Governor shall serve for three-year terms.  Each member shall hold office for the term of his appointment and until his successor has been appointed and qualified.  Any vacancy in the membership occurring other than by expiration of term shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment but for the unexpired term only. 

   b.   Any member of the board may be removed by the Governor for cause after notice and hearing. 

   c.   The Governor shall select a chairman and the members of the board shall elect a vice chairman.  The authority shall recommend at least three candidates for the position of Executive Director to the Governor, who shall appoint one of the candidates to the position, with the advice and consent of the Senate.  A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum. Any action may be taken by the affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum. 

   d.   The members of the board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed by the authority for their actual expenses.  No officer or employee of the State shall be deemed to have forfeited or shall forfeit his office or employment or any benefits or emoluments by reason of his appointment to the board or his appointment as a consultant to the board or his performance of other services for the authority. 

   e.   A true copy of the minutes of every meeting of the board, certified by the secretary of the board, shall be delivered by the secretary to the Governor.  No action taken at a meeting shall have effect until the 10th day following the delivery of the minutes to the Governor, Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays excepted, unless within that period the Governor has approved the minutes, in which case the action shall become effective upon his approvaL.    If, within the 10-day period, the Governor returns the copy of the minutes with his veto of any action taken by the board or any member thereof at the meeting, that action shall be null and void and of no effect. The Governor may approve all or part of the action taken at such meeting prior to the expiration of the 10-day period.   

  f.   On or before March 31 of every year, the authority shall make an annual report on its activities in the preceding calendar year to the Governor and the Legislature, which shall include a statement of its investment policy and its underwriting guidelines as well as a complete operating and financial statement covering the authority's operations during the preceding year.  The board shall cause an audit to be made at least once in each calendar year by certified public accountants.  A copy of the audit shall be filed with the State Treasurer and shall be available for public inspection. 

   L.  1985, c. 386, s. 3, eff. Dec. 18, 1985. 

34:1B-50.    Powers of authority 
    The authority shall have the power: 

   a.   To adopt bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its business, which shall include a code of ethics with respect to conflicts of interest; 

   b.   To sue or be sued in the name of the authority, provided that a judgment against the authority shall not create any direct liability against its directors, employees, or its agents; 

   c.   To indemnify its directors, employees and agents for any and all claims, suits, costs of investigations, costs of defense, settlements, or judgments against them on account of an act or omission in the scope of a director's duties, or an employee's or agent's employment, but the authority shall refuse to indemnify if it determines that the act or failure to act was because of actual fraud, willful misconduct, or actual malice; 

   d.   To enter into any contracts as are necessary or proper to carry out the provisions and purposes of this act; 

   e.   To establish and maintain any reserve or insurance funds as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this act; 

   f.   To sell, convey, lease, purchase, or otherwise acquire real or personal property to carry out its functions under the act; 

   g.   To borrow money, to issue bonds, notes, or other debt instruments, which may be at a fixed rate of return or otherwise, commensurate with the risk, and to provide for the rights of holders thereof as provided in this act, which obligations shall be an eligible investment pursuant to the provisions of section 144 of P.L.  1977, c. 110 (C. 5:12-144) and section 33 of P.L.  1984, c. 218 (C. 5:12-181); 

   h.   Subject to any agreements with bondholders or noteholders, to purchase bonds or notes of the authority out of any funds or money of the authority available therefor and to hold, cancel, or resell these bonds or notes; 

   i.   To contract for and to accept any gifts, grants, loans of funds or financial or other aid in any form from any person, including an individual, authority, partnership, or otherwise, or from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or from the State or any agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision thereof; 

   j.   In connection with any application for financing or other assistance under this act, to require and collect any reasonable fees and charges, including commitment fees, as the authority may deem necessary for its services; 

   k.   Subject to any agreement with bondholders or noteholders, to invest moneys of the authority not required for immediate use, including proceeds from the sale of bonds and notes, in any obligations, securities, and other investments which the authority deems prudent; 

   L.   To appoint and employ any persons as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this act, and to determine their qualifications, terms of office, duties and compensation without regard to the provisions of Title 11, Civil Service, of the Revised Statutes; 

   m.   To extend credit, make long-term or short-term loans, loan guarantees, or provide other financial assistance, including letters of credit or guarantees of letters of credit;     n.   To establish underwriting standards for eligibility for financial assistance, as provided in section 5 of this act; 

   o.   To establish a financial and technical assistance investment policy which delineates the proposed allocation of assistance by the authority by type of business, which policy shall include a provision that no more than 50% of the total assistance made available by the authority be made available to small businesses, and no more than 25% of the total assistance made available by the authority be made available to minorities and 25% of the total assistance made available by the authority be made available to women; except that notwithstanding the foregoing, and in addition to the funds otherwise allocated by the authority to minorities and women pursuant to this subsection, 100% of the funds made available pursuant to the provisions of section 33 of P.L.  1984, c. 218 (C. 5:12-181), shall be made available to minorities and women, 50% of which shall be made available to women, and 50% of which shall be made available to minorities and shall be invested in accordance with the geographic restrictions established by that act; provided, however, that any repayment of principal and interest due to the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority with respect to obligations purchased or monies otherwise invested in the New Jersey Development Authority for Small Businesses, Minorities, and Women's Enterprises shall be the obligation of the New Jersey Development Authority for Small Businesses, Minorities', and Women's Enterprises; 

   p.   To establish standards for providing a letter of credit or other guarantee for businesses which are unable to secure performance bonds; 

   q.   To take any security which it deems necessary in connection with any direct loan or any guaranteed loan or other extension of credit; 

   r.   To purchase any loan or assistance package which is consistent with the underwriting standards established by the authority from any person, including any financial institution or subsidiary thereof, and to contract with any person to originate these loans; 

   s.   To participate with financial institutions and other investors in providing financial assistance to eligible businesses, under underwriting standards established by the authority, by means of direct loan participations or loan guarantees; 

   t.   To make any rules and regulations necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act; 

   u.   To take any other actions which are reasonable and necessary to effectuate the provisions of this act. 

   L.  1985, c. 386, s. 4, eff. Dec. 18, 1985. 

34:1B-51.    Loans, other extensions of credit 
    a.   The authority may make long-term or short-term loans or other extensions of credit to eligible businesses under terms and conditions established by the authority.  The authority shall establish uniform underwriting standards for loans and other extensions of credit, which shall include minimum equity requirements, and the use by the businesses of an approved accounting system.  The authority may, either as a condition of granting the loan or at any time during the term of the loan, and in conjunction with the Commissioner of the Department of Commerce and Economic Development, require the use by the businesses of technical assistance approved by it. 

   b.   The authority may cooperate with the New Jersey Economic Development Authority and the federal Small Business Administration in arranging assistance for eligible businesses or may participate with these agencies in providing loans or other extensions of credit to eligible businesses. 

   c.   The authority may contract with any depository institution to maintain a portion of its funds on deposit for a specified period of time at a specified rate of interest as part of an arrangement whereby the depository institution agrees to make loans or other extensions of credit to eligible businesses, except that the compensating balance so deposited shall not be treated as a guarantee. 

   L.  1985, c. 386, s. 5, eff. Dec. 18, 1985. 

34:1B-52.    Waiver of bonding requirements 
    a.   The authority shall establish requirements as may be necessary and practical for the use of minority or women's businesses on projects financed in whole or in part by the authority.  The authority may waive bonding requirements in full or in part in order to facilitate the use of a minority or women's business if: 

   (1)  The minority or women's business has been rejected by two surety companies authorized to do business in this State; and 

   (2)  The minority or women's business meets the underwriting standards established pursuant to subsection p. of section 4 of this act. 

   The authority may require a cash deposit, increase the amount of retention, or limit or eliminate periodic payments.  No waiver may be extended more than three times to any one contractor. 

   b.   The authority may provide assistance to eligible businesses which are unable to secure bonding for projects other than those financed by the authority.  Upon presentation of evidence in writing that an eligible business has been rejected by two surety companies authorized to do business in this State, and if the applicant meets the underwriting standards established pursuant to subsection p. of section 4 of this act, the authority may guarantee the performance of the applicant through a letter of credit or by other means. 

   L.  1985, c. 386, s. 6, eff. Dec. 18, 1985. 

34:1B-53.    Issuance of bonds 
    The authority shall, by resolution of the board, have the power to incur indebtedness, borrow money and issue bonds to provide long-term and short-term financing to eligible businesses pursuant to the provisions of this act. Every issue of its bonds shall be general obligations of the authority payable from any revenues of the authority, subject only to agreements with the holders of particular bonds or notes pledging any particular revenues or moneys.  The bonds may be issued in one or more series and shall bear dates, mature at times not exceeding 40 years, bear interest at rates, be in a form, either coupon or registered, carry any conversion or registration privileges, have any rank or priority, be executed in a manner, be payable from a source in a medium of payment at places inside or outside the State, and be subject to any terms of redemption, with or without premium, as the resolution may provide. Bonds of the authority may be sold by the authority at a public or private sale at prices as the authority may determine. 

   L.  1985, c. 386, s. 7, eff. Dec. 18, 1985. 

34:1B-54.    No State liability 
    Bonds and notes of the authority issued under the provisions of this act shall not be in any way a debt or liability of the State or of any political subdivision thereof or be or constitute a pledge of the faith and credit of the State or of any political subdivision thereof but all bonds and notes, unless funded or refunded by the bonds or notes of the authority, shall be payable solely from revenues or funds pledged or available for their payment as authorized in this act.  Each bond and note shall contain on its face a statement to the effect that the authority is obligated to pay the principal thereof or the interest thereon only from revenues or funds of the agency and that neither the State nor any political subdivision thereof is obligated to pay the principal or interest and that neither the faith and credit nor the taxing power of the State or any political subdivision thereof is pledged to the payment of the principal of or the interest on the bonds or notes. 

   L.  1985, c. 386, s. 8, eff. Dec. 18, 1985. 

34:1B-55.    Bonds fully negotiable 
    Any bond or other obligation issued by the authority pursuant to this act shall be fully negotiable, within the meaning and for the purposes of Title 12A of the New Jersey Statutes, and each holder of a bond or other obligation or any coupon appurtenant thereto, by accepting the bond or coupon, shall be conclusively deemed to have agreed that the bond, obligation or coupon is and shall be fully negotiable within the meaning and for the purposes of Title 12A. 

   L.  1985, c. 386, s. 9, eff. Dec. 18, 1985. 

34:1B-56.    Power to covenant 
    In order to secure the payment of its bonds and in addition to its other powers, the authority shall have power by resolution to covenant and agree with the several holders of the bonds, as to: 

   a.   The custody, security, use, expenditure or application of the proceeds of the bonds; 

   b.   Payment of the principal of or interest on the bonds, or any other obligations, and the sources and methods thereof, the rank or priority of the bonds or obligations as to any lien or security, or the acceleration of the maturity of the bonds or obligations; 

   c.   The use and disposition of any moneys of the authority, including all revenues or other moneys derived or to be derived from any of the authority's activities; 

   d.   The pledging, setting aside, depositing or trusteeing all or any part of the revenues or other moneys of the authority to secure the payment of the principal or interest on the bonds or any other obligations and the powers and duties of any trustees with regard thereto; 

   e.   The setting aside out of the revenues or other moneys of the authority of reserves and sinking funds, and the source, custody, security, regulation, application and disposition thereof; 

   f.   The rents, fees or other charges for the use of any projects, including any part of any project previously constructed or acquired and any part, replacement or improvement of any project subsequently constructed or acquired, and the fixing, establishment, collection and enforcement of the same; 

   g.   Limitation on the issuance of additional bonds or any other obligations or on the incurrence of indebtedness of the authority; 

   h.   Vesting in trustees, fiscal or escrow agents within or without the State property, rights, powers and duties in trust as the authority may determine and limiting the rights, duties and powers of those trustees or agents; 

   i.   Payment of costs or expenses incident to the enforcement of the bonds or of the provisions of the resolution or of any covenant or contract with the holders of the bonds; 

   j.   The procedure, if any, by which the terms of any covenant or contract with, or duty to, the holders of bonds may be amended or abrogated, the amount of bonds the holders of which must consent thereto, and the manner in which that consent may be given or evidenced; or 

   k.   Any other matter or course of conduct which, by recital in the resolution, is declared to further secure the payment of the principal of or interest on the bonds. 

   L.  1985, c. 386, s. 10, eff. Dec. 18, 1985. 

34:1B-57.    Casino authority investments 
    On obligations purchased or monies otherwise invested by the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority as required by section 33 of P.L.  1984, c. 218 (C. 5:12-181), the authority shall covenant and agree to guarantee the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority at least the rate of return established by subsection d. of section 14 of P.L.  1984, c. 218 (C. 5:12-162).  The Casino Reinvestment Development Authority shall have a priority interest with respect to obligations purchased or monies otherwise invested in the authority, so long as the security interest is perfected in the manner set forth within Title 12A of the New Jersey Statutes. 

   L.  1985, c. 386, s. 11, eff. Dec. 18, 1985. 

34:1B-58.    Contracts binding 
    All provisions of the resolution and all covenants and agreements shall constitute valid and legally-binding contracts between the authority and the several holders of the bonds, regardless of the time of issuance of the bonds, and shall be enforceable by holders by appropriate action, suit or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction or by proceeding in lieu of prerogative writ. 

   L.  1985, c. 386, s. 12, eff. Dec. 18, 1985. 

34:1B-59.    No personal interest 
    No member of the board, officer, employee or agent of the authority shall have an interest, either directly or indirectly, in any project, transaction or business activity in which the authority is a party. 

   L.  1985, c. 386, s. 13, eff. Dec. 18, 1985. 

34:1B-60.    Expenses from revenues 
    All expenses incurred in carrying out the provisions of this act shall be payable solely from revenues or funds provided or to be provided under the provisions of this act and nothing in this act shall be construed to authorize the authority to incur any indebtedness or liability on behalf of or payable by the State or any political subdivision thereof. 

   L.  1985, c. 386, s. 14, eff. Dec. 18, 1985. 

34:1B-61.    Authorized investment 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, the State, its political subdivisions, agencies and instrumentalities, their officers, boards, commissioners, departments, any trust company, State or federally chartered bank, savings bank, savings and loan association, investment companies, insurance companies, all executors, administrators, guardians and fiduciaries, and all other persons whosoever who now are or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of the State, may legally invest funds belonging to them or within their control in bonds or notes issued by the authority pursuant to the provisions of this act.  These bonds and notes are securities which may properly and legally be deposited with and received by any State or municipal officer or agency of the State for any purpose for which the deposit of bonds or other obligations of the State is now or may hereafter be authorized by law. 

   L.  1985, c. 386, s. 15, eff. Dec. 18, 1985. 

34:1B-62.    Short title  
    1.   This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Global Export Network Act."  

   L.1993,c.197,s.1.  

34:1B-63.    Findings, determinations  
    2.   The Legislature finds and determines that:

  

   a.   The rapid change in global political and economic events and the effects thereof on the economy of the United States in general, and New Jersey in particular, require this State to expand its role in the promotion of international trade and the exportation of New Jersey products and services;  

   b.   Businesses located in this State currently export approximately $8 billion in goods and services, and increased promotion of the exportation of products produced by New Jersey businesses has been shown to have a positive effect upon the overall economy by creating new jobs, promoting market diversification, aiding in the development of new product ideas and sources of supply, and expanding the market share of local businesses;  

   c.   The New Jersey Economic Development Authority should provide increased financial assistance to small- and medium-sized businesses located in New Jersey which may have difficulty commencing or enhancing their export activities due to limitations on the availability of loan funds from financial institutions, and the existing export working capital loan and loan guarantee program of the authority should be further supplemented;  

   d.   The activities of the State in promoting the export of New Jersey goods and services in the global marketplace have taken on greater significance in light of the possible approval by the United States Congress of federal implementing legislation for the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) with Canada and Mexico, the continuing negotiations on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), Uruguay Round of Multi-Lateral Trade Negotiations, and the rapid progress toward European Community integration, which will provide new opportunities for American businesses to engage in fair competition in service markets of foreign countries;  

   e.   In light of the European Community's program to establish a single internal market having largely been accomplished, with over 90% of the regulations having been adopted to remove trade barriers and other restrictions on the movement of goods, services and capital within the 12 European Community countries, the European Community markets offer dramatically increased opportunities for export trade by New Jersey firms;  

   f.   The State's export trade with Mexico can be further enhanced through increased emphasis on the export potential of the State's industrial sector in the fields of analytical and laboratory equipment, electronics, plastics, health and medical equipment, high-tech industries and transfer of technology to the manufacturing sector;  

   g.   The emergence of new export markets in the republics of the former Soviet Union provides increased opportunities for New Jersey firms to export products and services that are in high demand in these areas, especially in the fields of environmental technology, pharmaceuticals, medical technology, food processing and telecommunications; and  

   h.   Given the importance to New Jersey of exporting more of the State's goods and services to foreign markets, it is in the public interest to establish a supplemental program with the active participation of New Jersey banks to offer New Jersey businesses export finance assistance for fixed asset needs or loans for working capital, to authorize the Economic Development Authority to solicit the participation of certain financial institutions in support thereof, to utilize moneys made available for such purposes pursuant to the "Economic Recovery Fund Act," and other programs administered by the authority, and to thereby promote New Jersey's role in the expanding global marketplace.  

   L.1993,c.197,s.2.  

34:1B-64.    Definitions  
    3.   As used in this act:

  

   "Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).  

   "Eligible export business" means a small- or medium-sized business which has its principal place of business located in this State and is engaged in the provision of goods or services to foreign export markets.  The authority shall promulgate by rule a detailed definition which shall set forth the criteria to be used to determine eligibility for the program pursuant to the provisions of this act.  

   "Fixed assets" means any real property, interests in real property, plants, equipment, and other assets commonly accepted as fixed assets.  

   "Participating bank"  means a bank as defined pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1948, c.67 (C.17:9A-1) deemed eligible by the authority for participation in the program.  

   "Program" means the "New Jersey Global Export Network Program" established by the authority pursuant to section 4 of this act.  

   "Working capital" means those liquid capital assets other than fixed assets.  

   L.1993,c.197,s.3.  

34:1B-65.    "New Jersey Global Export Network Program"  
    4.   The New Jersey Economic Development Authority shall, in consultation with the Division of International Trade and the Division of Economic Development in the Department of Commerce and Economic Development, establish the "New Jersey Global Export Network Program," to assist eligible export businesses to expand their role in the exportation of New Jersey products and services. The authority shall give priority consideration to eligible export businesses utilizing locally produced materials and supplies to add at least 50% of the value to the products or services.  As used in this section, "locally produced materials and supplies" means articles, materials and supplies produced or manufactured in this State.  The activities of the program shall be deemed to be supplementary to, and not in lieu of, the powers of the authority prescribed by law.  

   L.1993,c.197,s.4.  

34:1B-66.    "Global Export Network Assistance Fund"  
    5.  a.  In order to effectuate the purposes of the program, the authority shall establish and maintain a special non-lapsing revolving fund to be known as the "Global Export Network Assistance Fund," hereinafter the "network assistance fund," which shall be credited with: (1) an amount from the Economic Recovery Fund established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1992, c.16 (C.34:1B-7.13) which the authority determines is necessary to effectively implement the program, within the limits of funding available from the Economic Recovery Fund, based upon the response to the program by eligible export businesses and participating banks; (2) any moneys that shall be received by the authority from the repayment of the moneys in the network assistance fund used to provide direct loans or revolving credit lines pursuant to this act and interest thereon; and (3) other moneys of the authority, including but not limited to, any moneys available from other business loan programs administered by the authority which it determines to deposit therein.  

   b.   The authority may use the moneys in the network assistance fund established pursuant to this section for:  

   (1)  funding direct loans or revolving lines of credit agreements for eligible export businesses for the production of goods and services for export, and guaranteeing up to 25% of the loans or lines of credit provided by participating banks, in accordance with section 7 of this act;  

   (2)  making payments in fulfillment of the terms of any direct loans, revolving lines of credit agreements, or guarantee agreements, entered into pursuant to section 7 of this act; and  

   (3)  defraying the administrative costs of the authority in carrying out the purposes and provisions of this act.  

   c.   The portion of the direct loans or lines of credit provided by participating banks may be guaranteed by the authority pursuant to section 7 of this act only if an eligible export business has qualified therefor by demonstrating to the satisfaction of the authority that the eligible export business has the ability to develop new or expanded export activities, with particular emphasis on products or services which will be in high demand as a result of the expected approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (GATT) and the European Community (EC) integration, and that the eligible export business has sufficient ability, reputation and credit-worthiness.  

   d.   The maximum amount and term of the loan, line of credit or guarantee made pursuant to this act shall be determined by the authority.  

   L.1993,c.197,s.5.  

34:1B-67.    Establishment of reserves, liquid reserves  
    6.   The authority shall establish sufficient reserves and liquid reserves, aside from those moneys required to provide a sufficient and actuarially sound basis for its pledges contained in any loan, line of credit or guarantee agreement entered into pursuant to this act.  

   L.1993,c.197,s.6.  

34:1B-68.    Agreements with participating banks  
    7.   The authority shall enter into agreements with participating banks to use the moneys from the network assistance fund to provide up to 25% of the direct loans or revolving lines of credit for fixed asset needs and working capital of eligible exporting businesses.  The agreements shall further provide that the balance of the loans or lines of credit for financing the fixed asset needs and working capital of eligible export businesses shall come from participating banks.  The authority may also use moneys from the network assistance fund to guarantee up to 25% of the portion of the loans or lines of credit to be provided by the participating banks in those cases where the authority determines that such a guarantee is necessary for an agreement authorized by this section.  The agreements shall also provide for any other terms or conditions which the authority and the participating banks stipulate to as being necessary or desirable to make loans, establish  and extend lines of credit, guarantee loans and otherwise effectuate the purpose of the program.  

   L.1993,c.197,s.7.  

34:1B-69.    Rules, regulations  
    8.   The authority shall, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), adopt rules and regulations governing the making of loans, extending of credit and the issuance of guarantees pursuant to this act.  

   L.1993,c.197,s.8.  

34:1B-70.	Short title
	1. 	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Micro-Business Development and Assistance Act."

	L.1995,c.206,s.1.

34:1B-71.	Findings, declarations relative to microlending
	2. 	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a. 	Approximately 98% of New Jersey's employers are small business operators and more than 1.5 million employees are working in small businesses in this State; 

	b. 	Testimony taken at legislative hearings revealed that between 1987 and 1992, corporate down-sizing created a sizeable group of displaced and dislocated private sector workers, 12 to 14% of whom have undertaken self-employment opportunities, with the balance remaining underemployed or unemployed;

	c. 	While the New Jersey Development Authority for Small Businesses, Minorities' and Women's Enterprises has a peer group micro-lending program in place which targets certain geographical regions of the State, it is imperative that we find new and innovative ways to help unemployed and underemployed individuals throughout the entire State to re-enter the marketplace; and 

	d. 	Experience in numerous other states and in certain urban areas in New Jersey has shown that "microlending," or carefully underwriting small loans to individual entrepreneurs with well-developed, realistic business plans, has been successful in helping individuals, without regard to geographical location, to start, maintain and expand small businesses.

	L.1995,c.206,s.2.

34:1B-72.	Definitions
	3. 	As used in this act:

	"Certified micro-business development corporation" means a micro-business development corporation certified pursuant to section 7 of this act; 

	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Commerce and Economic Development;

	"Department" means the Department of Commerce and Economic Development;

	"Development loan" means money loaned to a certified micro-business development corporation by the authority for the purpose of making a micro-business loan pursuant to section 6 of this act; 

	"Micro-business development corporation" means a nonprofit corporation established prior to or after the effective date of this act, and pursuant to Title 15 of the Revised Statutes, Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes, or other law of this State to provide training, technical assistance, and access to capital for the startup or expansion of qualified micro-businesses; 

	"Micro-business loan" means a loan made from or guaranteed by a revolving loan fund contributed to by the micro-business assistance program; 

	"Program" means the micro-business assistance program established pursuant to section 4 of this act; and 

	"Qualified micro-business" means a business enterprise, which has its principal place of business in this State, is independently owned and operated as a sole proprietorship, partnership or corporation, with 20 or fewer employees in full-time positions and with a level of gross income from operations defined by the authority as a micro-business.

	L.1995,c.206,s.3.

34:1B-73.	New Jersey Micro-Business Assistance Program
	4.  a.  There is created, in the New Jersey Economic Development Authority , a "New Jersey Micro-Business Assistance Program,"  hereinafter, "the program."  The program shall be established by the authority in collaboration with the department.  The program shall consist of loans, loan guarantees, or both, and training and technical assistance which shall be provided to qualified micro-businesses through a network of regional micro-business development corporations.

	b. 	To implement the program, the authority shall, to the greatest extent feasible, cooperate with micro-business development corporations in no less than three service regions of the State consisting of one or more counties in seeking to involve the resources of local banks and financial institutions in order to leverage dollars available for the program.  The service regions shall be determined by the authority on the basis of: comparative unemployment or underemployment; an economic environment conducive to the establishment or expansion of businesses built around qualified micro-businesses; the need for assistance in maintaining, rehabilitating or refurbishing micro-businesses where such activity will protect or enhance a small-business economy; and the level of anticipated financial and other participation of county economic development agencies, municipal economic development agencies or business organizations, and county or municipal educational and nonprofit organizations.

	c. 	In designing and implementing the program, the authority is authorized to enter into agreements with county and municipal agencies, and local business, educational and nonprofit organizations, in order to leverage its development loans with funds from such entities.  Such agreements may also require participation from the county and municipal level where training and technical assistance, and other self-employment services are concerned.  The terms and conditions of all loans and loan guarantees provided by the authority shall be determined by the authority.

	L.1995,c.206,s.4.

34:1B-74.	"New Jersey Micro-Business Assistance Fund"
	5.  a.  To implement the program, the authority shall establish and maintain a special revolving fund to be known as the "New Jersey Micro-Business Assistance Fund," hereinafter, "the assistance fund," which shall be credited with:

	(1) 	such moneys from the economic growth account of the "Economic Recovery Fund" established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1992, c.16 (C.34:1B-7.13), which the authority determines are necessary to effectively implement the program, within the limits of funding available from the Economic Recovery Fund, based upon the response to the program by micro-business development corporations; (2)  any moneys that shall be received by the authority from the repayment of the moneys in the assistance fund used to provide micro-business development loans pursuant to this act and interest thereon; (3)  moneys as may be available to the authority from business assistance programs administered by the authority or by other State agencies or authorities including, but not limited to, the New Jersey Development Authority for Small Businesses, Minorities' and Women's Enterprises established pursuant to P.L.1985, c.386 (C.34:1B-47 et seq.), the New Jersey Urban Development Corporation established pursuant to P.L.1985, c.227 (C.55:19-1 et seq.), the department or administered by federal agencies or by private sector foundations ; (4)  appropriations made by the Legislature to effectuate the purposes of this act; (5)  fees collected from applicants pursuant to subsection c. of this section; and (6)  other moneys made available including, but not limited to, funds provided by agreement with private investors, small business investment corporations, banks and other lending institutions to effectuate the purposes of this act.

	b. 	Moneys in the assistance fund which are determined by the authority not to be needed for current responsibilities of the assistance fund, may be invested by the authority in any direct obligations as to which the principal and interest thereof are guaranteed by the United States of America or any other obligation deemed appropriate by the authority.  The authority may appoint a director to manage the activities associated with the assistance fund.  The director shall receive compensation as determined by the authority.

	c. 	The authority may charge fees in connection with applications for financial assistance from the assistance fund as it deems reasonable.

	L.1995,c.206,s.5.

34:1B-75.	Development loans to micro-business development corporations
	6.  a.  The authority shall use the moneys in the assistance fund established pursuant to section 5 of this act to make development loans to micro-business development corporations certified by the authority to participate in the program.  Moneys received from micro-business development corporations in repayment of a development loan shall be deposited in the assistance fund.  The authority may make development loans from the assistance fund in amounts not to exceed $250,000 per loan to a certified micro-business development corporation.

	b. 	In determining the criteria for making development loans, the authority shall , in addition to applying its customary underwriting criteria, also consider:

	(1) 	the plan for providing services to qualified micro-businesses;

	(2) 	the scope of services to be provided by the certified micro-business development corporation;

	(3) 	the geographic representation of all regions of the State, including both urban and rural municipalities;

	(4) 	the plan for providing service to minorities, women and low-income persons;

	(5) 	the ability of the corporation to provide business training and technical assistance to qualified micro-business clients;

	(6) 	the ability of the corporation, with its plan, to monitor and provide financial oversight of recipients of micro-business loans, to administer a revolving loan fund, and to investigate and qualify financing proposals and to service credit accounts;

	(7) 	sources and sufficiency of operating funds for the certified micro-business development corporations; and

	(8) 	the intent of the corporation, with its plan and written indications of local institutional support, to provide services to the service region within which it is located.

	c. 	Development loan funds may be used by a certified micro-business development corporation to:

	(1) 	satisfy matching requirements for other State, federal, or private funding only if funding is intended and used for the purpose of providing or enhancing the certified micro-business development corporation's ability to provide and administer loans, technical assistance, or management-training to qualified micro-businesses;

	(2) 	establish a revolving loan fund from which the certified micro-business development corporation may make loans to qualified micro-businesses, provided that a single loan does not exceed $50,000 and the outstanding balance of all loans to a qualified micro-business or a project participated in by more than one qualified micro-business or to two or more qualified micro-businesses in which any one person holds more than a 20% equity share does not exceed $50,000; and

	(3) 	establish a guarantee fund from which the certified micro-business development corporation may guarantee loans made by financial institutions to qualified micro-businesses.  However, a single guarantee may not exceed $50,000, and the aggregate of all guarantees to a qualified micro-business or a project participated in by more than one qualified micro-business or to two or more qualified micro-businesses in which any one person holds more than a 20% equity share may not exceed $50,000.

	d. 	Development loan funds may not be:

	(1) 	loaned for relending or investment in stocks, bonds, or other securities or for property not intended for use in production by the recipient of the loan; or

	(2) 	used to refinance a nonperforming loan held by a financial institution or to pay the operating costs of a certified micro-business development corporation.  However, interest income earned from the proceeds of a development loan may be used to pay operating expenses.

	e. 	Certified micro-business development corporations are required to contribute cash from other sources to leverage and secure development loans from the program.  Contributions provided by the corporation must be in a ratio of at least $1 from other sources for each $3 from the program.  These contributions may come from a public or private source other than the program and may be in the form of equity capital, loans, or grants.

	f. 	Development loans shall be made pursuant to a development loan agreement and may be amortization or term loans, bear interest at less than the market rate, be renewable, be callable, and contain other terms and conditions considered appropriate by the authority that are consistent with the purposes of this act and with rules and regulations promulgated by the authority to implement this act.

	g.  (1)  Unless subject to federal law, rule or regulation, each certified micro-business development corporation that receives a development loan under this act shall undergo an audit, at its own expense, at least once every two years.  The authority shall designate an auditor to conduct the audit.

	(2) 	If an audit is performed under a requirement of federal law, rule or regulation, the department shall waive the audit required in this subsection with respect to all issues addressed by the federal audit report.  However, the authority may require an audit of matters that are not, in the authority's judgment, addressed by the federal report including, but not limited to, verification of compliance with requirements specific to the program, such as job-generation standards and reporting.

	h. 	A certified micro-business development corporation that is in default for nonperformance under rules and regulations established by the authority may be required to refund the outstanding balance of development loans awarded prior to the default declaration.  A development loan is secured by a first lien on the receivables of the corporation receiving the loan.

	L.1995,c.206,s.6.

34:1B-76.	Certification of micro-business development corporation
	7. 	The authority may certify a micro-business development corporation when it determines that the corporation:

	a. 	has developed a viable plan for providing training, access to financing, and technical assistance for qualified micro-businesses;

	b. 	has broad-based community support in a designated service region of the State, as reflected, for example, by the membership of its board of directors, and has demonstrated support from other regional entities to provide assistance with service delivery and financial aspects; and

	c. 	has an adequate source of operating capital.

	L.1995,c.206,s.7.

34:1B-77.	Additional powers of authority
	8.  a.  The authority shall have, in addition to the powers enumerated in section 5 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-5), the power to enter into written agreements, including limited partnership agreements, with one or more professional investors or small business investment corporations or with one or more State agencies or authorities for the purposes of establishing a pool of moneys to be deposited in the assistance fund and to provide moneys, to be used exclusively for development loans to micro-business development corporations.  The pooled moneys provided by the authority from the assistance fund shall be fixed at an interest rate to be determined by the authority and shall be for a term not exceeding one year.

	b. 	The authority may also accept grants, donations, and other private and public income, including payments of interest on loans made by the authority.

	c. 	The authority shall deposit all moneys received under this section in the assistance fund established pursuant to section 5 of this act.

	L.1995,c.206,s.8.

34:1B-78.	Additional duties of authority
	9. 	In addition to the duties of the authority required under section 7 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-7), the authority shall, in conjunction with certified development corporations and the department, prepare a report within two years following the effective date of this act, and not later than September 15 of each third year thereafter.  The report shall include, but not be limited to, a description of the demand for the program from qualified micro-businesses, types of businesses the fund has assisted, the efforts made by the authority and the development corporations to promote the program and to establish a pool of funds from private and public sources, the total amount of loans or lines of credit issued by the authority or the development corporations, as appropriate, from the assistance fund or the revolving lines of credit, as the case may be, and an assessment of the effectiveness of the program in meeting the goals of this act.  The authority shall submit its reports to the Governor and the Legislature, along with any recommendations for legislation to improve the effectiveness of the program.

	L.1995,c.206,s.9.

34:1B-79.	Rules, regulations
	10. 	The authority and the department shall jointly adopt, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), rules and regulations as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act including, but not limited to, the criteria and procedures concerning certification of micro-business development corporations, the criteria and procedures for selecting from competing development loan applications and for awarding development loans to certified micro-business development corporations, criteria and procedures to be followed by certified micro-business development corporations in administering revolving loan funds supported by the program, criteria for determining the terms and conditions of development loans and loan repayments, and criteria for determining nonperformance and declaring default in the administration of development loans.

	L.1995,c.206,s.10.

34:1B-80.	Short title
	1. 	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Industry Sector Network Development Act."

	L.1995,c.207,s.1.

34:1B-81.	Findings, declarations relative to strategies promoting businesses
	2. 	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a. 	The Department of Commerce and Economic Development admirably provides generic services and technical assistance to businesses that request such help;

	b. 	The department should now complement its existing, generic types of assistance with appropriate, specific strategies oriented towards promoting businesses in high potential and mid-potential growth industry sectors, and businesses in declining industry sectors that have the potential for revitalization; and

	c. 	These new, specific strategies may include assistance in the creation of industry sector networks wherein similar businesses work together and learn from each other thereby enabling such networks to benefit from economies of scale and thus enhance their competitiveness in current markets and also permit their entry into new, larger markets.

L.1995,c.207,s.2.

34:1B-82.	Definitions
	3. 	As used in this act:

	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Commerce and Economic Development;

	"Department" means the Department of Commerce and Economic Development;

	"Economic master plan commission" means the New Jersey Economic Master Plan Commission established by Executive Order No. 1 issued by the Governor on January 18, 1994;

	"Industry sector network" means clusters of two or more businesses within a key industry working jointly to manufacture, sell or market products, develop technologies or create or disseminate information; and

	"Key industry" means an industry that makes or could make an important contribution to the economy of the State, which may include,  but need not be limited to, healthcare, pharmaceuticals, chemicals, communications, telecommunications, electronics, software, insurance, tourism, transportation, construction, agriculture, and biotechnology.

L.1995,c.207,s.3.

34:1B-83.	Assistance to key industries
	4. 	The commissioner may undertake to act through the Division of Economic Development, or through a nonprofit entity which may include a nonprofit corporation organized to implement the recommendations of the economic master plan commission, to assist key industries with:

	a. 	The creation of industry sector networks and the development of a program designed to train persons who would assist in the formation of such networks;

	b. 	The development of industry related markets;

	c. 	The establishment of industry related training and education programs;

	d. 	The improvement of industry products or quality of services;

	e. 	The development of solutions to industry problems that hinder the marketing of products or services;

	f. 	The adoption of policies to assure that industry proprietary information remains confidential; and

	g. 	Such other industry problems or opportunities that may arise or be so identified.

	L.1995,c.207,s.4.

34:1B-84.	Coordination, cooperation with programs, organizations
	5. 	In implementing the goals of section 4 of this act, the commissioner shall encourage the division or a designated nonprofit entity, as the case may be, to coordinate efforts with existing economic development programs and to cooperate with other public and private organizations, which may include, but need not be limited to, State and local agencies and commissions involved with business network development, utility companies, industry trade and business groups or associations, or private sector nonprofit groups organized to promote economic development in the State.

	L.1995,c.207,s.5.

34:1B-85.	Private industry membership fees for sector networks
	6. 	To the extent that the commissioner acts pursuant to section 4 of this act, the  commissioner shall encourage industry sector networks to support their network activities with private industry membership fees to enable the networks to be self-supporting, and shall encourage members of particular industry sector networks to adopt, by mutual agreement of the members, a schedule of fees to be paid by members of the particular network.

	L.1995,c.207,s.6.

34:1B-86.	Allocation of matching funds
	7. 	The commissioner may allocate matching funds to help an industry sector network with network start-up costs and activities in order to stimulate private sector financing to promote self-sufficient networks.

	L.1995,c.207,s.7.

34:1B-87.	Rules, regulations
	8. 	The commissioner shall, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), adopt any rule and regulation necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act.

	L.1995,c.207,s.8.

34:1B-88.	Short title
	1. 	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Business Relocation Mission Private Partnership Act."

	L.1995,c.208,s.1.

34:1B-89.	Findings, declarations relative to business relocations
	2. 	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a. 	A 1993 survey of business relocations reveals that business relocations to New Jersey came from 12 other states and nine foreign locations;

	b. 	Intra-regional moves accounted for over three-fourths of the business relocations with 56 businesses moving to this State from New York, and eight from New England and Pennsylvania;

	c. 	Businesses which relocated to New Jersey represent a wide variety of industries including manufacturing, transportation, financial services and other service industries;

	d. 	Testimony taken during hearings held by the General Assembly Task Force on Business Retention, Expansion and Export Opportunities revealed that other states have been much more aggressive than New Jersey in promoting business relocations through telemarketing, direct mail and "on site" visits to promote business relocations from other states and foreign locations; and

	e. 	It is, therefore, in the public interest for New Jersey to participate in the organization of State Relocation Missions and Foreign Relocation Missions in order to compete more effectively with what other states are doing to promote business relocations from other states and foreign locations.

	L.1995,c.208,s.2.

34:1B-90.	Establishment of State Relocation Missions, terms defined
	3. 	The Department of Commerce and Economic Development, hereinafter "the department," acting through the Division of Economic Development, or through a nonprofit entity designated by the department which may include a nonprofit corporation organized to implement the recommendations of the economic master plan commission, is authorized to  work with private sector businesses to develop public-private partnerships to establish State Relocation Missions in regions of the United States which are competitive with New Jersey.  As used in this section, "economic master plan commission" means the New Jersey Economic Master Plan Commission established pursuant to Executive Order No. 1 issued by the Governor on January 18, 1994.  The purpose of these missions, which shall utilize the resources of interested public utilities, county economic development departments, industry sector networks, New Jersey firms and private sector nonprofit groups involved in promoting economic development in the State, shall be to recruit companies to New Jersey which have expressed an interest in relocating to other states. As used in this section, "industry sector network" means clusters of two or more businesses that are (1) within an industry that makes or could make an important contribution to the economy of the State, which may include, but need not be limited to, healthcare, pharmaceuticals, chemicals, communications, telecommunications, electronics, software, insurance, tourism, transportation, construction, agriculture, and biotechnology, and (2) working jointly to manufacture, sell or market products, develop technologies or create or disseminate information.

	L.1995,c.208,s.3.

34:1B-91.	Establishment of Foreign Relocation Missions
	4. 	The department, acting through the Division of International Trade, or through a nonprofit entity designated by the department which may include a nonprofit corporation organized to implement the recommendations of the economic master plan commission, is authorized to work with private sector businesses to develop public-private partnerships to establish Foreign Relocation Missions in addition to the existing foreign offices established by the department.  As used in this section, economic master plan commission means the New Jersey Economic Master Plan Commission established pursuant to Executive Order No. 1 issued by the Governor on January 18, 1994.  The department may consult with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey and the Delaware River Port Authority, as well as other public and private organizations, including private sector nonprofit groups involved in promoting economic development in the State to jointly develop relocation missions to recruit foreign companies to New Jersey which have expressed an interest in relocating from their present countries.  The department shall strive, to the extent feasible, to utilize the resources of private sector businesses involved in the public-private partnerships developed pursuant to this section and to arrange for the sharing of office space, personnel and equipment with other public and private organizations which may have established offices in foreign locations in order to reduce the costs of establishing the Foreign Relocation Missions.

	L.1995,c.208,s.4.

34:1B-92.	Report to Governor, Legislature
	5. 	The department shall, within 18 months following the effective date of this act, submit a report to the Governor and the Legislature describing the efforts made by the department, or a designated nonprofit entity, to promote public-private partnerships to develop State and foreign relocation missions, the total number of such missions established and any recommendations for legislation to better effectuate the goals of this act.

	L.1995,c.208,s.5.

34:1B-93.	Short title
	1. 	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Export Financing Opportunities Act."

	L.1995,c.209,s.1.

34:1B-94  Findings, declarations relative to export financing.

	2.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	Currently, despite the existence of banks with active international export departments, small and medium-sized businesses in New Jersey find it difficult to obtain pre-export financing and other export finance services needed to defray the costs of potentially profitable orders.

	b.	Although there is currently a State-sponsored export working capital program for small and medium-sized businesses and an export loan guarantee program offered in conjunction with participating banks, relatively few transactions have been approved under these programs.

	c.	The public interest calls for encouraging the growth of exports and small and medium-sized businesses as well as providing stimulation to the economy and to employment by the creation of an export financing company supported by both public and private funds.

	d.	The public funding of an export financing company shall be accomplished by the purchase of stock or an interest in the company, as the case may be, by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority and other public entities involved in international export markets, such purchases to be specifically limited as to the percentage of participation.

	e.	The capitalization of the export financing company would be so structured that the New Jersey Economic Development Authority and other public entities would incur minimal risk on their investment, with private investors assuming most of the risk and earning more of the profits should the new venture prove successful.

	L.1995,c.209,s.2;  amended 1999, c.38, s.1.

34:1B-95  Definitions.

	3.	As used in this act:

	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).

	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Commerce and Economic Development.

	"Department" means the Department of Commerce and Economic Development.

	"Export financing company" means a private corporation or limited liability company incorporated or organized for the purpose of financing the export activities of small or medium-sized businesses.

	"Limited liability company" means a company organized pursuant to  the "New Jersey Limited Liability Company Act," P.L.1993, c.210 (C.42:2B-1 et seq.).

	"Small or medium-sized business" means a business enterprise, which has its principal place of business in this State, is independently owned and operated as a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or limited liability company with a level of gross income from operations defined by the authority as a small or medium-sized business.

	L.1995,c.209,s.3; amended 1999, c.38, s.2.

34:1B-96  Investment of moneys in export financing company.
  
	4.	The authority is authorized, notwithstanding any law to the contrary, to invest such moneys from the "Economic Recovery Fund," established pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1992, c.16 (C.34:1B-7.12), or from other export or business assistance programs administered by the authority, as may be available and which the authority deems appropriate for the purposes of this act, in an export financing company, hereinafter "the company," to be incorporated or organized pursuant to the provisions of this act, which, together with those investments which may be made in the stock or interest of the company by other public entities involved in international export markets that may include, but not necessarily be limited to, the Delaware River Port Authority and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, shall be at a minimum amount to be determined by the authority.  The moneys shall be used for the purchase of stock or an interest in the company, provided that the class of stock or interest purchased by the authority and other public entities shall be of such type and character as to require the company to repay the investment of funds from the authority and other public entities prior to the repayment of funds from private sources, but in no event shall the amount of such stock or interest purchased by the authority and other public entities exceed 49% of the total outstanding stock or total shared interest of the company.  The authority is authorized in its discretion to sell or otherwise dispose of the stock or interest purchased by the authority as shall be in the interest of the authority but the authority shall sell or otherwise dispose of the stock or interest no later than three years after the date of purchase.
 
	Nothing in this act shall be construed to preclude the company from being organized as a limited liability company or to preclude the authority and other public entities involved in international export markets from purchasing an interest in such a limited liability company provided that the interest purchased by the authority and other public entities shall not exceed 49 percent of the total shared interest of the company, and provided that the operating agreement of the company grants the authority and any other public entity the right to resign and receive a distribution, representing the fair value of the authority's or public entity's interest in the company, prior to the resignation of and distribution to any private members.1
 
	L.1995, c.209, s.4; amended 1999, c.38, s.3; 2007, c.39, s.3.

34:1B-97  Qualification as export financing company.

	5.	In order to qualify as an export financing company eligible to be the subject of an investment by the authority and by the other public entities involved in international export markets, a company shall:

	a.	Have a board of directors or board of trustees appropriate to the form of incorporation or organization of the company consisting of:  (1) the commissioner and the chairman of the authority, who shall be members ex officio; and (2) representatives of export trading companies, banking and other financial institutions, and other representatives of the private sector, who shall be selected by private stockholders or members, and who shall constitute the majority of the membership of the board.

	b.	Retain the services of an independent commercial auditor:

	(1)	to determine the extent to which funds made available to the company for its purposes have been expended in a manner that is consistent with the purposes of this act and the charter or operating agreement of the company; and

	(2)	to prepare and submit to the Legislature, the State Treasurer, the authority and the other public entities participating in the purchase of stock or an interest in the company, an independent certified statement annually containing the findings and determinations of such auditor.

	c.	In connection with the investment of authority moneys in the company pursuant to this act, solicit other forms of support, such as grants from the federal government or from other public and private sources, and make available its stock or a shared interest for purchase by private entities.

	L.1995,c.209,s.5; amended 1999, c.38, s.4.

34:1B-98.	Purpose of company
	6.  a.  The company shall have as its purpose the making of loans and loan guarantees to small or medium-sized businesses to assist in their export activities.  Such loans and loan guarantees shall include, but not be limited to, pre-export financing and working capital loans.  The criteria for the making of loans and loan guarantees shall be "transaction" based, that is to say, based upon the project in question rather than upon the assets which the business receiving the loan or loan guarantee possesses.

	b. 	The company shall also have as its purpose the providing of other export-related services as its board may from time to time approve.

	c. 	The company shall also have as an authorized purpose the entering into agreements with financial institutions, to the extent feasible, in order to assist in the making of loans and loan guarantees by the company and in the perfecting of related matters.

	d. 	The company shall actively solicit, to the extent feasible, the involvement of private banks, other lending institutions and the private insurance market to assist the company in the lending process and in providing the export-related services required by small or medium-sized businesses.

	L.1995,c.209,s.6.

34:1B-101.	Short title
	1. 	This amendatory and supplementary act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Purchase First Program Act."

	L.1995,c.210,s.1.

34:1B-102.	Findings, declarations relative to business directories, public-private cooperation
	2. 	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a. 	Hearings held by the General Assembly Task Force on Business Retention, Expansion and Export Opportunities revealed that many companies buy products or services from out-of-state businesses because they are unaware that such goods or services are available from companies within this State, often at a substantial discount from the costs of purchasing the same goods or services from out-of-state companies;

	b. 	While the Division of International Trade in the Department of Commerce and Economic Development has developed directories useful for trade purposes which highlight certain selected industries in this State, cutbacks in staff and the limited resources of the department impede its efforts to develop and promote a more comprehensive set of State and regional business directories that could promote the sale of New Jersey's goods and services to other companies within the State as well as to companies in other states and foreign locations; and 

	c. 	Given the importance to the State's economy of encouraging the purchase of goods and services from New Jersey businesses, it is in the public interest for the State to place a priority on encouraging the development and use of  comprehensive business directories and to undertake public-private cooperation in promoting the purchase of products and services produced in this State.

	L.1995,c.210,s.2.

34:1B-103.	New Jersey Purchase First Program
	3. 	There is established, within the Department of Commerce and Economic Development, hereinafter "the department," the New Jersey Purchase First Program, hereinafter "the program."  The purpose of the program shall be to promote and develop markets for New Jersey's goods and services by encouraging private sector businesses to produce and distribute comprehensive State and regional business directories , hereinafter, the "directories," and by coordinating its efforts with privately funded campaigns to stimulate and encourage businesses and industries to buy goods and services produced in this State.  The program shall be administered by the department in consultation with the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).

	L.1995,c.210,s.3.

34:1B-104.	Development, distribution of directories; "industry sector network" defined
	4.  a.  In order to implement the purpose of the program, the department shall, within one year of the effective date of this amendatory and supplementary act, consult with New Jersey business groups in order to develop ways to stimulate the development of directories by the private sector.  The groups to be consulted may include,  but need not be limited to, the New Jersey Business and Industry Association, the New Jersey State Chamber of Commerce, the South Jersey Chamber of Commerce, municipal chambers of commerce, State and local economic development agencies, other local business groups, regional offices of the department, private sector nonprofit entities organized to promote economic development in the State, and community college associations.

	The department shall provide advice, based on its experience in producing departmental business directories, to business and trade groups and associations in order to facilitate the development of comprehensive business directories, to the greatest extent possible, through private sector financing.

	b. 	The directories shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, a catalog of New Jersey manufacturing, supply, distribution and service businesses by product or service description, as appropriate, in a manner to be determined by the commissioner of the department in consultation with the business groups enumerated in subsection a. of this section.  The directories shall be available for purchase by businesses throughout the State and outside the State.

	c. 	The department shall encourage private sector businesses, private sector nonprofit entities, regional groups or partnerships and industry sector networks to make the directories available as soon as practicable and to implement steps to inform the business community throughout the State of the benefits of using the directories to purchase goods and services from New Jersey businesses. As used in this section, "industry sector network" means clusters of two or more businesses that are (1) within an industry that makes or could make an important contribution to the economy of the State, which may include, but need not be limited to, healthcare, pharmaceuticals, chemicals, communications, telecommunications, electronics, software, insurance, tourism, transportation, construction, agriculture, and biotechnology, and (2) working jointly to manufacture, sell or market products, develop technologies or create or disseminate information. 

	L.1995,c.210,s.4.

34:1B-105.	Report to Governor, Legislature
	6. 	Within 24 months of the effective date of this amendatory and supplementary act, the commissioner shall report to the Governor and the Legislature on the outcome of the program authorized under this amendatory and supplementary act, including any recommendations regarding the improvement and expansion of the program.

	L.1995,c.210,s.6.

34:1B-106.	Rules, regulations
	7. 	The department may adopt, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), rules and regulations as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this amendatory and supplementary act.

	L.1995,c.210,s.7.


34:1B-112  Short title.

	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Business Retention and Relocation Assistance Act."

	L.1996,c.25,s.1; amended 2004, c.65, s.1.

34:1B-113  Definitions relative to business retention and relocation assistance.
	2.	As used in this act:
 
	"Affiliate" means an entity that directly or indirectly controls, is under common control with, or is controlled by the business. Control exists in all cases in which the entity is a member of a controlled group of corporations as defined pursuant to section 1563 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. s.1563) or the entity is an organization in a group of organizations under common control as defined pursuant to subsection (b) or (c) of section 414 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. s.414). An entity may establish by clear and convincing evidence, as determined by the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, that control exists in situations involving lesser percentages of ownership than required by those statutes;
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority created pursuant to P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.);
 
	"Business retention or relocation grant of tax credits" or "grant of tax credits" means a grant which consists of the value of corporation business tax credits against the liability imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5) or credits against the taxes imposed on insurers pursuant to P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-1 et al.), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), and N.J.S.17B:23-5, provided to fund a portion of retention and relocation costs pursuant to P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.);
 
	"Business" means an employer located in this State that has operated continuously in the State, in whole or in part, in its current form or as a predecessor entity for at least 10 years prior to filing an application pursuant to P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.) and which is subject to the provisions of R.S.43:21-1 et seq. and may include a sole proprietorship, a partnership, or a corporation that has made an election under Subchapter S of Chapter One of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or any other business entity through which income flows as a distributive share to its owners, limited liability company, nonprofit corporation, or any other form of business organization located either within or outside the State. A business shall include an affiliate of the business if that business applies for a credit based upon any capital investment made by an affiliate or based upon retained full-time jobs of an affiliate;
 
	"Capital investment" means expenses that the business incurs following its submission of an application to the authority pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-116), but prior to the Capital Investment Completion Date, as shall be defined in the project agreement, for: (1) the site preparation and construction, renovation, improvement, equipping of, or obtaining and installing fixtures and machinery, apparatus or equipment in, a newly constructed, renovated or improved building, structure, facility, or improvement to real property in this State; and (2) obtaining and installing fixtures and machinery, apparatus or equipment in a building, structure, or facility in this State. Provided however, that "capital investment" shall not include soft costs such as financing and design, furniture or decorative items such as artwork or plants, or office equipment if the office equipment is property with a recovery period of less than five years. The recovery period of any property, for purposes of this section, shall be determined as of the date such property is first placed in service or use in this State by the business, determined in accordance with section 168 of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. s.168). A business that acquires or leases a qualified business facility shall also be deemed to have acquired the capital investment made or acquired by the seller or landlord, as the case may be;
 
	"Certificate of compliance" means a certificate issued by the authority pursuant to section 9 of P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-120);
 
	"Chief executive officer" means the chief executive officer of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority;
 
	"Commitment duration" means the tax credit term and five years from the end of the tax credit term specified in the project agreement entered into pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-116);
 
	"Designated industry" means an industry identified by the authority as desirable for the State to maintain, which may be designated and amended via the promulgation of rules by the authority to reflect changing market conditions;
 
	"Designated urban center" means an urban center designated in the State Development and Redevelopment Plan adopted by the State Planning Commission;
 
	"Eligible position" means a full-time position retained by a business in this State for which a business provides employee health benefits under a group health plan as defined under section 14 of P.L.1997, c.146 (C.17B:27-54), a health benefits plan as defined under section 1 of P.L.1992, c.162 (C.17B:27A-17), or a policy or contract of health insurance covering more than one person issued pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 27 of Title 17B of the New Jersey Statutes.  For an eligible business that submitted a certificate of compliance on or after January 1, 2020, the requirement that employee health benefits are to be provided shall be deemed to be satisfied if the benefits are provided by the business or pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement, no later than 90 days of employee start date, under a health benefits plan authorized pursuant to State or federal law;
 
	"Full-time employee" means a person employed by the business for consideration for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice, as determined by the authority, as full-time employment, or a person who is employed by a professional employer organization pursuant to an employee leasing agreement between the business and the professional employer organization, in accordance with P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.) for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice, as determined by the authority, as full-time employment, and whose wages are subject to withholding as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq. or an employee who is a resident of another State but whose income is not subject to the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq. or who is a partner of a business who works for the partnership for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice, as determined by the authority, as full-time employment, and whose distributive share of income, gain, loss, or deduction, or whose guaranteed payments, or any combination thereof, is subject to the payment of estimated taxes, as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq.  "Full-time employee" shall not include any person who works as an independent contractor or on a consulting basis for the business;
 
	"Full-time employee at the qualified business facility" means a full-time position in a business in this State, which position the business has filled with a full-time employee, who shall have their primary office at the qualified business facility and spend at least 60 percent of their time at the qualified business facility.  This requirement shall supersede any law, regulation, or incentive agreement that imposes a requirement that the employee be present at the qualified business facility for a specified percentage of time greater than 60 percent. This amendment shall not alter or terminate any waiver of the requirement that an employee spend time at the qualified business facility implemented by the authority due to COVID-19 public health emergency and state of emergency.
 
	"New business location" means the premises to which a business will relocate that the business has either purchased or built or for which the business has entered into a purchase agreement or a written lease for a period of no less than the commitment duration or eight years, whichever is greater, from the date of relocation. A "new business location" also means the business's current location or locations if the business makes a capital investment equal to the total value of the business retention or relocation grant of tax credits to the business at that location or locations;
 
	"Program" means the Business Retention and Relocation Assistance Grant Program created pursuant to P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.);
 
	"Project agreement" means an agreement between a business and the authority that sets the forecasted schedule for completion and occupancy of the project, the date the commitment duration shall commence, the amount and tax credit term of the applicable grant of tax credits, and other such provisions which further the purposes of P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.);
 
	"Retained full-time job" means an eligible position that currently exists in New Jersey and is filled by a full-time employee but which, because of a potential relocation by the business, is at risk of being lost to another state or country. For the purposes of determining a number of retained full-time jobs, the eligible positions of an affiliate shall be considered the eligible positions of the business;
 
	"Tax credit term" means the period of time commencing with the first issuance of tax credits and continuing during the period in which the recipient of a grant of tax credits is eligible to apply the tax credits pursuant to section 7 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-115.3); and
 
	"Yearly tax credit amount" means $1,500 times the number of retained full-time jobs. "Yearly tax credit amount" does not include the amount of any bonus award authorized pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-115.1).
 
	L.1996, c.25, s.2; amended 2004, c.65, s.2; 2007, c.253, s.14; 2010, c.123, s.1; 2011, c.149, s.12; 2021, c.160, s.64; 2023, c.143, s.1.

34:1B-114  Business Retention and Relocation Assistance Grant Program.
  
	3. a. The Business Retention and Relocation Assistance Grant Program is hereby established as a program under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority and shall be administered by the authority.  The purpose of the program is to encourage economic development and job creation and to preserve jobs that currently exist in New Jersey but which are in danger of being relocated to premises outside of the State.  To implement that purpose, and to the extent that funding for the program is available, the program may provide grants of tax credits.  To be eligible for any grant of tax credits pursuant to P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.), a business shall demonstrate to the authority, at the time of application, that the grant of tax credits and resultant retention of full-time jobs and any capital investment will yield a net positive benefit to the State.  The net benefit resulting from the retention of full-time jobs and any capital investment by a business that has had grant pre-application meetings with the authority and has executed contracts relating to the new business location during the period commencing May 1, 2010 until the enactment of P.L.2010, c.123, shall be calculated from the date of the initial grant pre-application meeting.
 
	b. (1) If an application under P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.) has been received by the authority prior to the effective date of the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.), then, to the extent that there remains sufficient financial authorization for the grant of tax credits, the authority is authorized to consider the application and to make a grant of tax credits to an eligible applicant, provided that the authority shall take final action on that grant of tax credits no later than December 31, 2013.
 
	(2)	A business shall apply for a grant of tax credits under the Business Retention and Relocation Assistance Grant Program prior to the effective date of the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.), and shall submit its documentation for approval of a grant of tax credits no later than 90 calendar days after the effective date of the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.).
 
	(3)	If a business has submitted an application under P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.) and that application has not been approved for any reason, the lack of approval shall not serve to prejudice in any way the consideration of a new application as may be submitted by a business for the provision of incentives offered pursuant to the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.).

 	L.1996, c.25, s.3; amended 2004, c.65, s.3; 2007, c.253, s.15; 2010, c.123, s.2; 2013, c.161, s.2.

34:1B-115  Grant of tax credits; qualifications.
 
 	4. a. To qualify for a grant of tax credits, a business shall enter into an agreement to undertake a project to:
 
	(1)	relocate or maintain a minimum of 50 retained full-time jobs from one or more locations within this State to a new business location or locations in this State; and
 
	(2)	maintain the retained full-time jobs pursuant to the project agreement for the commitment duration.
 
	b.	A project that consists solely of point-of-final-purchase retail facilities shall not be eligible for a grant of tax credits.  If a project consists of both point-of-final-purchase retail facilities and non-retail facilities, only the portion of the project consisting of non-retail facilities shall be eligible for a grant of tax credits.  If a warehouse facility is part of a point-of-final-purchase retail facility and supplies only that facility, the warehouse facility shall not be eligible for a grant of tax credits.  For the purposes of this section, catalog distribution centers shall not be considered point-of-final-purchase retail facilities.
 
	L.1996, c.25, s.4; amended 2004, c.65, s.4; 2007, c.310, s.1; 2010, c.123, s.3.

34:1B-115.1  Bonus awards to certain businesses.
 
	5. a. In addition to any grant of tax credits determined pursuant to section 7 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-115.3), a bonus award equivalent to 50% of the amount of the original grant of tax credits shall be made to any business that relocates more than 2,000 full-time employees covered by the project agreement from one or more locations outside of a designated urban center into a designated urban center, provided that all other applicable requirements of P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.) are satisfied; and provided further that no grant of tax credits shall be awarded pursuant to this section for any job that is moved from its current location in an urban enterprise zone designated pursuant to the "New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act," P.L.1983, c.303 (C.52:27H-60 et seq.) to a location that is not within an urban enterprise zone; however, that if the move from the urban enterprise zone is to a facility already owned or leased by the same business and that business already employs at least the same number of persons as those being relocated from the urban enterprise zone a grant of tax credits may still be awarded pursuant to this section. 
 
	b.	In addition to any grant of tax credits determined pursuant to section 7 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-115.3), and in addition to any bonus award pursuant to subsection a. of this section, a bonus award equivalent to 50% of the amount of the grant of tax credits pursuant to section 7 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-115.3) shall be made to any business that makes a capital investment in an amount that is at least twice that of the total value of the grant of tax credits granted pursuant to section 7 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-115.3) and the grant of tax credits pursuant to this subsection.  A bonus award made pursuant to this subsection may be limited, so that when added to the tax credits granted pursuant to section 7 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-115.3), the total amount shall not exceed 50% of the amount of the capital investment in this State.
 
	L.2004, c.65, s.5; amended 2010, c.123, s.4.

34:1B-115.2  Qualification for grant of tax credits.
 
 	6.	To qualify for a grant of tax credits pursuant to P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.), a business shall demonstrate that the receipt of assistance pursuant to P.L.1996, c.25, will be a material factor in the business' decision not to relocate outside of New Jersey; provided however, that a business that relocates 1,500 or more retained full-time jobs covered by a project agreement from outside of a designated urban center to one or more new locations within a designated urban center shall not be required to make such a demonstration if the business applies for a grant of tax credits within six months of signing its lease or purchase agreement.  A business that has had grant pre-application meetings with the authority and has executed contracts relating to the new business location during the period commencing May 1, 2010 until the enactment of P.L.2010, c.123 shall not be deemed ineligible for the grant due to the material factor requirement.
 
	L.2004, c.65, s.6; amended 2010, c.123, s.5.

34:1B-115.3  Limit on total value of grants of tax credits; approval schedule.
 
 	7. a. The total value of the grants of tax credits, approved by the authority pursuant to P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.), that may be applied against tax liability for any tax period shall not exceed an aggregate annual limit of $20,000,000.  The total value of the grants of tax credits, issued pursuant to P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.), that a single business may apply against its tax liability shall not exceed an aggregate annual limit of $10,000,000 in a fiscal year.  A tax credit issued pursuant to P.L.1996, c.25 may be applied against liability in the single tax period in which the tax credit or portion of the tax credit may be applied as prescribed by the project agreement and as set forth in subsection b. of this section and shall expire thereafter.
 
	b.	Subject to the limitation set forth in subsection a. of this section, grants of tax credits shall be approved for qualifying businesses according to the following schedule, and shall be issued upon the execution and satisfaction of the requirements of the project agreement between the authority and the business with an approved project:
 
	(1)	for a project that covers a business relocating or retaining 50 to 250 full-time employees, a grant of tax credits shall be for the yearly tax credit amount plus any applicable bonus award determined pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-115.1), and may be applied against liability in the tax period in which the tax credit is issued;
 
	(2)	for a project that covers a business relocating or retaining 251 to 400 full-time employees, a grant of tax credits shall be for two times the yearly tax credit amount plus any applicable bonus award determined pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-115.1), and may be applied against liability in the tax period in which the tax credit is issued and the following tax period, for one-half of the total grant award per tax period, provided that the use of the credit must be accompanied by a certificate of compliance;
 
	(3)	for a project that covers a business relocating or retaining 401 to 600 full-time employees, a grant of tax credits shall be for three times the yearly tax credit amount plus any applicable bonus award determined pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-115.1) and may be applied against liability in the tax period in which the tax credit is issued and the following two tax periods, for one-third of the total grant award per tax period, provided that the use of the credit must be accompanied by a certificate of compliance;
 
	(4)	for a project that covers a business relocating or retaining 601 to 800 full-time employees, a grant of tax credits shall be for four times the yearly tax credit amount plus any applicable bonus award determined pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-115.1) and may be applied against liability in the tax period in which the tax credit is issued and the following three tax periods, for one-fourth of the total grant award per tax period, provided that the use of the credit must be accompanied by a certificate of compliance;
 
	(5)	for a project that covers a business relocating or retaining 801 to 1,000 full-time employees, a grant of tax credits shall be for five times the yearly tax credit amount plus any applicable bonus award determined pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-115.1) and may be applied against liability in the tax period in which the tax credit is issued and the following four tax periods for one-fifth of the total grant award per tax period, provided that the use of the credit must be accompanied by a certificate of compliance; and
 
	(6)	for a project that covers a business relocating or retaining 1,001 or more full-time employees, a grant of tax credits shall be for six times the yearly tax credit amount plus any applicable bonus award determined pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-115.1) and may be applied against liability in the tax period in which the tax credit is issued and the following five tax periods, for one-sixth of the total grant award per tax period, provided that the use of the credit must be accompanied by a certificate of compliance.
 
	c.	If the approval of a grant of tax credits pursuant to this section would exceed the $20,000,000 aggregate annual limit, the authority may award a smaller grant of tax credits or no grants of tax credits, as necessary to comply with the aggregate annual limit.
 
	L.2004, c.65, s.7; amended 2007, c.310, s.2; 2010, c.123, s.6; 2011, c.149, s.13.

34:1B-116  Grant application.
 
	5.	Each business seeking a grant of tax credits for a project shall submit an application for approval of the project to the authority in a form and manner prescribed in regulations adopted by the authority. The application must be submitted to the authority for approval at least 45 days prior to moving to the new business location; provided however, a business relocating 1,500 or more retained full-time jobs to one or more new locations within a designated urban center shall, if relocating to a leased location, submit an application within six months of executing its lease.  A business that has had grant pre-application meetings with the authority and has executed contracts relating to the new business location during the period commencing May 1, 2010 until the enactment of P.L.2010, c.123 shall not be deemed ineligible for the grant due to the requirement to apply 45 days before moving to the new business location.  The application for approval of a project shall include:
 
	a.	A schedule of short-term and long-term employment projections of the business in the State based upon the relocation;
 
	b.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2004, c.65.)
 
	c.	Terms of any lease agreements, either existing or proposed, or details of the purchase or building of the new business location, if applicable;
 
	d.	An estimate of the projected retained State tax revenues resulting from the relocation;
 
	e.	A description of the type of contribution the business can make to the long-term growth of the State's economy and a description of the potential impact on the State's economy if the jobs are not retained;
 
	f.	Evidence that the business or a predecessor entity has been operating, in whole or in part, in this State for at least 10 years prior to the filing of the application;
 
	g.	Evidence of alternative relocation plans, such as an analysis of the cost effectiveness of remaining in this State versus relocation under the alternative plans;
 
	h.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2010, c.123); and
 
	i.	Any other necessary and relevant information as determined by the authority.
 
	The authority staff may provide whatever assistance the authority deems appropriate in the preparation of an application for approval of a project and may issue grants of tax credits pursuant to the project agreement entered between the authority and the business.
 
	The project agreement shall include terms establishing the starting date, or event that will determine the starting date, of the commitment duration and any other terms or conditions as determined by the authority, which shall include the number of full-time jobs that must be maintained in the State by the business over the commitment duration.
 
	L.1996, c.25, s.5; amended 2004, c.65, s.8; 2010, c.123, s.7.

34:1B-118  Grant limitations.
 
 	7. a. A business that is receiving a business employment incentive grant pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et al.) shall not be eligible to receive a grant of tax credits under P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.) with respect to a job which is included in the calculation of a grant pursuant to P.L.1996, c.26.
 
	b.	A business that is receiving any other grant by operation of State law shall be eligible to receive a grant of tax credits under P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.); provided, however, that a business that is receiving another State grant shall not be eligible to receive assistance with respect to any job that is currently the subject of any other State grant, except for grants from the Office of Customized Training pursuant to the "1992 New Jersey Employment and Workforce Development Act," P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-1 et seq.), and provided further that a business shall not receive an amount as a grant of tax credits pursuant to P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.) unless the State will realize a net positive benefit from the grant of tax credits and resultant retention of full-time jobs and any capital investment when combined with such other grants, except upon the approval of the State Treasurer. Amounts received as grants from the Office of Customized Training pursuant to the "1992 New Jersey Employment and Workforce Development Act," P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-1 et seq.), shall be excluded from the calculation of the total amount permitted under this subsection.
 
	L.1996, c.25, s.7; amended 2004, c.65, s.10; 2010, c.123, s.9.

34:1B-118.1  Award, amount of grant; factors.
 
	11.	In considering the award and the amount of any grant of tax credits made pursuant to P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.), the authority may consider, as part of the authority's overall review process, the following factors:
 
	a.	The number of full-time jobs retained;
 
	b.	The quality of the full-time jobs retained, including but not limited to the salaries and benefits provided to retained full-time employees;
 
	c.	Any capital investments made by the business at the new business location;
 
	d.	The nature of the business' operations, including but not limited to whether the business is a designated industry;
 
	e.	The potential impact on the State if the business were to relocate to another state;
 
	f.	The site of the new business location and its consistency with the smart growth goals, strategies and policies of the State Development and Redevelopment Plan established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1985, c.398 (C.52:18A-200);
 
	g.	Whether positions average at least 1.5 times the minimum hourly wage during the commitment duration; and
 
	h.	The duration and extent of past operations by the business in New Jersey and any other information indicating the business' level of commitment to the State and the likelihood that the business will continue to operate in this State in the future.
 
	L.2004, c.65, s.11; amended 2010, c.123, s.10.

34:1B-119  Rules, regulations relative to program.
 
	8.	The authority shall, after consultation with the Director of the Division of Taxation, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), adopt rules and regulations necessary to govern the proper conduct and operation of the program consistent with the provisions of P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.) including, but not limited to, a procedure for recapturing relocation grants of tax credits awarded pursuant to P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.) in those cases in which the authority determines that the business receiving the grant of tax credits fails to meet or comply with any condition or requirement attached by the authority to the receipt of the grant of tax credits or included in rules and regulations adopted by the authority governing the implementation of the program.  The Director of the Division of Taxation, after consultation with the authority, is authorized to promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to effect the tax-related provisions of the program.
 
	L.1996, c.25, s.8; amended 2004, c.65, s.12; 2010, c.123, s.11.

34:1B-120  Certificate of compliance indicating amount of tax credits; elect to waive requirement, minimum employee time, criteria.
	9. a. As determined by the authority, a business which is awarded a grant of tax credits under P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.) shall submit annually, no later than March 1st of each year, commencing in the year in which the grant of tax credits is issued and for the remainder of the commitment duration, a certificate of compliance that indicates that the business continues to maintain the number of retained full-time jobs as specified in the project agreement. Upon receipt and review thereof during the tax credit term, the authority shall issue a certificate of compliance indicating the amount of tax credits that the business may apply against liability pursuant to section 7 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-115.3). Any reduction in the number of retained full-time jobs below the number prescribed under the terms of the project agreement shall proportionately reduce the amount of tax credits the business may apply against liability in that tax period and the credits that may no longer be applied for that tax period shall be forfeited. However, if in any tax period, the number of retained full-time jobs drops below the minimum number of retained full-time jobs indicated in the paragraph of subsection b. of section 7 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-115.3) pursuant to which the project agreement was executed such that the business would no longer be eligible to apply the credits for the number of years for which it was approved, then the authority shall reduce the amount of tax credits the business may apply against liability and the number of years in which the business may apply the tax credits. The grant shall be subject to recapture provisions pursuant to the project agreement.
 
	b.	Following the termination of the public health emergency declared by the Governor pursuant to Executive Order No. 103 of 2020, as extended, a business that has entered into an incentive agreement may elect, before March 31, 2024, to waive, for the period beginning on July 1, 2022 and ending on March 31, 2024, the requirement that a full-time employee who is employed by the business shall spend at least 60 percent of the employee's time at the qualified business facility; provided, however, that a business that makes such an election shall satisfy the following criteria:
 
	(1)	any full-time employee employed by the business shall spend at least 10 percent of the employee's time at the qualified business facility for the 2023 tax period and, if elected by the business, the 2024 tax period through March 31, 2024; and
 
	(2)	following the receipt by the business of its tax credit certificate or tax credit transfer certificate for the 2022 tax period, the business shall make a payment of an amount equal to five percent of the amount of tax credit the business receives for the 2022 tax period through March 31, 2024, which payment shall be made to the authority, and which payment the authority shall hold and make available for the provision of loans, guarantees, equity investments, and grants, or other forms of financing to support small business and downtown or commercial corridor activation activities within the municipality in which the qualified business facility is located, as may be designated by the chief executive officer of the authority.  Such funds shall be deployed by the authority within 12 months of the authority's receipt of the funds, and the authority shall issue a report each fiscal year to the Legislature, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), detailing how the funds were distributed.
 
	c.	Notwithstanding the provisions of section 2 of P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-113) or any other law or regulation to the contrary, beginning on April 1, 2024, and for all subsequent tax periods, a business located outside an enhanced area or government-restricted municipality, as those terms are defined in section 69 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-337), that has entered into an incentive agreement with the authority may elect to waive the requirement that a full-time employee who is employed by the business shall spend at least 60 percent of the employee's time at the qualified business facility, provided, however, that a business that makes this election shall satisfy the following criteria:
 
	(1)	 for a qualified business facility located outside an enhanced area or government-restricted municipality, as those terms are defined in section 69 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-337), any full-time employee employed by the business shall spend at least 40 percent of the employee's time at the qualified business facility during the tax period; 
 
	(2)	the business shall extend by two years the term of its commitment duration beyond the time set forth in the project agreement; and
 
	(3)	at the time the business submits its tax credit certificate certification for the tax period, the business shall make a non-refundable payment of an amount equal to 10 percent of the amount of the maximum annual tax credit that the business is eligible to receive for the tax period, which payment shall be made to the authority and which payment the authority shall hold and make available for the provision of loans, guarantees, equity investments, and grants or other forms of financing to support small business and downtown or commercial corridor activation activities within enhanced areas or government-restricted municipalities, as those terms are defined in section 69 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-337), as may be designated by the chief executive officer of the authority.  Such funds shall be deployed by the authority within 12 months of the authority's receipt of the funds, and the authority shall issue a report each fiscal year to the Legislature, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), detailing how the funds were distributed.
 
	d.	Notwithstanding the provisions of any law to the contrary, the credit amount may first be taken by the tax certificate holder for the tax period for which it was issued, for the tax period in which it was issued, or in any tax period during the commitment duration set forth in the project agreement.  The tax certificate holder may transfer the tax credit amount on or after the date of issuance for use by the transferee in the tax period for which it was issued, for the tax period in which it was issued, or in any of the next three successive tax periods.  The tax certificate holder or transferee may first use the credit against tax liabilities in the tax period in which it was issued or in a succeeding tax period, as authorized in this subsection, without the need for amending the tax return for the tax period for which the credit was issued, subject to the provisions of this section.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no more than the amount of tax credits equal to the total credit amount, divided by the duration of the tax credit term, in years, may be taken in any tax period.
 
	L.1996, c.25, s.9; amended 2004, c.65, s.13; 2010, c.123, s.12; 2022, c.134, s.1; 2023, c.261, s.1; 2024, c.40, s.1.

34:1B-120.1  Rules for recapture of tax credits.
 
	14.	The authority is authorized to pursue, and shall adopt rules for, the recapture of all, or a portion of, the grant of tax credits, based on criteria established by the authority pursuant to regulation or under the terms of the project agreement.  The rules shall allow for the authority to pursue the full or partial recapture or, in its discretion, to notify the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, who shall issue a recapture assessment which shall be based upon the proportionate value of the grant of tax credits that corresponds to the amount and period of noncompliance, in which case, the recapture of funds shall be subject to the State Uniform Tax Procedure Law, R.S.54:48-1 et seq.  Recaptured funds shall be deposited in the General Fund of the State.
 
	L.2004, c.65, s.14; amended 2010, c.123, s.13.

34:1B-120.2  Corporation business tax, insurance premiums tax credits.
 
	17. a. The authority shall establish a corporation business tax credit and insurance premiums tax credit certificate transfer program to allow businesses in this State with unused amounts of tax credits issued under P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.), and otherwise allowable, that cannot be applied by the business to which originally issued before the expiration of the credit, to surrender those tax credits for use by other corporation business and insurance premiums taxpayers in this State. The tax credits may be used on the corporation business tax and insurance premiums tax returns to be filed by those taxpayers in exchange for private financial assistance to be provided by the corporation business taxpayer or insurance premiums taxpayer that is the recipient of the corporation business tax credit certificate or insurance premiums tax credit certificate to assist in the funding of costs incurred by the relocating business.
 
	b.	Businesses may apply to the executive director of the authority and the Director of the Division of Taxation for a tax credit transfer certificate, covering one or more years.  Upon receipt thereof, the business may sell or assign the tax credit certificate in exchange for private financial assistance to be made by the purchaser in an amount equal to at least 75% of the amount of the surrendered tax credit of a business relocating in the State.  The private financial assistance shall assist in funding expenses incurred in connection with the operation of the business in the State, including but not limited to the expenses of fixed assets, such as the construction and acquisition and development of real estate, materials, start-up, tenant fit-out, working capital, salaries, research and development expenditures and any other expenses determined by the authority to be necessary to carry out the purposes of P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.).
 
	c.	The authority shall establish procedures to facilitate such transfers and encourage liquidity and simplicity in the market for the purchase and sale of such certificates, including, in the authority's discretion, coordinating the applications for surrender and acquisition of unused but otherwise allowable tax credits pursuant to this section in a manner that can best stimulate and encourage the extension of private financial assistance to businesses in this State.
 
	d.	The authority shall, in consultation with the Director of the Division of Taxation, develop criteria for the approval or disapproval of applications.
 
	L.2004, c.65, s.17; amended 2010, c.123, s.14; 2011, c.149, s.14.

34:1B-121  Annual report on program.
 
 	10. The authority shall prepare and transmit to the Governor and the Legislature, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), on or before November 1st of each year, a report concerning the impact of the program on job retention in the State.
 
	L.1996, c.25, s.10; amended 2004, c.65, s.15; 2010, c.123, s.15.

34:1B-123  Appropriation capped by retained tax revenue.

	12. There is appropriated to the New Jersey Commerce and Economic Growth Commission from the General Fund such sums as may be necessary, as certified by the commissioner and the Director of the Division of Budget and Accounting, to fund business retention and relocation grants of tax credits made under P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.), the amount of which shall not exceed the retained State tax revenues as defined in section 2 of P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-113).

	L.1996,c.25,s.12;  amended 2004, c.65, s.16. 

34:1B-124. Short title

	1. Sections 1 through 17 of this act shall be known and may be cited as the "Business Employment Incentive Program Act."

L.1996,c.26,s.1.

34:1B-125  Definitions relative to business employment incentives.
	2.	As used in sections 1 through 17 of P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et seq.) and in sections 9 through 11 of P.L.2003, c.166 (C.34:1B-139.1 through C.34:1B-139.3), unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
 
	"Advanced computing" means a technology used in the designing and developing of computing hardware and software, including innovations in designing the full spectrum of hardware from hand-held calculators to super computers, and peripheral equipment.
 
	"Advanced computing company" means a person, whose headquarters or base of operations is located in New Jersey, engaged in the research, development, production, or provision of advanced computing for the purpose of developing or providing products or processes for specific commercial or public purposes.
 
	"Advanced materials" means materials with engineered properties created through the development of specialized processing and synthesis technology, including ceramics, high value-added metals, electronic materials, composites, polymers, and biomaterials.
 
	"Advanced materials company" means a person, whose headquarters or base of operations is located in New Jersey, engaged in the research, development, production, or provision of advanced materials for the purpose of developing or providing products or processes for specific commercial or public purposes.
 
	"Application year" means the grant year for which an eligible partnership submits the information required under section 8 of P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-131).
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority created pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Base years" means the first two complete calendar years following the effective date of an agreement.
 
	"Biotechnology" means the continually expanding body of fundamental knowledge about the functioning of biological systems from the macro level to the molecular and sub-atomic levels, as well as novel products, services, technologies, and sub-technologies developed as a result of insights gained from research advances which add to that body of fundamental knowledge.
 
	"Biotechnology company" means a person, whose headquarters or base of operations is located in New Jersey, engaged in the research, development, production, or provision of biotechnology for the purpose of developing or providing products or processes for specific commercial or public purposes, including but not limited to, medical, pharmaceutical, nutritional, and other health-related purposes, agricultural purposes, and environmental purposes, or a person, whose headquarters or base of operations is located in New Jersey, engaged in providing services or products necessary for such research, development, production, or provision.
 
	"Bonds" means bonds, notes, or other obligations issued by the authority pursuant to P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et seq.).
 
	"Business" means a corporation; sole proprietorship; partnership; corporation that has made an election under Subchapter S of Chapter One of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or any other business entity through which income flows as a distributive share to its owners; limited liability company; nonprofit corporation; or any other form of business organization located either within or outside this State. A grant received under P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et seq.) by a partnership, Subchapter S-Corporation, or other business entity shall be apportioned among the persons to whom the income or profit of the partnership, Subchapter S-Corporation, or other entity is distributed, in the same proportions as those in which the income or profit is distributed.
 
	"Business employment incentive agreement" or "agreement" means the written agreement between the authority and a business proposing a project in this State in accordance with the provisions of P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et seq.) which establishes the terms and conditions of a grant to be awarded pursuant to P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et seq.).
 
	"Designated industry" means a business engaged in the field of biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, financial services, transportation and logistics, advanced computing, advanced materials, electronic device technology, environmental technology, or medical device technology.
 
	"Director" means the Director of the Division of Taxation.
 
	"Division" means the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.
 
	"Electronic device technology" means a technology involving microelectronics, semiconductors, electronic equipment, and instrumentation, radio frequency, microwave, and millimeter electronics, and optical and optic-electrical devices, or data and digital communications and imaging devices.
 
	"Electronic device technology company" means a person, whose headquarters or base of operations is located in New Jersey, engaged in the research, development, production, or provision of electronic device technology for the purpose of developing or providing products or processes for specific commercial or public purposes.
 
	"Eligible partnership" means a partnership or limited liability company that is qualified to receive a grant as established in P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et seq.).
 
	"Eligible position" is a new full-time position created by a business in New Jersey or transferred from another state by the business under the terms and conditions set forth in P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et seq.) during the base years or in subsequent years of a grant. In determining if positions are eligible positions, the authority shall give greater consideration to positions that average at least 1.5 times the minimum hourly wage during the term of an agreement authorized pursuant to P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et seq.). For grants awarded on or after July 1, 2003, eligible position includes only a position for which a business provides employee health benefits under a group health plan as defined under section 14 of P.L.1997, c.146 (C.17B:27-54), a health benefits plan as defined under section 1 of P.L.1992, c.162 (C.17B:27A-17), or a policy or contract of health insurance covering more than one person issued pursuant to Article 2 of Title 17B of the New Jersey Statutes.  For an eligible business that submitted its applicable New Jersey tax return and annual payroll report required pursuant to section 8 of P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-131) to the authority on or after January 1, 2020, the requirement that employee health benefits are to be provided shall be deemed to be satisfied if the benefits are provided by the business or pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement, no later than 90 days of employee start date, under a health benefits plan authorized pursuant to State or federal law.  An "eligible position" shall also include all current and future partners or members of a partnership or limited liability company created by a business in New Jersey or transferred from another state by the business pursuant to the conditions set forth in P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et seq.) during the base years or in subsequent years of a grant. An "eligible position" shall also include a position occupied by a resident of this State whose position is relocated to this State from another state but who does not qualify as a "new employee" because prior to relocation the resident's wages or the resident's distributive share of income from a gain, from a loss or deduction, or the resident's guaranteed payments or any combination thereof, prior to the relocation, were not subject to income taxes imposed by the state or municipality in which the position was previously located. An "eligible position" shall also include a position occupied by a resident of another State whose position is relocated to this State but whose income is not subject to the New Jersey gross income tax pursuant to the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq. An "eligible position" shall not include any position located within New Jersey, which, within a period either three months prior to the business' application for a grant under P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et seq.) or six months after the date of application, ceases to exist or be located within New Jersey.
 
	"Employment incentive" means the amount of a grant, either in cash or in tax credits, determined pursuant to subsection a. of section 6 of P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-129 ).
 
	"Environmental technology" means assessment and prevention of threats or damage to human health or the environment, environmental cleanup, or the development of alternative energy sources.
 
	"Environmental technology company" means a person, whose headquarters or base of operations is located in New Jersey, engaged in the research, development, production, or provision of environmental technology for the purpose of developing or providing products or processes for specific commercial or public purposes.
 
	"Estimated tax" means an amount calculated for a partner in an eligible position equal to 6.37 percent of the lesser of: a. the amount of the partner's net income from the eligible partnership that is sourced to New Jersey as reflected in Column B of the partner's Schedule NJK-1 of the application year less the amount of the partner's net income from the eligible partnership that is sourced to New Jersey as reflected in column B of the partner's Schedule NJK-1 in the foundation year; or b. the net of all items of partnership income upon which tax has been paid as reflected on the partner's New Jersey Gross Income Tax return in the application year.
 
	"Foundation year" means the year immediately prior to the creation of the eligible position.
 
	"Full-time employee" means a person who is employed for consideration for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment, whose wages are subject to withholding as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq., and who is determined by the authority to be employed in a permanent position according to criteria it develops, or who is a partner of an eligible partnership, who works for the partnership for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment, and whose distributive share of income, gain, loss, or deduction, or whose guaranteed payments, or any combination thereof, is subject to the payment of estimated taxes, as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq. "Full-time employee" shall not include any person who works as an independent contractor or on a consulting basis for the business.
 
	"Full-time employee at the qualified business facility" means a full-time position in a business in this State, which position the business has filled with a full-time employee, who shall have their primary office at the qualified business facility and spend at least 60 percent of their time at the qualified business facility. This requirement shall supersede any law, regulation, or incentive agreement that imposes a requirement that the employee be present at the qualified business facility for a specified percentage of time greater than 60 percent. This amendment shall not alter or terminate any waiver of the requirement that an employee spend time at the qualified business facility implemented by the authority due to COVID-19 public health emergency and state of emergency.
 
	"Grant" means a business employment incentive grant as established in P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et seq.).
 
	"Medical device technology" means a technology involving any medical equipment or product, other than a pharmaceutical product, that has therapeutic value, diagnostic value, or both, and is regulated by the federal Food and Drug Administration.
 
	"Medical device technology company" means a person, whose headquarters or base of operations is located in New Jersey, engaged in the research, development, production, or provision of medical device technology for the purpose of developing or providing products or processes for specific commercial or public purposes.
 
	"Net income from the eligible partnership" means the net combination of a partner's distributive share of the eligible partnership's income, gain, loss, deduction, or guaranteed payments.
 
	"New employee" means a full-time employee first employed in an eligible position on the project which is the subject of an agreement or who is a partner of an eligible partnership, who works for the partnership for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment, and whose distributive share of income, gain, loss or deduction, or whose guaranteed payments, or any combination thereof, is subject to the payment of estimated taxes, as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq.; except that a New Jersey resident whose position is relocated to this State shall not be classified as a "new employee" unless the employee's wages, or the employee's distributive share of income from a gain, from a loss or deduction, or the employee's guaranteed payments or any combination thereof, prior to the relocation, were subject to income taxes imposed by the state or municipality in which the position was previously located. "New employee" may also include an employee rehired or called back from a layoff during or following the base years to a vacant position previously held by that employee or to a new position established during or following the base years. "New employee" shall not include any employee who was previously employed in New Jersey by the business or by a related person as defined in section 2 of P.L.1993, c.170 (C.54:10A-5.5) if the employee is transferred to the business, which is the subject of an agreement, unless the employee's position at the employee's previous employer is filled by a new employee. "New employee" also shall not include a child, grandchild, parent, or spouse of an individual associated with the business who has direct or indirect ownership of at least 15 percent of the profits, capital, or value of the business. New employee shall also include an employee whose position is relocated to this State but whose income is not subject to the New Jersey gross income tax pursuant to the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq.
 
	"Partner" means a person who is entitled to either a distributive share of a partnership's income, gain, loss, or deduction, or guaranteed payments, or any combination thereof, by virtue of holding an interest in the partnership. "Partner" also includes a person who is a member of a limited liability company which is treated as a partnership, as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq.
 
	"Refunding Bonds" means bonds, notes or other obligations issued to refinance bonds, notes or other obligations previously issued by the authority pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et seq.).
 
	"Residual withholdings" means for any period of time, the excess of the estimated cumulative withholdings for all executed agreements eligible for payments under P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et seq.) over the cumulative anticipated grant amounts.
 
	"Schedule NJK-1" means Schedule NJK-1 as the form existed for taxable year 1997.
 
	"Withholdings" means the amount withheld by a business from the wages of new employees or estimated taxes paid by, or on behalf of, partners that are new employees, or any combination thereof, pursuant to the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq., and, if the new employee is an employee whose position has moved to New Jersey but whose income is not subject to the New Jersey gross income tax pursuant to N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq., the amount of withholding that would occur if the employee were to move to New Jersey.
 
	L.1996, c.26, s.2; amended 1998, c.33, s.1; 2003, c.166, s.1; 2015, c.194, s.1; 2021, c.160, s.63; 2023, c.143, s.2.

34:1B-126. Business Employment Incentive Program established

	3. There is established the Business Employment Incentive Program to be administered by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.  In order to foster job creation in this State, the authority may enter into agreements with businesses to provide business employment incentive grants in accordance with the provisions of this act if it finds that:

	a.  The project proposed by the business will create, during the term of the agreement, a net increase in employment by the business and its related persons, as defined in section 2 of P.L.1993, c.170 (C.54:10A-5.5), in the State as provided in section 4 of this act;

 	b.  The project is economically sound and will benefit the people of New Jersey by increasing opportunities for employment and by strengthening New Jersey's economy; and

	c.  The authority determines that the receipt of the business employment incentive grant will be a material factor in the business' decision to go forward with the project.

L.1996,c.26,s.3.

34:1B-127  Project requirements.
  
	4. a. A business may apply to the authority for a grant for any project which:

	(1)	Will create at least 25 eligible positions in the base years; or
 
	(2)	Will create at least 10 eligible positions in the base years if the business is an advanced computing company, an advanced materials company, a biotechnology company, an electronic device technology company, an environmental technology company, or a medical device technology company.
 
	b.	In the case of a business which is a landlord, the business may apply to the authority for a grant for any project in which at least 25 eligible positions are created in the base years.
 
	c.	A project which consists solely of point-of-final-purchase retail facilities shall not be eligible for a grant under P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et seq.).  If a project consists of both point-of-final-purchase retail facilities and non-retail facilities, only the portion of the project consisting of non-retail facilities shall be eligible for a grant, and only the withholdings from new employees which are employed in the portion of the project which represents non-retail facilities shall be used to determine the amount of the grant.  If a warehouse facility is part of a point-of-final-purchase retail facility and supplies only that facility, the warehouse facility shall not be eligible for a grant.  For the purposes of P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et seq.), catalog distribution centers shall not be considered point-of-final-purchase retail facilities.
 
	d. (1) If an application under P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et seq.) has been received by the authority prior to the effective date of the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.), and, to the extent that there remains sufficient appropriations for grant issuance, then the authority is authorized to consider the application and to make a grant to an eligible applicant, provided that the authority shall take final action on that grant no later than December 31, 2013.
 
	(2)	A business shall apply for a grant under the Business Employment Incentive Program prior to the effective date of the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.), and shall submit its documentation for approval of a grant no later than 90 calendar days after the effective date of the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.).
 
	(3)	If a business has submitted an application under P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et seq.) and that application has not been approved for any reason, the lack of approval shall not serve to prejudice in any way the consideration of a new application as may be submitted by a business for the provision of incentives offered pursuant to the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.).
 
	L.1996, c.26, s.4; amended 2003, c.166, s.2; 2013, c.161, s.3.

34:1B-128  Grant application.

	5.	A business shall apply to the authority for a grant on a form prescribed by the authority which shall include:

	a.	The name of the business, the proposed location of the project, and the type of activity which will be engaged in at the project site;

	b.	The names and addresses of the principals or management of the business, and the nature of the form of business organization under which it is operated;

	c.	The most recent financial statement of the business;

	d.	The number of eligible positions proposed to be created during the base years and thereafter; and

	e.	An estimate of the total withholdings.

	L.1996,c.26,s.5; amended 2003, c.166, s.3.

34:1B-129  Employment incentive grant criteria; tax credit transfer certificate; elect to waive requirement, minimum employee time, criteria.
	6. a. The amount of the employment incentive awarded as a grant by the authority shall either be awarded in cash or as a tax credit.  In each case, the amount of the grant shall be not less than 10 percent and not more than 50 percent of the withholdings of the business, or not less than 10 percent and not more than 30 percent of the estimated tax of the partners of an eligible partnership whether paid directly by the partner or by the eligible partnership on behalf of the partner's account, or any combination thereof, and shall be subject to the provisions of sections 10 and 11 of P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-133 and C.34:1B-134). In no case shall the aggregate amount of the employment incentive grant awarded pursuant to a business employment incentive agreement entered into on or after July 1, 2003 exceed an average of $50,000 for all new employees over the term of the grant. The employment incentive shall be based on criteria developed by the authority after considering the following:
 
	(1)	The number of eligible positions to be created;
 
	(2)	The expected duration of those positions;
 
	(3)	The type of contribution the business can make to the long-term growth of the State's economy;
 
	(4)	The amount of other financial assistance the business will receive from the State for the project;
 
	(5)	The total dollar investment the business is making in the project;
 
	(6)	Whether the business is a designated industry;
 
	(7)	Impact of the business on State tax revenues; and
 
	(8)	Such other related factors determined by the authority.
 
	b.	A business may be eligible to be awarded a grant, either in cash or in tax credits, of up to 80 percent of the withholdings of the business or up to 50 percent of the estimated tax of the partners of an eligible partnership if the grant promotes smart growth and the goals, strategies, and policies of the State Development and Redevelopment Plan, established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1985, c.398 (C.52:18A-200), as determined by and based upon criteria promulgated by the authority following consultation with the Office of State Planning in the Department of State.
 
	c.	The term of the grant shall not exceed 10 years.
 
	d.	At the discretion of the authority, the grant may apply to new employees or partners in eligible positions created during the base years, and during the remainder of the term of the grant.
 
	e.	Within 180 days of the date of enactment of P.L.2015, c.194 (C.34:1B-137.1 et al.), a business that was approved for a grant prior to the enactment of P.L.2015, c.194 (C.34:1B-137.1 et al.), may direct the authority to convert the grant to a tax credit against the tax liability otherwise due pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and 54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5. The direction to convert the grant to a tax credit shall be irrevocable. An approved tax credit shall be issued in the manner and for the amounts as follows and may only be applied in the tax period for which they are issued and shall not be carried forward:
 
	(1)	For grants accrued but not paid during calendar years 2008 through 2013, the tax credit shall be equal to an approved amount and shall be issued in five installments over a five-year period beginning in the 2017 tax accounting or privilege period of the business or tax credit transferee in the following percentages: in year one, five percent of the accrued amount; in year two, 20 percent of the accrued amount; in year three, 25 percent of the accrued amount; in year four, 25 percent of the accrued amount; in year five, 25 percent of the accrued amount. To the extent any amount in this paragraph has not been approved by the authority by the commencement of State fiscal year 2017, the aggregate tax credit that would have been issued in State fiscal year 2017 shall be issued in the year the amount is approved and the five-year period shall commence in that fiscal year;
 
	(2)	For a grant accrued but not paid during calendar year 2014, the tax credit shall be equal to any approved amount and shall be issued in four equal installments over a four-year period beginning in the 2019 tax accounting or privilege period of the business or tax credit transferee;
 
	(3)	For a grant accrued but not paid during calendar year 2015, the tax credit shall be equal to any approved amount and shall be issued in four equal installments over a four-year period beginning in the 2019 tax accounting or privilege period of the business or tax credit transferee;
 
	(4)	For a grant accrued but not paid during calendar year 2016, the tax credit shall be equal to any approved amount and shall be issued in three equal installments over a three-year period beginning in the 2020 tax accounting or privilege period of the business or tax credit transferee;
 
	(5)	For a grant accrued but not paid during calendar year 2017, the tax credit shall be equal to any approved amount and shall be issued in three equal installments over a three-year period beginning in the 2020 tax accounting or privilege period of the business or tax credit transferee;
 
	(6)	For a grant accrued but not paid during calendar year 2018, the tax credit shall be equal to any approved amount and shall be issued in two equal installments over a two-year period beginning in the 2022 tax accounting or privilege period of the business or tax credit transferee;
 
	(7)	For a grant accrued but not paid during calendar year 2019, the tax credit shall be equal to any approved amount and shall be issued in two equal installments over a two-year period beginning in the 2022 tax accounting or privilege period of the business or tax credit transferee;
 
	(8)	For a grant accrued but not paid during calendar year 2020, the tax credit shall be equal to any approved amount and shall be issued in two equal installments over a two-year period beginning in the 2023 tax accounting or privilege period of the business or tax credit transferee;
 
	(9)	For a grant accrued but not paid during calendar year 2021, the tax credit shall be equal to any approved amount and shall be issued in two equal installments over a two-year period beginning in the 2023 tax accounting or privilege period of the business or tax credit transferee;
 
	(10) For a grant accrued but not paid during calendar year 2022, the tax credit shall be equal to any approved amount and shall be paid in two equal installments over a two-year period beginning in the 2023 tax accounting or privilege period of the business or tax credit transferee;
 
	(11) For a grant accrued but not paid during calendar year 2023, the tax credit shall be equal to any approved amount and shall be issued in two equal installments over a two-year period beginning in the 2023 tax accounting or privilege period of the business or tax credit transferee;
 
	(12) For a grant accrued but not paid during calendar year 2024, the tax credit shall be equal to any approved amount and shall be issued in the 2025 tax accounting or privilege period of the business or tax credit transferee; and
 
	(13) For a grant accrued but not paid during calendar year 2025, the tax credit shall be equal to any approved amount and shall be issued in the 2025 tax accounting or privilege period of the business or tax credit transferee.
 
	f.	The amount of the credit allowed pursuant to this section shall be applied against the tax otherwise due under section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5, prior to all other credits and payments. If the credit exceeds the amount of tax liability otherwise due from a business that pays taxes under section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5, that amount of excess shall be an overpayment for the purposes of R.S.54:49-15, provided, however, that section 7 of P.L.1992, c.175 (C.54:49-15.1) shall not apply.
 
	g.	(1) A business that does not pay taxes under section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and 54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5 may apply to the executive director of the authority for a tax credit transfer certificate, covering one or more years.
 
	(2)	A business that has received a tax credit pursuant to subsection e. of this section, which credit exceeds the amount of the tax liability otherwise due, may apply to the executive director of the authority for a tax credit transfer certificate, covering one or more years.
 
	(3)	Upon the executive director's approval of an application for a tax credit transfer certificate, the division shall review and issue the tax credit transfer certificate. The tax credit transfer certificate, upon receipt thereof by the business, may be sold or assigned, in full or in part, in an amount not less than $100,000, or the amount of the refundable tax credit issued if less than $100,000, of tax credits to any other person that may have a tax liability pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and 54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5. The tax credit transfer certificate provided to the business shall include a statement waiving the business's right to claim that amount of the credit against the taxes that the business has elected to sell or assign. The sale or assignment of any amount of a tax credit transfer certificate allowed under this section shall not be exchanged for consideration received by the business of less than 75 percent of the transferred credit amount before considering any further discounting to present value which shall be permitted. Any amount of a tax credit transfer certificate used by a purchaser or assignee against a tax liability shall be subject to the same privileges, limitations, and conditions that apply to the use of the credit by the business that originally applied for and was allowed the tax credit, including treating the amount of excess as an overpayment under subsection f. of this section. The tax credit transferee may not transfer its tax credit to any other party.
 
	h.	Following the termination of the public health emergency declared by the Governor pursuant to Executive Order No. 103 of 2020, as extended, a business that has entered into an incentive agreement may elect, before March 31, 2024, to waive, for the period beginning on July 1, 2022 and ending on March 31, 2024, the requirement that a full-time employee who is employed by the business shall spend at least 60 percent of the employee's time at the qualified business facility; provided, however, that a business that makes such an election shall satisfy the following criteria:
 
	(1) any full-time employee employed by the business shall spend at least 10 percent of the employee's time at the qualified business facility for the 2023 tax period and, if elected by the business, the 2024 tax period through March 31, 2024; and
 
	(2) following the receipt by the business of its tax credit certificate or tax credit transfer certificate for the 2022 tax period, the business shall make a payment of an amount equal to five percent of the amount of tax credit the business receives for the 2022 tax period through March 31, 2024, which payment shall be made to the authority, and which payment the authority shall hold and make available for the provision of loans, guarantees, equity investments, and grants, or other forms of financing to support small business and downtown or commercial corridor activation activities within the municipality in which the qualified business facility is located, as may be designated by the chief executive officer of the authority.  Such funds shall be deployed by the authority within 12 months of the authority's receipt of the funds, and the authority shall issue a report each fiscal year to the Legislature, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), detailing how the funds were distributed.
 
	i.	Notwithstanding the provisions of section 2 of P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-125) or any other law or regulation to the contrary, beginning on April 1, 2024, and for all subsequent tax periods, a business located outside an enhanced area or government-restricted municipality, as those terms are defined in section 69 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-337) that has entered into an  incentive agreement with the authority may elect to waive the requirement that a full-time employee who is employed by the business shall spend at least 60 percent of the employee's time at the qualified business facility, provided, however, that a business that makes this election shall satisfy the following criteria:
 
	(1)	 for a qualified business facility located outside an enhanced area or government-restricted municipality, as those terms are defined in section 69 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-337), any full-time employee employed by the business shall spend at least 40 percent of the employee's time at the qualified business facility during the tax period; 
 
	(2)	the business shall extend by two years the time it is required to maintain the project at a location in New Jersey beyond the time set forth in the incentive agreement; and
 
	(3)	at the time the business submits its tax credit certificate certification for the tax period, the business shall make a non-refundable payment of an amount equal to 10 percent of the amount of the maximum annual tax credit that the business is eligible to receive for the tax period, which payment shall be made to the authority and which payment the authority shall hold and make available for the provision of loans, guarantees, equity investments, and grants or other forms of financing to support small business and downtown or commercial corridor activation activities within enhanced areas or government-restricted municipalities, as those terms are defined in section 69 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-337), as may be designated by the chief executive officer of the authority.  Such funds shall be deployed by the authority within 12 months of the authority's receipt of the funds, and the authority shall issue a report each fiscal year to the Legislature, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), detailing how the funds were distributed.
 
	j.	Notwithstanding the provisions of any law to the contrary, the credit amount may first be taken by the tax certificate holder for the tax period for which it was issued, for the tax period in which it was issued, or in any tax period during the time the business is required to maintain the project at a location in New Jersey, as set forth in the incentive agreement.  The tax certificate holder may transfer the tax credit amount on or after the date of issuance for use by the transferee in the tax period for which it was issued, for the tax period in which it was issued, or in any of the next three successive tax periods.  The tax certificate holder or transferee may first use the credit against tax liabilities in the tax period in which it was issued or in a succeeding tax period, as authorized in this subsection, without the need for amending the tax return for the tax period for which the credit was issued, subject to the provisions of this section.
 
	L.1996, c.26, s.6; amended 1998, c.33, s.2; 2003, c.166, s.4; 2015, c.194, s.2; 2016, c.9; 2017, c.12, s.1; 2022, c.134, s.2; 2023, c.261, s.2; 2024, c.40, s.2.

34:1B-130. Incentive agreement

	7.  The business employment incentive agreement shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

	a.  A detailed description of the proposed project which will result in job creation, and the number of new employees to be hired in the base years;

	b.  The term of the grant, and the first year for which the grant may be claimed;

	c.  The new employees whose positions are subjects of the grant, pursuant to subsection c. of section 6 of this act;

	d.  A requirement that the applicant maintain the project at a location in New Jersey for at least 1.5 times the number of years of the term of the grant, with at least the number of eligible positions as required by section 4 of this act;

	e.  The employment incentive, as determined pursuant to subsection a. of section 6 of this act;

	f.  A method for determining the number of new employees who are employed during a grant year;

	g.  A method for the business to report annually to the authority the number of new employees for which the grant is to be made;

	h.  A requirement that the business report to the authority annually the aggregate amount of withholdings during the grant year;

	i.  A provision permitting an audit of the payroll records of the business by the authority from time to time, as the authority deems necessary;

	j.  A provision which permits the authority to amend an agreement pursuant to section 9 of this act;

	k.  A  provision which requires the business to maintain operations at the project location or another location approved by the authority for at least 1.5 times the term of the grant, and a provision to permit the authority to recapture all or part of the grant at its discretion if the business does not remain at the site for the required term; and

	l.  A provision establishing the conditions under which the grant agreement may be terminated and grant funds recaptured by the authority.

L.1996,c.26,s.7.

34:1B-131  Submission of NJ tax return, other information; audit.

	8. a. No later than March 1 of each year, for the preceding grant year, every business which is awarded a grant under this act shall submit to the authority a copy of its applicable New Jersey tax return within 30 days of filing showing business income and withholdings as a condition of its continuation in the grant program, together with an annual payroll report showing (1) the eligible positions which were created during the base years and (2) the new eligible positions created during each subsequent year of the grant.  Should any business which is awarded a grant under this act fail to submit to the authority a copy of its annual payroll report or submit its annual payroll report without the information required by (1) and (2) above, any grant payment to be received by any such business shall be forfeited for the applicable reporting year unless the Executive Director of the authority determines that there are extenuating circumstances excusing the timely filing required herein.

	b.	The division may require by regulation any information which it deems necessary to effectuate the provisions of this act.

	c.	The authority may cause an audit of any business receiving a grant to be conducted at any time.

	L.1996,c.26,s.8; amended 2003, c.166, s.5.

34:1B-132. Failure of business to comply, circumstances

	9.a.  If the business receiving a grant fails to meet or comply with any condition or requirement set forth in a grant agreement or in rules and regulations of the authority or the division, the authority may amend the agreement to reduce the amount of the employment incentive or the term of the grant agreement.  The reduction of the employment incentive shall be applicable to the grant year immediately following the grant year in which the authority amends the agreement.

	b.  If a business fails to maintain employment at the levels stipulated in the agreement or otherwise fails to comply with any condition of the grant agreement for any two consecutive years, the authority may terminate the agreement.

L.1996,c.26,s.9.

34:1B-133  Disbursement conditions.

	10.	No amount shall be disbursed to a recipient business as a grant under this act in any year until the State Treasurer has certified that the amount of withholdings or estimated taxes of partners, or any combination thereof, received in that year by the division from the business or the partners of the business equals or exceeds the amount of the grant.

	L.1996,c.26,s.10; amended 1998, c.33, s.3.

34:1B-134  Grant limitations.

	11. a. A business that is receiving a business relocation grant pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1996, c. 25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.) shall not be eligible to receive a grant under this act except upon the approval of the State Treasurer.

	b.	A business that is receiving any other grant by operation of State law shall not receive an amount as a grant pursuant to this act which, when combined with such other grants, exceeds the total of 50% of its withholdings or 30% of its estimated tax, or any combination thereof paid, except upon the approval of the State Treasurer.  Amounts received as grants from the Office of Customized Training pursuant to the "1992 New Jersey Employment and Workforce Development Act," P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-1 et seq.) shall be excluded from the calculation of the total amount permitted under this subsection.

	c.	A business that qualifies under subsection b. of section 6 of P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-129) for a grant of up to 80% of its withholdings or up to 50% of its estimated tax and is receiving any other grant by operation of State law shall not receive an amount as a grant pursuant to this act which, when combined with such other grants, exceeds the total of up to 80% of its withholdings or 50% of the estimated tax, or any combination thereof paid except upon approval of the State Treasurer.  Amounts received as grants from the Office of Customized Training pursuant to the "1992 New Jersey Employment and Workforce Development Act," P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-1 et seq.) shall be excluded from the calculation of the total amount permitted under this subsection.

	L.1996,c.26,s.11;  amended 1998, c.33, s.4; 2003, c.166, s.6.

34:1B-135. Implementation, study.

	12.  The department shall conduct a study to determine the minimum funding level required to implement the Business Employment Incentive Program successfully.  Major consideration shall be given to the rate of return for each job created as a result of business employment incentive grants.

L.1996,c.26,s.12.

34:1B-136. Fees

	13.  The authority shall establish an application fee for a grant application and service fees payable by each business which is a grant recipient to pay the costs of the administration of the program.

L.1996,c.26,s.13.

34:1B-137  Rules.

	14. The New Jersey Economic Development Authority, after consultation with the department and the Division of Taxation, shall in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), adopt rules necessary to implement the provisions of the Business Employment Incentive Program not related to the collection or determination of taxes and tax withholding.  The rules shall provide for the recipients of business employment incentive grants to be charged an initial application fee, and ongoing service fees, to cover the administrative costs related to the program.  The Director of the Division of Taxation is authorized to promulgate those rules necessary to effectuate the tax related provisions of the Business Employment Incentive Program.

	L.1996,c.26,s.14;  amended 2003, c.166, s.7.

34:1B-137.1  Rules, regulations.
 	4.	Notwithstanding any provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), to the contrary, the Executive Director of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority may adopt immediately upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law such rules and regulations as the executive director determines to be necessary and appropriate to effectuate the purposes of P.L.2015, c.194 (C.34:1B-137.1 et al.), which rules and regulations shall be effective for a period not to exceed 360 calendar days following the effective date of P.L.2015, c.194 (C.34:1B-137.1 et al.) and may thereafter be amended, adopted, or readopted by the executive director in accordance with the requirements of P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	L.2015, c.194, s.4.

34:1B-138  Annual report.
  	15.	The authority shall submit a report on the Business Employment Incentive Program to the Governor and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), to the Legislature on or before October 31 of each year.  The report shall include information on the number of agreements entered into during the preceding fiscal year, a description of the project under each agreement, the number of jobs created, new income tax revenue received from withholdings, amounts awarded as grants and an update on the status of projects under agreement before the preceding fiscal year.
 
	L.1996, c.26, s.15; amended 2003, c.166, s.8; 2015, c.194, s.3.

34:1B-139. Appropriation capped by new revenues

	17. There is appropriated to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority from the General Fund such sums as may be necessary to fund the Business Employment Incentive Program established by this act, the amount of which shall not exceed the total amount of revenues received as withholdings, as defined in section 2 of P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-125) from all businesses receiving grants pursuant to this act, as certified by the Director of the Division of Taxation.

L.1996,c.26,s.17.

34:1B-139.1  Powers of authority relative to bonds.

	9.	Notwithstanding the provisions of any law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary:

	a.	The authority shall have the power, pursuant to the provisions of this act and P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), to issue bonds and refunding bonds, incur indebtedness and borrow money secured, in whole or in part, by money received pursuant to this act for the purpose of (1) providing funds for the payment, in full or in part, of the grants provided to businesses under sections 1 through 14 of P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 through 34:1B-137); (2) providing funds to be used by the authority only for the purposes enumerated in subsections a. and b. of section 4 of P.L.1992, c.16 (C.34:1B-7.13) for payments to, or for the benefit of, designated industries that have the greatest potential to create eligible positions and promote State development strategies; and (3) and any costs related to the issuance of such bonds.  The authority may establish reserve or other funds to further secure bonds and refunding bonds.  The bonds shall be in the amount to yield proceeds to fund, all or in part, the payment of grants provided to business under this act, plus additional bonds to pay for the costs of issuance.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, bonds issued for the purposes of paragraph (2) of this subsection, excluding refunding bonds, may only be issued upon certification by the authority at the time of issuance to the effect that payments for principal and interest on such bonds and any additional costs authorized by that paragraph (2) may not exceed an amount equivalent to the residual withholdings anticipated at the time of issuance of such bonds for the applicable fiscal years.

	b.	The authority may, in any resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds or refunding bonds, pledge the contract with the State Treasurer, provided for in section 10 of P.L.2003, c.166 (C.34:1B-139.2), or any part thereof, for the payment or redemption of the bonds or refunding bonds, and covenant as to the use and disposition of money available to the authority for payments of bonds and refunding bonds. All costs associated with the issuance of bonds and refunding bonds by the authority for the purposes set forth in this act may be paid by the authority from amounts it receives from the proceeds of the bonds or refunding bonds and from amounts it receives pursuant to sections 10 and 11 of P.L.2003, c.166 (C.34:1B-139.2 and C.34:1B-139.3), which costs may include, but are not limited to, any costs and fees relating to the issuance of the bonds or refunding bonds, annual administrative costs and fees of the authority attributable to the payment of grants issued to businesses under this act, the fees and costs of bond counsel and any other professional fees and costs attributable to the agreements described in subsection c. of this section.  The bonds or refunding bonds shall be authorized by resolution, which shall stipulate the manner of execution and form of the bonds, whether the bonds are in one or more series, the date or dates of issue, time or times of maturity, which shall not exceed 20 years, the rate or rates of interest payable on the bonds, which may be at fixed rates or variable rates, and which interest may be current interest or may accrue, the denomination or denominations in which the bonds are issued, conversion or registration privileges, the sources and medium of payment and place or places of payment, terms of redemption, privileges of exchangeability or interchangeability, and entitlement to priorities of payment or security in the amounts to be received by the authority pursuant to sections 10 and 11 of P.L.2003, c.166 (C.34:1B-139.2 and C.34:1B-139.3).  The bonds may be sold at a public or private sale at a price or prices determined by the authority.  The authority is authorized to enter into any agreements necessary or desirable to effectuate the purposes of this section, including agreements to sell bonds or refunding bonds to any person and to comply with the laws of any jurisdiction relating thereto.

	c.	In connection with any bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to this act, the authority may also enter into any revolving credit agreement, agreement establishing a line of credit or letter of credit, reimbursement agreement, interest rate exchange agreement, currency exchange agreement, interest rate floor or cap, options, puts or calls to hedge payment, currency, rate, spread or similar exposure, or similar agreements, float agreements, forward agreements, insurance contract, surety bond, commitment to purchase or sell bonds, purchase or sale agreement, or commitments or other contracts or agreements and other security agreements approved by the authority.

	d. (1) No resolution adopted by the authority authorizing the issuance of bonds or refunding bonds pursuant to this act shall be adopted or otherwise made effective without the approval in writing of the State Treasurer and the Joint Budget Oversight Committee. Except as provided by subsection i. of section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4), bonds or refunding bonds may be issued without obtaining the consent of any department, division, commission, board, bureau or agency of the State, other than the approval as required by this subsection, and without any other proceedings or the occurrence of any other conditions or other things other than those proceedings, conditions or things which are specifically required by this act.

	(2)	Subsequent to the issuance of bonds for the purposes of paragraph (2) of subsection a. of this section, but prior to the expenditure of the proceeds of the issuance of those bonds for any program, the authority shall provide the Joint Budget Oversight Committee with a detailed description of the program to be funded.  No expenditure for such program, shall occur without approval by the committee of that program; provided however, that if the committee fails to consider any program for approval within 14 calendar days from date of receipt of the program description from authority, each such program not considered shall be deemed approved.  "Program" for purposes of this section does not include costs of issuance.  In addition, the authority shall provide the committee with an itemized, detailed list of persons, businesses or other entities that will receive financing under such approved programs prior to the funding being distributed, including other public entities for the purpose of the public entity making grants, loans or entering into other financial transactions.  

	When the funds allocated to a public entity for the purpose of the public entity making grants, loans or entering into other financial transactions are subsequently allocated by that other public entity, the entity shall provide to the authority so that the authority can provide to  the Joint Budget Oversight Committee an itemized, detailed list of persons, businesses or other entities, that will receive such funds, and the amount that each will so receive. 

	e.	Bonds and refunding bonds issued by the authority pursuant to this act shall be special and limited obligations of the authority payable from, and secured by, such funds and moneys determined by the authority in accordance with this section.  Neither the members of the authority nor any other person executing the bonds or refunding bonds shall be personally liable with respect to payment of interest and principal on these bonds or refunding bonds.  Bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to the provisions of this act shall not be a debt or liability of the State or any agency or instrumentality thereof, except as otherwise provided by this subsection, either legal, moral or otherwise, and nothing contained in this act shall be construed to authorize the authority to incur any indebtedness on behalf of or in any way to obligate the State or any political subdivision thereof, and all bonds and refunding bonds issued by the authority shall contain a statement to that effect on their face.

	f.	The authority is authorized to engage, subject to the approval of the State Treasurer and in such manner as the State Treasurer shall determine, the services of bond counsel, financial advisors and experts, placement agents, underwriters, appraisers, and such other advisors, consultants and agents as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act.

	g.	The proceeds from the sale of the bonds, other than refunding bonds, issued pursuant to this act, after payment of any costs related to the issuance of such bonds, shall be paid by the authority to be applied to the payment, in full or in part, for the purposes set forth in subsection a. of this section as directed by the State Treasurer.

	h.	All bonds or refunding bonds issued by the authority are deemed to be issued by a body corporate and politic of the State for an essential governmental purpose, and the interest thereon and the income derived from all funds, revenues, incomes and other moneys received for or to be received by the authority and pledged and available to pay or secure the payment on bonds or refunding bonds and the interest thereon, shall be exempt from all taxes levied pursuant to the provisions of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes or Title 54A of the New Jersey Statutes, except for transfer inheritance and estate taxes levied pursuant to Subtitle 5 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes.

	i.	The State hereby pledges and covenants with the holders of any bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to the provisions of this act, that it will not limit or alter the rights or powers vested in the authority by this act, nor limit or alter the rights or powers of the State Treasurer in any manner which would jeopardize the interest of the holders or any trustee of such holders, or inhibit or prevent performance or fulfillment by the authority or the State Treasurer with respect to the terms of any agreement made with the holders of these bonds or refunding bonds or agreements made pursuant to subsection c. of this section except that the failure of the Legislature to appropriate moneys for any purpose of this act shall not be deemed a violation of this section.

	j.	Notwithstanding any restriction contained in any other law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary, the State and all political subdivisions of this State, their officers, boards, commissioners, departments or other agencies, all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks and institutions, building and loan associations, saving and loan associations, investment companies and other persons carrying on a banking or investment business, and all executors, administrators, guardians, trustees and other fiduciaries, and all other persons whatsoever who now are or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of the State, may properly and legally invest any sinking funds, moneys or other funds, including capital, belonging to them or within their control, in any bonds or refunding bonds issued by the authority under the provisions of this act; and said bonds and refunding bonds are hereby made securities which may properly and legally be deposited with, and received by any State or municipal officers or agency of the State, for any purpose for which the deposit of bonds or other obligations of the State is now, or may hereafter be, authorized by law.

	L.2003,c.166,s.9; amended 2003, c.274.

34:1B-139.2  Contract payments to authority for debt service.

	10. The State Treasurer shall, in each State fiscal year, pay from the General Fund to the authority, in accordance with a contract or contracts between the State Treasurer and the authority, authorized pursuant to section 11 of P.L.2003, c.166 (C.34:1B-139.3), an amount equivalent to the amount due to be paid in such State fiscal year to pay the debt service incurred for such State fiscal year on the bonds or refunding bonds of the authority issued pursuant to this act and any additional costs authorized by section 9 of P.L.2003, c.166 (C.34:1B-139.1).  Notwithstanding any other provision of any law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary, the authority shall be paid only such funds as shall be determined by the contract or contracts and further provided that the incurrence of any obligation of the State under the contract or contracts, including any payments to be made thereunder from the General Fund, shall be subject to and dependent upon appropriations being made from time to time by the Legislature for the purposes of this act.

	L.2003,c.166,s.10.

34:1B-139.3  Contracts between State Treasurer and authority authorized.

	11. The State Treasurer and the authority are authorized to enter into one or more contracts to implement the payment arrangement that is provided for in section 10 of P.L.2003, c.166 (C.34:1B-139.2).  The contract or contracts shall provide for payment by the State Treasurer of the amounts required to be paid pursuant to section 10 of P.L.2003, c.166 (C.34:1B-139.2) and shall set forth the procedure for the transfer of moneys for the purpose of paying such moneys.  The contract or contracts shall contain such terms and conditions as are determined by the parties, and shall include, but not be limited to, terms and conditions necessary and desirable to secure any bonds or refunding bonds of the authority issued pursuant to this act; provided however, that notwithstanding any other provision of any law, rule, regulation or order to the contrary, the authority shall be paid only such funds as shall be determined by the contract or contracts and further provided that the incurrence of any obligation of the State under the contract or contracts, including any payments to be made thereunder from the General Fund, shall be subject to and dependent upon appropriations being made from time to time by the Legislature for the purposes of this act.

	L.2003,c.166,s.11.

34:1B-139.4  Pilot program established, New Jersey Economic Development Authority, grants, businesses, employees, residents assigned to New Jersey locations.
	4. a. There is established a pilot program, to be administered by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, through which the authority shall provide grants to businesses to assign their employees, who are New Jersey residents assigned to locations outside of the State, to New Jersey locations.  A business shall be eligible for a grant under the pilot program if the business has 25 or more full time employees and is principally located in another state.
 
	b.	A business seeking a grant pursuant to this section shall submit an application for approval to the authority on or before July 1, 2028, in the form and manner prescribed by the chief executive officer of the authority.  Following approval of an application, but before the disbursement of grant funds, the authority shall require the business to enter into a grant agreement.  The grant agreement shall, at a minimum, specify the amount of the grant to be awarded to the business, the minimum number of resident employees the business shall assign to the State, and, if applicable, the terms governing actions proposed to be undertaken by the business for the purpose of receiving the preference authorized by subsection c. of this section.  If the authority determines that the business made a material misrepresentation on the business's grant application or if the business fails to comply with any requirement set forth in the grant agreement, then the business shall return to the authority any grant awarded pursuant to this section.
 
	c.	The value of the grant shall be the New Jersey Gross Income Tax withholdings of resident employees re-assigned by the business to a New Jersey location, as certified by the Director of the Division of Taxation, or $500,000, whichever is less.  In awarding the grants made available by this section, the authority may establish a preference for businesses that: acquire or lease office space in this State and make a capital investment in such office space; submit to the authority a plan showing that the business will provide bonuses to, or otherwise increase the compensation of, employees relocating to the State; or both.  The sum of all grants awarded pursuant to this section shall not exceed $35,000,000 in any State fiscal year.
 
	As used in this subsection, "capital investment" means expenses that the business incurs, or are incurred on behalf of the business by its landlord, for construction, repair, renovation, improvement, equipping, or furnishing of a building or structure acquired or leased by the business and used in connection with the operation of the business.
 
L.2023, c.125, s.4.

34:1B-141  Project application procedure; priority list; appropriations
	7.  a.  The Department of Commerce and Economic Development shall establish a process under which applicants may apply for monies made available from the "1996 Economic Development Site Fund," established pursuant to section 20 of P.L. 1996, c.70.

	b.  It shall be the duty of the Department of Commerce and Economic Development to review and evaluate applications received pursuant to the process established in subsection a. of this section to determine whether the project is eligible pursuant to the provisions of section 8 of P.L. 1997, c.97 (C.34:1B-142).  Of those projects deemed eligible, the Department of Commerce and Economic Development shall include a description of each project and its purpose, impact, cost, and construction schedule and a recommendation for the approval or disapproval by the task force.

	c.  Upon the development of the project priority list, the Department of Commerce and Economic Development shall submit the list to the task force for its approval.  The task force is authorized to approve, disapprove or approve with modifications, a project priority list.  Upon approval of a project priority list containing projects eligible pursuant to section 8 of P.L.1997, c.97 (C.34:1B-142), and authorized to receive funding pursuant to section 8 of P.L.1996, c.70, the task force shall submit a project priority list to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the General Assembly, who shall cause the project priority list to be introduced in each House in the form of legislative appropriations bills.

	d.  The Legislature shall consider, and may amend or supplement, the appropriations bills containing the project priority list.  The monies authorized to be appropriated pursuant to this subsection shall be appropriated from the "1996 Economic Development Site Fund," established pursuant to section 20 of P.L.1996, c.70, to the Department of Commerce and Economic Development for the projects designated in the legislation.  The Department of Commerce and Economic Development shall administer the projects designated in the legislation.

	e.  No monies appropriated pursuant to subsection d. of this section shall be expended for any economic development site related project unless the expenditure is authorized pursuant to the legislation approved in accordance with the provisions of subsection d. of this section.

	f.  Nothing in this section shall preclude the Legislature from developing a project priority list and making appropriations therefor.

	L.1997,c.97,s.7.

34:1B-142  Eligibility for economic development site funds
	8.  a.  To be eligible to receive monies from the "1996 Economic Development Site Fund," established pursuant to section 20 of P.L.1996, c.70, an economic development site project must meet at least two of the following criteria:

	(1)  The project will support or enhance the existing economic base of the region in which it is located, which may include, but need not be limited to, the agricultural, tourism and commercial sectors, or improvements to the region's infrastructure;

	(2)  The project will result in the rehabilitation or expansion of existing facilities in the region in which it is located;

	(3)  The project will result in the creation or retention of jobs in the region in which it is located; and

	(4)  The project will foster the development of business or commercial ventures which will promote long-term economic growth in the region in which it is located.

	b.  No monies from the "1996 Economic Development Site Fund," established pursuant to section 20 of P.L.1996, c.70, shall be expended for an economic development site outside of the Delaware River and Bay Region.

	 c. For the purposes of sections 6, 7 and 8 of P.L.1997, c.97 (C.34:1B-140, C.34:1B-141 and C.34:1B-142):   "Delaware River and Bay Region" means all the State territory located within the "port district," as defined pursuant to section 1(6) of P.L.1951, c.288 (C.32:3-13.23); and "economic development site" means land, equipment, buildings, appurtenant infrastructure and miscellaneous site improvements designed to promote economic activity and new jobs in the Delaware River and Bay Region.

	L.1997,c.97,s.8.

34:1B-143  Appropriation from fund
	9.  The Legislature shall, from time to time, appropriate monies from the "1996 Economic Development Site Fund," established pursuant to section 20 of P.L.1996, c.70, to the Department of Commerce and Economic Development for the projects designated in the legislation.  Any appropriation from this fund shall specify the projects involved, all of which shall meet the requirements of section 8 of P.L.1997, c.97 (C.34:1B-142).

	L.1997,c.97,s.9.

34:1B-144  Short title
	1.  Sections 2 through 19 of this act shall be known and may be cited as the "Port Unification and Financing Act."

	L.1997,c.150,s.1.

34:1B-145  Findings, declarations relative to unification of ports
	2.   The Legislature finds and declares:

	a.  The Legislature of the State of New Jersey approved legislation in 1992, concurred in by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and approved by the Congress of the United States, amending the Compact creating the Delaware River Port Authority to facilitate the unification of the ports of the Delaware river by authorizing the creation of a subsidiary corporation or corporations and the taking of other measures to effectuate the unification.

	b.  Pursuant to the provisions of the Compact amendments, the merger or unification of port facilities in the State of New Jersey must be done in accordance with State law.

	c.  It is therefore in the public interest, pursuant to existing law, for this Legislature to consent to legislation that will direct that, upon the refunding, refinancing or defeasance of the outstanding bonds of the South Jersey Port Corporation, the port facilities of that corporation, along with its assets, liabilities and obligations, will be transferred to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority for operation and maintenance of all or a portion of the facilities by a subsidiary corporation of the Delaware River Port Authority, with the employees of the South Jersey Port Corporation to be employed by the subsidiary corporation.  The subsidiary corporation shall operate pursuant to the same principles set forth in R.S.32:3-1 et seq. for the operation of the Delaware River Port Authority.

	L.1997,c.150,s.2.

34:1B-146  Definitions relative to unification of ports
	3.  As used in this act:

	"Authority" or "New Jersey Economic Development Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority created pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4) or a subsidiary corporation of the authority created pursuant to section 16 of this act.

	"Compact creating the Delaware River Port Authority" or "Compact" means the compact or agreement between the State of New Jersey and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania entitled "Agreement between the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the State of New Jersey creating the Delaware River Joint Commission as a body corporate and politic and defining its powers and duties," as amended and supplemented (R.S.32:3-1 et seq.).

	"Marine facilities" means port facilities to be used for piers, wharves, docks, bulkheads, slips, basins, vehicular roadways, railroad connections, side tracks, sidings, warehousing, storage or other buildings and structures, facilities or improvements, or other real property, necessary, convenient or accessory to the support, operation, maintenance or accommodation of steamships or other vessels and their cargoes or passengers, as shall be determined by the authority on or before the entering into of the initial agreement provided for in subsection b. of section 4 of this act with respect to the lease, management, or other operation of all or a portion of the port facilities, and upon subsequent changes in use or control of the marine facilities.

	"Port facility" means a marine terminal or part thereof or any port property or facility.  In the case of the port facilities of the South Jersey Port Corporation, the term "port facility" shall include the foregoing and any other real or personal property under the jurisdiction, ownership or control of that corporation and transferred to or acquired by the authority pursuant to this act.

	"Port Facility Revenue Fund" means the fund created by section 6 of this act.

	"Redevelopment facilities" means port facilities excluding the marine facilities and any personal property.

	"Salem facility rights" means (1) property owned by the South Jersey Port Corporation and leased to Salem Terminals, Limited Liability Company, an Ohio limited liability company; (2) property owned by the South Jersey Port Corporation and leased to the Mid-Atlantic Shipping and Stevedoring, Inc.; and (3) all rights under the foreign trade zone approved by the United States Department of Commerce-Foreign Trade Zone Board by Order Number 358 establishing Foreign Trade Zone 142; provided, however, that the property described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this definition shall not be deemed to be Salem facility rights at the time such property is no longer subject to the leases described in this definition.

	"South Jersey Port Corporation" means the South Jersey Port Corporation created pursuant to P.L.1968, c.60 (C.12:11A-1 et seq.).

	"State contract" means the contract or agreement entered into by the State Treasurer and the authority concerning the payment of the bonds issued pursuant to this act.

	"Subsidiary" means a subsidiary corporation of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority created pursuant to section 16 of this act.

	"Subsidiary corporation" means a subsidiary corporation which has been established by the Delaware River Port Authority pursuant to subdivision (m) of Article I of the compact creating the Delaware River Port Authority (R.S.32:3-2).

	"Transfer date" means the date on which all bonds issued by the South Jersey Port Corporation cease to be outstanding within the meaning of the resolutions pursuant to which those bonds were issued, as certified by the trustee or trustees thereunder.

	L.1997,c.150,s.3.

34:1B-147  Powers of authority
	4.   a.  For the purpose of providing funds for the financing of the establishment, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, improvement and ownership of port facilities, the authority shall have the power to issue bonds or notes, incur indebtedness, borrow money or incur other obligations secured in whole or in part by the moneys in the Port Facility Revenue Fund or by any state contract or both and also to issue such bonds, notes or other indebtedness for the purpose of defeasing, refinancing or refunding the existing bonded and other indebtedness of an authority or corporation having jurisdiction, ownership or control of port facilities.  However, the authority shall not issue bonds, notes or other obligations for defeasing, refinancing or refunding the bonds or notes of the South Jersey Port Corporation until a subsidiary corporation has been formally established by the Delaware River Port Authority and the State Treasurer and the authority have approved an agreement pursuant to subsection b. of this section providing for the lease, management or other operation of all or a portion of the port facilities of the South Jersey Port Corporation.  The bonds or notes shall be authorized by resolution, which shall stipulate the manner of execution and form of the bonds or notes, whether the bonds or notes are in one or more series, the date of issue, time or times of maturity, which (in the case of bonds) shall not exceed 30 years, the rate or rates of interest payable on the bonds or notes, the denomination or denominations in which the bonds or notes are issued, conversion or registration privileges, the sources and medium of payment and place or places of payment and terms of redemption.  The bonds or notes may be sold at a public or private sale at a price or prices determined by the authority.

	b.  The authority is hereby authorized to enter into any agreement with a subsidiary corporation with respect to the lease, management or other operation of all or a portion of the port facilities on such terms as the authority shall deem appropriate, such agreement to be subject to the approval of the State Treasurer.

	The authority shall, however, be authorized to enter into an agreement with a subsidiary corporation under this section where the directors of such subsidiary corporation are required to be residents of the State of New Jersey and one or more other states only on the following conditions:  The bylaws of the subsidiary corporation shall provide, and continue to provide, for the exercise of a veto by the Governor of the State of New Jersey with respect to an action of a director of the subsidiary corporation appointed from the State of New Jersey, which exercise is hereby authorized in the same form and manner as provided in P.L.1991, c.516 (C.32:3-4a et seq.) for the veto of an action of a commissioner of the Delaware River Port Authority appointed from the State of New Jersey; the exercise of the veto by the Governor of the State of New Jersey pursuant to this section shall not serve to dissolve the subsidiary corporation; the number of directors of the corporation from the State of New Jersey shall be the same as the number of directors of the corporation from each of the other states; and no action of the corporation shall be binding unless at least a simple majority of the directors from each state and at least a simple majority of the directors from New Jersey shall vote in favor thereof.  The provisions of this section shall also be binding on any entity which is a successor to the authority.

	The authority is hereby authorized also to enter into any agreement with the South Jersey Port Corporation with respect to the defense of litigation against the South Jersey Port Corporation.

	c.  The authority is hereby authorized to convey or reconvey the port facilities to any other entity, including but not limited to the South Jersey Port Corporation, subject to the approval of the State Treasurer and the Legislature.  The authority shall submit for approval to the Legislature, on a day when both the General Assembly and the Senate are in session, a plan for conveying or reconveying the port facilities to an entity other than the subsidiary corporation.  The date of the submission shall be entered into the Senate Journal and the Minutes of the General Assembly.  The Legislature shall be deemed to have approved the plan unless within 45 days of the submission of the plan by the authority to the Legislature, the Legislature adopts by affirmative vote of a majority of the authorized membership of both of the houses a concurrent resolution disapproving the plan.  The time period shall commence on the day of submission and expire on the 45th day after submission or for a house not meeting on the 45th day, on the next meeting of that house.

	d.  In addition to any other provisions of an agreement, an agreement between the authority and a subsidiary corporation for the lease, management or other operation of port facilities acquired from the South Jersey Port Corporation, except as provided in section 15 of this act, shall require an annual payment to the authority for the rental of the port facilities in New Jersey.   The annual payment shall be deposited into the Port Facility Revenue Fund created by section 6 of this act.

	L.1997,c.150,s.4.

34:1B-148  Payment of,  redemption of bonds, notes
	5.  The authority may, in any resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds or notes pursuant to this act, pledge the Port Facility Revenue Fund or a portion thereof for payment of the redemption of the bonds or notes, or the principal and interest thereon, and covenant as to the use and disposition of moneys in the Port Facility Revenue Fund.  All costs associated with the issuance of the bonds or notes by the authority for the purposes set forth in this act may be paid by the authority from the proceeds of bonds or notes or from the Port Facility Revenue Fund, as the authority shall determine, which costs may include, but shall not be limited to, any costs related to the issuance of bonds or notes, operating expenses of the authority attributable to the payment of current and anticipated liabilities and expenses, and costs of, and any payment due under, any agreement, including any agreement entered into pursuant to the provisions of subsection b. of section 7 of this act.  Moneys in the Port Facility Revenue Fund shall not be used for any other purposes of the authority than those provided in this act.

	L.1997,c.150,s.5.

34:1B-149  "Port Facility Revenue Fund"
	6.  There is created within the authority a special nonlapsing fund, to be known as the "Port Facility Revenue Fund."  This fund shall consist of:

	a.  Such moneys as may be transferred to the fund by the State Treasurer, upon appropriation by the Legislature;

	b.  Such moneys as may have been or may be authorized by, or appropriated to, the South Jersey Port Corporation for the payment of debt service with respect to the port facilities of the corporation and which may be transferred to the authority by the corporation on or after the acquisition of the port facilities of the corporation by the authority or which may be transferred to the authority pursuant to section 14 of this act;

	c.  Interest or other income derived from the investment of moneys in the fund; and

	d.  Payments received by the authority under subsection d. of section 4 of this act.

	Moneys in the fund shall be managed and invested by the Division of Investment in the Department of the Treasury.

	L.1997,c.150,s.6.

34:1B-150  Use of moneys in Port Facility Revenue Fund
	7.  a.  The authority may use moneys in the Port Facility Revenue Fund to pay the principal and interest and premium, if any, on the bonds or notes issued by it pursuant to this act and in connection with the lease, management, or other operation of the port facilities transferred pursuant to this act and as provided in subsection b. of section 4 of this act.  The authority may create any other fund or funds by resolution of the authority which it deems necessary to further secure the bonds or notes or otherwise effectuate the purposes of this act, including funds for the deposit of the proceeds from bonds or notes issued pursuant to this act.

	b.  The authority may, in connection with its duties and responsibilities under this act or in connection with any duties and responsibilities provided for in P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), enter into any revolving credit agreement, agreement establishing a line of credit or letter of credit, reimbursement agreement, interest rate exchange or other like agreement, forward purchase agreement, insurance contract, surety bond, commitment to purchase bonds or notes, purchase or sale agreement or commitments or other contracts or agreements in connection with the authorization, issuance, sale or payment of bonds or notes.

	c.  All bonds or notes issued by the authority are deemed to be issued by a body corporate and politic of the State for an essential governmental purpose, and the interest thereon or to be received by the authority and pledged and available to pay or secure the payment on bonds or notes or pledged or available to pay or secure payment on such bonds or notes or interest thereon shall be exempt from all taxes levied pursuant to the provisions of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes or Title 54A of the New Jersey Statutes, except for transfer, inheritance and estate taxes pursuant to Subtitle 5 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes.

	L.1997,c.150,s.7.

34:1B-151  Bonds, notes considered special, limited obligations
	8.  Bonds and notes issued by the authority pursuant to the provisions of this act shall be special and limited obligations which are payable only from the sources enumerated in this act.  Neither the members of the authority nor any other person executing the bonds or notes issued pursuant to this act shall be liable personally with respect to payment of interest and principal on these bonds, notes, or any other obligations issued pursuant to this act.  The bonds, notes, or any other obligations issued pursuant to the provisions of this act shall not be a debt or liability of the State or any agency or instrumentality thereof, either legal, moral or otherwise, and nothing contained in this act shall be construed to authorize the authority to incur any indebtedness on behalf of or in any way to obligate the State or any political subdivision and all debt instruments issued by the authority shall contain a statement to that effect on their face.

	L.1997,c.150,s.8.

34:1B-152  Pledges, covenants with holders of bonds, notes, obligations
	9.  The State hereby pledges and covenants with holders of any bonds, notes or other obligations issued pursuant to this act that it will not limit or alter the rights or powers vested in the authority by this act, nor limit or alter the rights or powers of the State Treasurer in any manner which would jeopardize the interest of the holders or any trustee of such holders, or inhibit or prevent performance or fulfillment by the authority or the State Treasurer with respect to the terms of any agreement made with the holders of these bonds, notes or other obligations.  The State also pledges and covenants with the holders of any such bonds, notes or obligations, that it will not act to prevent the authority from obtaining any of the revenues provided for in this act, which shall be sufficient to meet all costs and expenses in connection with the issuance of such obligations, until the bonds, notes or other obligations, together with interest thereon, are fully met and discharged or payment thereof is fully provided for, except that the failure of the State to appropriate moneys for any purposes of this act shall not be deemed a violation of this section.

	L.1997,c.150,s.9.

34:1B-153  Immunity for authority, members, employees
	10.  Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, the State shall indemnify and save harmless the authority, its members or employees from any actions, claims, judgments or awards of any type, arising from or as the result of any act or omission by or on behalf of the South Jersey Port Corporation or the subsidiary corporation or in relation to the port facilities transferred to the authority pursuant to this act or arising from or as the result of the condition of those facilities.  The State may, in addition, enter into an agreement with the authority to provide for the payment of liability insurance premiums for the provision of liability insurance coverage for the authority, its members or employees with respect to any such action or claim instituted or asserted after the transfer of the port facilities.  The amount and terms of such liability coverage shall be subject to the approval of the State Treasurer.  The State shall, in addition, provide for the payment of annual administrative expenses of the authority associated with the ownership and operation of port facilities, in an amount authorized by the State Treasurer.

	L.1997,c.150,s.10.

34:1B-154  Immunity for South Jersey Port Corporation, members, employees
	11.  Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, the State Treasurer is authorized to enter into an agreement with the South Jersey Port Corporation on or after the transfer of the port facilities of the corporation to the authority, which shall provide that the State shall indemnify and save harmless the South Jersey Port Corporation, its members, or employees from any actions, claims, judgments or awards of any type, arising from or as the result of any act or omission by or on behalf of the South Jersey Port Corporation.  Such agreement may, in addition, provide for the payment of liability insurance premiums for the provision of liability insurance coverage for the South Jersey Port Corporation,  its members, or employees with respect to any such action or claim instituted or asserted after the transfer of the port facilities to the authority.  The amount and terms of any such liability insurance coverage shall be subject to the approval of the State Treasurer.

	L.1997,c.150,s.11.

34:1B-155  Limited immunity for Delaware River Port Authority
	12.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the State Treasurer is authorized to enter into an agreement with the Delaware River Port Authority or the subsidiary corporation, or both, which would provide that the State shall indemnify and save harmless the Delaware River Port Authority or the subsidiary corporation, or both, from any and all claims or causes of action which are based on the condition of the port facilities transferred pursuant to this act.  The State Treasurer is not authorized to enter into an agreement which obligates the State to indemnify or save harmless the Delaware River Port Authority or the subsidiary corporation from any damages which directly result from any act or omission by the Delaware River Port Authority or the subsidiary corporation, or both, or any of their agents, servants or employees.

	L.1997,c.150,s.12.

34:1B-156  Agreements authorized
	13.  The State Treasurer and the authority may enter into any agreements as may be necessary to effectuate the provisions of this act, which may include, but not be limited to, procedures for the transfer of moneys to the Port Facility Revenue Fund as provided for in section 6 of this act, with respect to the terms and conditions relative to the securing of bonds, notes and other obligations of the authority, the pledge and assignment of any agreement or agreements authorized by this act, or any payments to the trustees of the holders of these bonds.  Notwithstanding any provision of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), this act or any regulation of the authority to the contrary, the authority shall be paid only such fees as shall be determined by an agreement entered into pursuant to this section.  Any such agreements entered into pursuant to this section  shall require that the subsidiary corporation shall indemnify and save harmless the authority, its members or employees from any actions, claims, judgments or awards of any type regarding the lease, operation and management of the port facilities by the subsidiary corporation.

	L.1997,c.150,s.13.

34:1B-157  Cooperation of South Jersey Port Corporation with authority to effect transfer
	14.  a.  The South Jersey Port Corporation shall cooperate with the authority in the defeasing, refunding or refinancing of the outstanding obligations of the corporation by the authority as authorized by this act and the corporation shall take such steps as are necessary in order to implement such defeasing, refunding or refinancing.

	b.  On the transfer date:

	(1)  All right, title and interest of the South Jersey Port Corporation in its port facilities, except as provided in section 15 of this act, and in any of its records and papers, as well as its assets, funds, obligations  and liabilities, are hereby transferred to the authority to be held, used and applied for the purposes of this act.

	(2)  All powers and duties which hitherto were exercised by the corporation with respect to its port facilities transferred pursuant to this section may henceforth be exercised by the authority.  The authority may permit the exercise of these powers and duties by the subsidiary corporation as may be necessary or convenient to operate and maintain the port facilities which are the subject of the lease, management or operational agreement between the authority and the subsidiary corporation authorized pursuant to subsection b. of section 4 of this act.

	(3)  All moneys transferred pursuant to this act shall be deposited in the "Port Facility Revenue Fund" established by section 6 of this act.

	(4)  All creditors of the corporation and persons having claims against or contracts with the corporation of any kind or character may enforce such debts, claims and contracts against the authority in the same manner as they might have had against the corporation, and the rights and remedies of such creditors and persons having claims or contracts shall not be limited or restricted in any manner by this act, except as provided in this section.  All debts, liabilities, obligations, agreements and covenants of the corporation, except to the extent otherwise specifically provided or established to the contrary in this act, are hereby imposed upon the authority.  In continuing the functions and carrying out the contracts, obligations, powers and duties of the corporation, the authority, or the subsidiary corporation, as the case may be, are authorized to act in their own name or in the name of the corporation as may be convenient or advisable under the circumstances from time to time.

	(5)  The lease, management or operational agreement referred to in paragraph (2) of this subsection shall provide that all officers and employees of the corporation shall be employed by the subsidiary corporation until determined otherwise by that corporation.  The employees shall retain all of their rights and benefits under existing collective bargaining agreements or contracts until such time as new or revised agreements or contracts are agreed to or these agreements or contracts shall expire.  All existing bargaining agents shall be retained to act on behalf of those employees until such time as the employees shall, pursuant to law, elect to change those agents.  The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to any officer or employee appointed or employed, or any collective bargaining agreement entered into, on or after the effective date of this act.

	c.  As soon as may be practicable after the transfer date, the authority shall notify the Governor, the presiding officers of each house of the Legislature, and the President of the Delaware River Port Authority that the transfer has occurred, the date of the transfer, and any other information concerning the transfer the authority deems appropriate.

	d.  (1)  After the transfer date, the subsidiary corporation which has entered into the lease, management or operational agreement shall annually submit to the authority a written report on the carrying out of its responsibilities under the agreement in addition to any other reports as may be required by the agreement.  The annual report shall include a financial summary of  revenues and expenditures relating to the ports. The report shall also be submitted to the Legislature.

	(2)  In addition to any other reports required to be submitted to the Legislature, the Delaware River Port Authority shall submit to the Legislature, at least 60 days prior to action taken to authorize or adopt, any plan developed by the Delaware River Port Authority to finance any capital project for the construction, reconstruction, development or improvement of the port facilities located in New Jersey that are operated and maintained by the subsidiary corporation pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1997, c.150 (C.34:1B-144 et al.).  Upon the initial submission of such a plan, the authority shall annually thereafter submit written progress reports on the implementation of the plan with the final progress report submitted upon the completion of projects set forth in the initial plan.

	L.1997,c.150,s.14.

34:1B-158  Authority not to acquire certain port facilities
	15.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this act to the contrary, the authority shall not acquire from the South Jersey Port Corporation the former port facilities of the Salem Municipal Port Authority as acquired previously from the Salem Municipal Port Authority by the South Jersey Port Corporation.  The South Jersey Port Corporation shall, not later than six months after the effective date of this act, enter into a lease or other agreement with a person other than a public entity to operate and maintain the former port facilities of the Salem Municipal Port Authority previously acquired by the South Jersey Port Corporation, including other real property previously acquired by that corporation from the county of Salem or the City of Salem and located in the City of Salem.

	If the South Jersey Port Corporation fails to enter into such a lease or other agreement within that six-month period, the South Jersey Port Corporation shall, at the expiration of that period, transfer all right, title and interest to those facilities to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.  If the South Jersey Port Corporation has entered into such lease or other agreement within the six-month period, the South Jersey Port Corporation shall, at the expiration or termination of such lease or other agreement, transfer all right, title and interest to those facilities to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority unless the lessee or operator of those facilities shall have exercised an option to purchase or acquire the facilities pursuant to the lease or agreement.  The New Jersey Economic Development Authority shall be authorized to acquire all right, title, and interest to those facilities if transferred pursuant to this section.

	Any agreement entered into pursuant to this section shall be subject to the approval of the State Treasurer and if such an agreement shall result in any payments to the South Jersey Port Corporation such payments shall be remitted to the State Treasurer for deposit in the General Fund less those amounts that the South Jersey Port Corporation is required to pay to other public entities under the terms of leases referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) of "Salem facility rights" as defined in section 3 of this act.

	L.1997,c.150,s.15.

34:1B-159  Additional powers of authority to form subsidiary
	16.  a.  To effectuate any of its authorized purposes either directly or indirectly, the authority, in addition to any powers granted to it elsewhere in P.L.1997, c.150 (C.34:1B-144 et al.), shall have the authority to form, purchase or assume control of one or more subsidiaries, in the manner and for the purposes set forth in this section.

	b.  The authority may form a subsidiary by filing with the Secretary of State a certificate of incorporation, which may be amended from time to time and which shall set forth the name of the subsidiary, its duration, the location of its principal office, the joint owners thereof if any such joint owners shall be provided for by an agreement between the authority and the joint owners, and the purposes of the subsidiary.

	c.  The directors of the subsidiary shall be members or employees of the authority, who shall constitute at least a majority, and such other persons representing any joint owner or owners, if any, as may be provided for in the agreement in connection with the incorporation of the subsidiary.

	d.  The subsidiary shall have all the powers vested in the authority which the authority may delegate to it by terms of the agreement entered into pursuant to subsection b. of this section, except that it shall not have the power to contract indebtedness independently of the authority.  The subsidiary and any of its properties, functions and activities shall have all the privileges, immunities, tax exemptions and other exemptions as the authority's property, functions and activities.  The subsidiary shall also be subject to the restrictions and limitations to which the authority is subject.  The subsidiary shall be subject to suit as if it were the authority itself.

	e.  Whenever the State or any municipality, commission, public authority, agency, office, department, board, or division is authorized and empowered for any purposes of P.L.1997, c.150 (C.34:1B-144 et al.) to cooperate and enter into agreements with the authority or to grant any consent to the authority or to grant, convey, lease or otherwise transfer any property to the authority or to execute any document, the State or such municipality, commission, public authority, agency, officer, department, board, or division shall have the same authorization and power for any of such purposes to cooperate and enter into agreements with the subsidiary, to grant consents to the subsidiary, to grant, convey, lease or otherwise transfer property to the subsidiary and to execute documents for the subsidiary.

	f.  Among the powers that shall be granted to a subsidiary established by the authority, or which may be exercised by the authority itself, are:

	(1)  The power to participate as a co-owner or co-venturer in any activity financed by a loan from the authority;

	(2)  The power to issue its stock and employ the proceeds of such issuance for capital investment in, or other expenses in connection with, the projects of the subsidiary, upon authorization by the authority; and

	(3)  The power to enter into leases, subleases or other conveyances of property, or to grant easements, or licenses for the use of property.

	L.1997,c.150,s.16.

34:1B-160  Joint ventures
	17.  The authority, or any subsidiary, may enter into agreements with any individual, partnership, trust, association or corporation, or any public agency, under which the authority or subsidiary and such other entity or entities shall undertake a project as a joint venture, with the authority or subsidiary providing such financial assistance, through loans, grants or the acquisition of an ownership interest in the project, and such technical or managerial assistance or advice, as the agreement may provide for.

	L.1997,c.150,s.17.

34:1B-161  Written summary of developments in Camden
	18.  When undertaking any construction, reconstruction, or other improvement of property which is part of the marine facilities or redevelopment facilities located in the City of Camden, the authority shall provide the Planning Board of the City of Camden with a written summary, for informational purposes only, or an informational presentation to the Planning Board of the City of Camden which shall describe the proposed development.

	L.1997,c.150,s.18.

34:1B-162  Authority's activities, tax exempt; in lieu of taxes on commercial activities
	19.  a.  The exercise of the powers granted by this act shall constitute the performance of an essential governmental function and the authority shall not be required to pay any taxes or assessments upon or in respect of its port facilities as defined in section 3 of P.L.1997, c.150 (C.34:1B-146), or any property or moneys of the authority, and the authority, its port facilities, property and moneys and any bonds and notes issued under the provisions of this act, their transfer and the income there-from, including any profit made on the sale thereof, shall at all times be free from taxation of every kind by the State except for transfer, inheritance and estate taxes and by any political subdivision of the State.

	b.  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-15) to the contrary:  (1) any person occupying port facilities of the authority used as redevelopment facilities for commercial purposes, whether as lessee, vendee or otherwise, except a subsidiary corporation as defined in section 3 of P.L.1997, c.150 (C.34:1B-146), shall pay to any political subdivision in which such redevelopment facilities are located a payment in lieu of taxes which shall equal the taxes on real and personal property, including water and sewer service charges and assessments, which that person would have been required to pay to the respective political subdivisions had it been the owner of the property during the period for which such payment is made and neither the subsidiary nor the authority nor any of their projects, properties, moneys or bonds and notes shall be obligated, liable or subject to lien of any kind for the enforcement, collection or payment thereof; (2) the State shall make a payment in lieu of taxes on the authority's port facilities used as marine facilities for commercial purposes and occupied by any person as lessee, except a subsidiary corporation as defined in section 3 of P.L.1997, c.150 (C.34:1B-146) and neither the subsidiary nor the authority nor any of their projects, properties, moneys, or bonds and notes shall be obligated, liable or subject to lien of any kind for the enforcement, collection or payment thereof.  The payment by the State shall be made to the City of Camden, subject to annual appropriation by the Legislature, and shall be equal to 40 percent of the fair market value of the property, determined by the Department of the Treasury at the time of transfer of the facilities to the authority pursuant to this act, multiplied by the local municipal purposes tax rate.

	c.  Payments made pursuant to this section shall be paid to the political subdivision in the fiscal year commencing on July 1 following the year in which the occupancy occurred.  Such payments shall only be payable for that portion of the year in which the facilities subject to the payment were actually occupied by a lessee, vendee or otherwise or in the case of paragraph (2) of subsection b. of this section by a lessee.

	d.  Any property transferred to the authority pursuant to the provisions of this act, which is not occupied by a lessee, vendee or otherwise, as provided in this section, shall not be subject to a payment in lieu of taxes.

	e.  In the event that the port facilities of the authority are transferred to another entity which is not subject to taxation, the provisions of this section concerning payments in lieu of taxes shall continue, and any person occupying the transferred redevelopment facilities as a lessee, vendee or otherwise, except a subsidiary corporation defined in section 3 of P.L.1997, c.150 (C.34:1B-146), shall make the payments prescribed in paragraph (1) of subsection b. of this section, and the entity to which the marine facilities are transferred, rather than the State, shall continue to make the payments prescribed in paragraph (2) of subsection b. of this section unless the entity and the City of Camden shall enter into an agreement to provide for a different method of determining the amount of payment in lieu of taxes or otherwise to alter the amount of the payment provided for in paragraph (2) of subsection b. of this section.

	f.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section to the contrary, the governing body of a county or municipality in which the port facilities of the authority used as redevelopment facilities are located may, by resolution or ordinance, as appropriate, provide for the reduction in the amount of the in lieu of tax payment which a vendee, lessee or otherwise is required to pay under paragraph (1) of subsection b. of this section.  The reduction in the amount shall be for a term of no greater than 20 years from the date of initial occupancy by the vendee, lessee or otherwise and shall be so structured that the total reduction shall constitute no greater than 75 percent of the in lieu of tax payment required under paragraph (1) of subsection b. of this section over the 20-year or lesser period, and shall only be adopted upon a finding that the reduction would be in the best interest of the county or municipality.

	L.1997,c.150,s.19.

34:1B-163  Eligibility of employees for State Health Benefits Program
	27.  A subsidiary corporation or other corporation established by the Delaware River Port Authority which has employees eligible to participate in the State Health Benefits Program as provided in section 3 of P.L.1964, c.125 (C.52:14-17.34) shall participate in the program in accordance with the laws and rules governing the program as long as it has employees participating in the program.

	L.1997,c.150,s.27.

34:1B-164  Concurrent resolution expressing disapproval of Legislature
	28.  At any time, the Legislature may express its disapproval of a decision, action or procedure of the subsidiary corporation established by the Delaware River Port Authority pursuant to the provisions of the "Port Unification and Financing Act,"P.L.1997, c.150 (C.34:1B-144 et al.), by an affirmative vote of a majority of the authorized membership of both houses adopting a concurrent resolution setting forth the  Legislature's findings and declarations and expressing the Legislature's disapproval of the matter at issue.  Upon adoption, the concurrent resolution shall be transmitted by the Clerk of the General Assembly or the Secretary of the Senate to the Governor, all the directors of the subsidiary corporation from each state, the chairman and executive director of the Delaware River Port Authority, and the chairman and executive director of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.

	L.1997,c.150,s.28.

34:1B-165  Short title.

	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Local-State Business Incentive Promotion Act."

	L.1998,c.94,s.1.

34:1B-166  Definitions relative to local-State business incentive promotion.

	2.	As used in this act:

	"Act" means the "Local-State Business Incentive Promotion Act."

	"Applicant" means any business within a county or municipality applying for a loan pursuant to this act.

	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).

	"Business" means a corporation; sole proprietorship; partnership; corporation that has made an election under Subchapter S of Chapter One of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or any other business entity through which income flows as a distributive share to its owners; limited liability company; nonprofit corporation; or any other form of business organization located either within or outside this State.

	"Loan" means money loaned to a business by the authority for the purpose of retaining existing business or attracting new business to a county or municipality pursuant to this act.

	"Program" means the Local-State Business Incentive Promotion Program established pursuant to section 3 of this act.

	L.1998,c.94,s.2.

34:1B-167  "Local-State Business Incentive Promotion Program" created.

	3.  a.  There is created, in the authority, a "Local-State Business Incentive Promotion Program."  The program shall be established by the authority.  The program shall consist of loans which shall be provided to qualified applicants in order to retain existing businesses or to attract new businesses within a county or municipality by providing the businesses with financing for a project, which may include, but not limited to; the development of transportation services, parking facilities or other types of investments needed to assist local business retention and attraction efforts; the promotion of environmental, quality of life and public safety projects to make an area more conducive for existing businesses to expand and to attract new businesses to an area; and the acquisition of buildings and real property needed to retain businesses or to attract businesses to locate within the area.

	b.  In designing and implementing the program, the authority shall enter into agreements with local agencies, businesses and nonprofit organizations for matching funds in order to leverage its loans with funds from such entities.  The terms and conditions of any agreements for matching funds shall be determined by the authority.

	L.1998,c.94,s.3.

34:1B-168  Use of moneys; sources.

	4.  a.  To implement this act, the authority shall establish and maintain the program with moneys to be used by the authority for the purposes specified in this act.  Moneys to be utilized by the program shall include, but not be limited to:

	(1)	such moneys from the "Economic Recovery Fund" established pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1992, c.16 (C.34:1B-7.12), that the authority determines are available and necessary in response to the demand for the program, and such other business development fund moneys that the authority determines are available and necessary, in response to the demand for the program, to effectively implement the purposes of this act;

	(2)	moneys that shall be received by the authority from the repayment of loans pursuant to this act and interest thereon;

	(3)	moneys as may be available to the authority from business development programs administered by other State agencies or authorities and which the authority determines are necessary in response to the demand for the program;

	(4)	appropriations made by the Legislature to effectuate the purposes of this act;

	(5)	fees collected from applicants pursuant to subsection c. of this section; and

	(6)	such other moneys as may be made available including, but not limited to, funds provided by agreement with private investors to effectuate the purposes of this act.

	b.	Moneys in the program which are determined by the authority not to be needed for current responsibilities of the program, may be invested by the authority in any direct obligations as to which principal and interest are guaranteed by the United States of America or any other obligation deemed appropriate by the authority.

	c.	The authority may charge fees in connection with the provision of loans from the program.

	d.	The authority is authorized to disburse moneys in the program for purposes unrelated to this act if, for a period of at least three years, no moneys are disbursed from the program for the purposes set forth pursuant to this act.

	L.1998,c.94,s.4.

34:1B-169  Loan criteria.

	5.  a.  The authority shall use the moneys from the program to provide loans to applicants determined to be qualified by the authority to participate in the program, in accordance with the criteria set forth in this section, and in accordance with the authority's underwriting criteria.  The authority shall give priority consideration to those project applicants that have leveraged resources pursuant to paragraph (5) of subsection b. of this section, provided that the authority determines that the project is fiscally prudent and meets the authority's underwriting criteria.  Moneys received in repayment of loans shall be deposited in the program.  The maximum amount of each loan from the program that is provided to each qualified applicant shall be determined in accordance with criteria to be adopted by the authority pursuant to section 10 of this act.

	b.	In determining the criteria for qualifying applicants for loans, the authority shall consider:

	(1)	the need to provide assistance for retaining and attracting businesses and jobs;

	(2)	the level of potential job creation and the longevity of such jobs;

	(3)	the conduciveness of the economic environment for the establishment, expansion or relocation of businesses within the jurisdiction of the project;

	(4)	the geographic representation of all regions of the State, including both urban and rural municipalities; and

	(5)	the level of financial and other participation by local economic development agencies, county or municipal government entities, nonprofit or for-profit organizations and lending institutions.

	c.	The authority shall require applicants to contribute cash from other sources to leverage the amount of moneys received from the program.  Contributions provided from other  sources shall be in a ratio of at least $1 from other sources for each $2 from the program.  These contributions may come from a public or private source other than the program.

	d.	Loans to stimulate the retention or attraction of businesses in accordance with this act shall be made by the authority pursuant to a loan agreement and may be amortization or term loans, bear interest at less than the market rate, be renewable, be callable, and contain other terms and conditions considered appropriate by the authority that are consistent with the purposes of this act and with rules and regulations adopted by the authority to implement the program.

	e.	The authority may require, as a condition of receiving a loan under the program, that a business which an applicant seeks to retain or attract shall continue operating at a location in New Jersey for at least 1.5 times the number of years of the term of the loan.

	L.1998,c.94,s.5.

34:1B-170  Investment of moneys.

	6.	The authority shall have, in addition to the powers set forth in section 5 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-5), the power to enter into written agreements with one or more private investors, or with one or more State agencies or authorities for the purpose of establishing a pool of moneys to be deposited in the program and to provide moneys to be used exclusively for loans to stimulate the retention or attraction of businesses pursuant to this act.  The pooled moneys provided as loans by the authority from the program shall be fixed at an interest rate to be determined by the authority and shall be for a term to be established by the authority.

	L.1998,c.94,s.6.

34:1B-171  Coordination of efforts, activities.

	7.  a.  The authority shall seek to coordinate its efforts and activities, to the greatest extent feasible, with the county or municipality, in order to retain or attract businesses in the applicant's jurisdiction.

	b.	The authority shall actively seek the advice of county economic development offices in order to improve the effectiveness of the program.


	L.1998,c.94,s.7.

34:1B-172  Report, contents.

	8.	In addition to the duties of the authority required under section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4), the authority shall prepare a report within two years following the effective date of this act, and not later than September 15 of each third year thereafter, which shall describe: the demand for the program; the number of applicants assisted by the program; the efforts made by the authority to promote the program and to establish a pool of funds from private and public sources pursuant to section 6 of this act; the total number of loans and the average amount of such loans provided by the authority; and an assessment of the effectiveness of the program in meeting the goals of this act.  The authority shall submit its report to the Governor and the Legislature, along with any recommendations for legislation to improve the effectiveness of the program.

	L.1998,c.94,s.8.

34:1B-173  Agreement, cancelled, rescinded.

	9.	If a project fails to meet or comply with a condition or requirement set forth in a loan agreement with the authority or in rules and regulations of the authority, the authority may cancel or rescind the agreement or amend the agreement to reduce the amount of the loan or the term of the loan agreement.

	L.1998,c.94,s.9.

34:1B-174  Rules, regulations.

	10. The authority may adopt, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), rules and regulations as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act.

	L.1998,c.94,s.10.

34:1B-175.  Findings, determinations relative to informational sessions for veterans
	1.	The Legislature finds and determines that:

	a.	In order to encourage and assist veterans to avail themselves of the State's business assistance programs, it is important to provide for the establishment of informational sessions to make veterans aware of such resources.

	b.	It is the purpose of this act to provide for the establishment of informational sessions for veterans in this State to inform them of the authority's business assistance programs and to facilitate their application for such programs.

	L.1999,c.276, s.1.

34:1B-176.  Development of informational sessions by EDA
	2. a. The New Jersey Economic Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as "the authority"), established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4), shall, in consultation with the Adjutant General of the Department of Military and Veterans' Affairs (hereinafter referred to as "the department"), develop informational sessions to inform veterans of the availability of the authority's assistance programs.

	b.	The informational sessions shall be conducted by the authority through the network of veterans' service offices, operated by the department, in the form of lectures, demonstrations or discussions to familiarize veterans with the types of programs administered by the authority and to provide assistance to veterans with the application process required for the programs.  The sessions shall also include such printed or otherwise duplicated materials as the authority shall consider necessary or expedient to render the sessions effective.

	c.	The number of sessions and the content of the sessions shall be determined by the authority, in consultation with the department, so as to most properly effectuate the purposes of this act.

	L.1999,c.276, s.2.

34:1B-177.  Preparation of report to Governor, Legislature
	3.	The authority shall prepare a report within two years following the effective date of this act, and not less than every third year thereafter, which shall include, but not be limited to:  a description of the demand for the sessions from veterans in this State, the efforts made by the authority to promote the sessions; an assessment of the effectiveness of the informational sessions in meeting the goals of this act; and any recommendations for legislation to improve the effectiveness of the sessions.  The authority shall submit its reports to the Governor and the Legislature.

	L.1999,c.276, s.3.

34:1B-178.  Short title
	1.	Sections 1 through 7 of this act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Film Production Assistance Act."

	L.2003,c.182,s.1.

34:1B-179.  Findings, declarations relative to film production assistance
	2.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	The film industry spent over $69 million in this State in the year 2000 on a record 664 different projects including 88 feature films;

	b.	The creation of additional incentives to attract film companies to this State will make substantial contributions to the State's continued economic growth and development;

	c.	In order to attract greater investment by film companies in this State, it is important to establish a film production assistance program with sufficient incentives to encourage new film projects and investment in this State.

	L.2003,c.182,s.2.

34:1B-180.  Definitions relative to film production assistance
	3.	As used in this act:

	"Above-the-line expenses" means the major expenses committed to a film project before production begins and may include storywriting, salaries for the producer, director, and cast, travel and living, and production fees if the film project is bought from another film production company.

	"Act" means the New Jersey Film Production Assistance Act.

	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).

	"Below-the-line expenses" means all physical production costs not included in the above-the-line expenses of a film project and may include material costs, music rights, publicity, or advertisements.

	"Film production company" or "company" means a person engaged in the business of making motion picture or television images for theatrical, commercial or educational purposes.

	"Film project" means a single media or multimedia program produced by a film production company including, but not limited to, motion pictures, feature films, shorts and documentaries, television films or episodes or similar programs fixed on film, videotape, computer disk, laser disk or other similar means that is intended for exhibition in theaters, by television stations or by other means for the home viewing market but does not include any film production that is produced by or on behalf of a corporation or other person for its own internal use for advertising, educational, training or similar purposes. "Film project" shall not mean a single media or multimedia program produced by a film production company if records, as required under 18 U.S.C. s.2257, are to be maintained by that film production company with respect to any performer portrayed in that single media or multimedia program.

	"Financial assistance" means a loan guarantee.

	"Program" means the "New Jersey Film Production Assistance Program" established in the authority pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2003, c.180 (C.34:1B-182).

	L.2003,c.182,s.3.

34:1B-181.  New Jersey Film Production Assistance Program
	4.  a.  There is created in the authority the New Jersey Film Production Assistance Program.  The purpose of the program shall be to attract film production companies with financial assistance from the authority in order to promote and encourage the development of film projects and investments by film production companies in this State.

	b.	The authority shall adopt eligibility criteria for providing financial assistance to film production companies.  These criteria shall limit financial assistance to film production companies that:

	(1)	want to engage in film projects where more than 70 percent of the shooting days take place in this State and where at least 50 percent of the amount of the below-the-line expenses of the operating budget of the film project is spent in this State;

	(2)	have obtained a minimum of one-half of the estimated total production costs from other sources;

	(3)	provide in their employment contracts that not less than the prevailing wage rate, as determined by the Commissioner of Labor, pursuant to the provisions of the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.), shall be paid to workers employed in the performance of contracts in connection with a proposed project, including construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or demolition of property and improvements thereon; and

	(4)	have posted such financial security as may be deemed to be necessary by the authority.

	c.	The authority shall provide financial assistance to eligible film production companies to facilitate their film projects in New Jersey.  In order to be eligible for the financial assistance, film production companies shall, in addition to meeting the authority's customary underwriting criteria, demonstrate to the authority's satisfaction that they meet the eligibility criteria adopted pursuant to subsection b. of this section.  If at any time the authority determines that a film production company does not meet such criteria, any financial assistance provided shall be withdrawn or any financial assistance to be provided shall be rendered null and void, as appropriate.

	d.	The authority shall utilize the program to stimulate greater investment in this State by film production companies through measures that include, but are not limited to:

	(1)	identifying low-interest loans or tax credits that may be available from the State or from federal government agencies or private organizations to promote the planning and development of film projects in this State; and

	(2)	in consultation with the Department of the Treasury, identifying existing surplus State property that could be utilized by film production companies for film projects.

	L.2003,c.182,s.4.

34:1B-182.  Establishment, maintenance of program; funding; use
	5.  a.  To implement this act, the authority shall establish and maintain the program with moneys to be used by the authority for the purposes specified in this act.  Moneys to be utilized by the program shall include, but not be limited to:

	(1)	any moneys that shall be received by the authority from the repayment of the moneys in the account used to provide financial assistance to film production companies pursuant to P.L.2003, c.182 (C.34:1B-178 et al.);

	(2)	any moneys that shall be received by the authority from other business assistance programs administered by the authority which it determines to deposit therein; and

	(3)	any other source that the authority may determine is available to effectuate the purposes of the program.

	b.	The authority shall use the moneys available for the program to:

	(1)	provide, for a period of  five years after the effective date of this act, financial assistance to film production companies deemed eligible pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2003, c.182 (C.34:1B-181); and

	(2)	defray the administrative expenses of carrying out the purposes and provisions of P.L.2003, c.182 (C.34:1B-178 et al.).  Such administrative expenses may be used by the authority to employ an administrator and additional personnel or consultants to oversee the operations of the program and to prepare any reports or other documentation regarding the program with the assistance of the authority.  Such administrator, additional personnel or consultants shall review each application for financial assistance for the purpose of assisting the authority in an investigation and analysis of the financial soundness of the film project or film production company.

	Within 30 days of the end of the five-year period as provided in paragraph (1) of subsection b. of this section, the authority shall determine whether sufficient interest in financial assistance from qualified film production companies warrants the continuation of the program and the authority may discontinue the program at the end of such period if the authority determines that such interest is not evident.  The authority shall notify the Governor and Legislature of its decision and issue a report of its findings and any suggestions for improvement to the program if such suggestions are warranted.

	c.	The maximum amount of any loan that is guaranteed by the authority and is to be provided to a film production company, pursuant to P.L.2003, c.182 (C.34:1B-178 et al.), shall not exceed either $1,500,000 per film project, or an amount that is no greater than 30 percent of any loan for the film project that is derived from private sources, whichever amount is less.  The authority shall not have a balance outstanding of all loans guaranteed pursuant to P.L.2003, c.182 (C.34:1B-178 et al.) of an amount greater than $10 million at any time, except that the authority may increase this amount if the authority determines that the  demand for financial assistance warrants such increase.

	d.	The authority shall provide in any agreement between the authority and a film production company for financial assistance from the program that the authority shall retain a security interest in the assets of the film production company including, but not limited to, all revenues, payments, money and proceeds generated by the company's film project, to the extent necessary to insure the authority's full recovery of the amount of any financial assistance.  Prior to the granting of any financial assistance, the authority shall require the film production company to enter into a faithful performance bond, completion bond or similar security with the authority in such form, amount and terms as shall be determined by the authority.

	L.2003,c.182,s.5.

34:1B-183.  Report to Governor, Legislature
	6.	Within two years of the effective date of P.L.2003, c.182 (C.34:1B-178 et al.), the authority shall submit a written report to the Governor and the Legislature describing the status of the program, the demand for the program, the total amount of financial assistance awarded by the authority from the program and an assessment of the success of the program in meeting the goals of this act and any recommendations for improving the operation and effectiveness of the program.

	L.2003,c.182,s.6.

34:1B-184.  Rules, regulations
	7.	The authority shall adopt, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), any rules and regulations necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act.

	L.2003,c.182,s.7.

34:1B-185  Definitions relative to sales tax exemption program.
  
	19.	As used in sections 19 through 22 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-185 through C.34:1B-188) the following terms shall have the following meanings:
 
	"Eligible property" means machinery, equipment, furniture and furnishings, fixtures, and building materials, but "eligible property" shall not include "motor vehicles" as defined pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1966, c.30 (C.54:32B-2), parts with a useful life of one year or less, or tools or supplies used in connection with the eligible property;
 
	"Headquarters" means the single location that serves as the national administrative center of a business, at which the primary office of the chief executive officer or chief operating officer of the business, as well as the offices of the management officials responsible for key businesswide functions such as finance, legal, marketing, and human resources, are located;
 
	"Life sciences business" means a business engaged principally in the production of medical equipment, ophthalmic goods, medical or dental instruments, diagnostic substances, biopharmaceutical products; or physical and biological research; or biotechnology;
 
	"Manufacturing facility" means a business location at which more than 50% of the business personal property that is housed in the facility is eligible for the sales tax exemption pursuant to subsection a. of section 25 of P.L.1980, c.105 (C. 54:32B-8.13) for machinery, apparatus or equipment used in the production of tangible personal property; and
 
	"Research and development facility" means a business location at which more than 50% of the business personal property that is purchased for the facility is eligible for the sales tax exemption pursuant to section 26 of P.L.1980, c.105 (C.54:32B-8.14) for property used in research and development.
 
	L.2004, c.65, s.19; amended 2007, c.253, s.16.

34:1B-186  Program to approve issuance of certificates to qualifying businesses.
  
	20.	The New Jersey Commerce Commission shall establish and administer a program to approve the issuance of sales and use tax exemption certificates to qualifying businesses as specified in sections 19 through 22 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-185 through C.34:1B-188).  The receipts from the certificate holder's purchase of eligible property located or placed at the business location covered by the project approval within the period established pursuant to the terms and conditions of the project approval for the approved business location shall be exempt from the tax imposed under the "Sales and Use Tax Act," P.L.1966, c.30 (C.54:32B-1 et seq.).
 
	L.2004, c.65, s.20; amended 2007, c.253, s.17.

34:1B-187  Submission of project application; eligibility.
 
 	21. a. A business seeking to participate in the sales and use tax exemption certificate program established pursuant to sections 19 through 22 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-185 through C.34:1B-188) shall submit a project application to the New Jersey Commerce Commission in such form as required by the New Jersey Commerce Commission.
 
	b.	The location for the project shall be situated in designated Planning Area 1 or 2, as defined in the State Development and Redevelopment Plan adopted by the State Planning Commission; provided however, that a business project involving the renovation or expansion of an existing facility that is not located in designated Planning Area 1 or 2 may be eligible to participate in the program, at the determination of the New Jersey Commerce Commission, if all other applicable criteria are satisfied.
 
	A business located in an urban enterprise zone designated pursuant to the "New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act," P.L.1983, c.303 (C.52:27H-60 et al.) as of the effective date of this section shall not be eligible to participate in this program if the relocation project is from a facility within the urban enterprise zone to a facility outside an urban enterprise zone; provided however, that if the relocation is to a facility already owned or leased by the same business and that business already employs at least the same number of persons as those being relocated from the urban enterprise zone, it may be eligible to apply. 
 
	c.	To be eligible to apply for the sales and use tax exemption certificate program, a business shall have operated continuously in this State, in whole or in part, in its current form or as a predecessor entity, for at least 10 years prior to filing an application and shall satisfy at least one of the following criteria:
 
	(1)	the business has 1,000 or more full-time employees in the State and the project involves relocating 500 or more full-time employees into a new business location or locations; 
 
	(2)	the business is a life sciences business or a manufacturing facility and the project is: constructing one or more new research and development facilities, constructing one or more new manufacturing facilities in this State, or relocating to a new headquarters in this State that will employ 250 or more full-time employees; 
 
	(3)	the business is a life sciences business or a manufacturing business and the project is constructing a new, or substantially rehabilitating a vacant, property that will separately or collectively:
 
	(a)	be predominately a new research and development facility;
 
	(b)	be predominately a new manufacturing facility;
 
	(c)	house the headquarters of the business; or
 
	(d)	separately or collectively be a combination of subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c);
 
provided, that the new or substantially rehabilitated facility will house a minimum of 250 full-time employees. For the purposes of this subparagraph, "predominantly" means a majority of the employees housed in the new facility are engaged in that activity, or a majority of the square footage of the new facility is used in that activity; or a majority of the total value of the investment made will be employed in that activity; or other measures of activity as may be determined by the New Jersey Commerce Commission that demonstrate that a critical concentration of research and development, manufacturing, or both, will occur at the new facility; or
 
	(4)	the business is, at the time of enactment of this section, currently receiving a structured finance special guarantee pursuant to N.J.A.C.19:31-2.1(c)3.ii(5) for the project.
 
	d.	For the purposes of determining a number of full-time employees pursuant to subsection c. of this section, the full-time employees of the members of a "controlled group of corporations" as defined pursuant to section 1563 of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 26 U.S.C. s.1563, shall be considered the employees of a single employer.
 
	e.	A project may be completed in up to two phases provided that it will be the national headquarters of a life sciences or manufacturing company, and will include a significant research and development facility, a significant manufacturing facility, or combination thereof if: (1) the first completed phase will house at least 200 full-time employees and the second phase will house at least 100 additional employees; and (2) the project is pre-approved for phases and that all phases are completed within 30 months of project approval. 
 
	f.	Upon approval of a project, the Executive Director of the New Jersey Commerce Commission shall notify the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury of the terms and conditions of the project approval and the director shall issue a certificate of exemption pursuant to the terms and conditions of the project approval.  In general, the sales and use tax exemption certificate provided by sections 19 through 22 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-185 through C.34:1B-188) should not apply to purchases initiated by the business after the date that the temporary certificate of occupancy is issued, or in cases where no temporary certificate of occupancy is issued should not apply to purchases initiated by the business more than one year from the project commencement date; however, the duration of the certificate of exemption shall be pursuant to the terms and conditions of the project approval.
 
	L.2004, c.65, s.21; amended 2007, c.253, s.18.

34:1B-188  Rules, regulations.
 
	22.	The New Jersey Commerce Commission shall, after consultation with the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, adopt rules and regulations pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) necessary to govern the proper conduct and operation of the program consistent with the provisions of sections 19 through 22 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-185 through C.34:1B-188).
 
	L.2004, c.65, s.22; amended 2007, c.253, s.19.

34:1B-189  Low-interest loans for medical offices in Health Enterprise Zones, definitions.

	3. a. In consultation with the Commissioner of Health and Senior Services, the Executive Director of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority shall establish and administer a program that makes low-interest loans for the purposes of constructing and renovating medical offices in Health Enterprise Zones as described in section 1 of P.L.2004, c.139 (C.54A:3-7) and the offices of a qualified practice that is located within 5 miles of a Health Enterprise Zone and purchasing medical equipment for use by primary care providers as defined in N.J.S.18A:71C-32 at practices located in Health Enterprise Zones or at qualified practices that are located within 5 miles of a Health Enterprise Zone.  The executive director shall adopt rules and regulations, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C:52:14B-1 et seq.), necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section.

	b.	For the purposes of this section:

	"Qualified practice" means a practice at which 50% or more of the total amount received for services at that practice for the taxable year are qualified receipts and 50% or more of the patients whose services are compensated by qualified receipts reside in a Health Enterprise Zone; and

	"Qualified receipts" means amounts received for services from the Medicaid program pursuant to P.L.1968, c.413 (C.30:4D-1 et seq.), including amounts received from managed care organizations under contract with the Medicaid program, the FamilyCare Health Coverage Program pursuant to P.L.2000, c.71 (C.30:4J-1 et seq.), and the Children's Health Care Coverage Program pursuant to P.L.1997, c.272 (C.30:4I-1 et seq.) for providing health care services to eligible program recipients.

	L.2004,c.139,s.3.

34:1B-190  Short title.
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Sports and Entertainment District Urban Revitalization Act."

	L.2007, c.30,s.1.

34:1B-191  Findings, declarations relative to sports and entertainment districts.
 	2.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	The blighted condition of the land and buildings in certain areas of the State discourages serious private investment, therein, a situation which is often exacerbated by the onerous tax rates which beset those municipalities.

	b.	The development and expansion of significant commercial and entertainment establishments can generate tangible long-term benefits for the State, its local political subdivisions, its businesses and its citizens.  These benefits include increases in State sales and use tax revenues, employment and local property tax revenues, and new employment opportunities.

	c.	It is in the public interest to provide the means to finance certain costs of development and redevelopment in order to promote private investment, to create jobs, stimulate commercial, recreational, cultural, entertainment, civic and educational enterprises, and otherwise create favorable conditions for increases in economic activity, property values and employment opportunities.

	d.	The potential for substantial gains in new tax revenues, job creation, economic activity, increased recreational opportunities, and the enhancement of the quality of life in the State justifies the use of public financing to encourage private investment and to promote development and redevelopment projects that would be spurred by such State assistance.

	e.	It is appropriate to authorize the issuance of bonds and other notes and obligations and to provide the basis upon which to secure contract bonds, notes or other financial obligations issued in accordance with P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-190 et seq.) with respect to financing or refinancing the project costs authorized in P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-190 et seq.).

	L.2007, c.30,s.2.

34:1B-192  Definitions relative to sports and entertainment districts.
 	3.	As used in this act:

	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established pursuant to P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.).
 
	"Developer" means any person or entity, whether public or private, including a State entity, that proposes to undertake a project pursuant to a development agreement.
 
	"District" or "sports and entertainment district" means a geographic area which includes a project as set forth in the ordinance pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-193).
 
	"Eligible municipality" means a municipality: (1) in which is located part of an urban enterprise zone that has been designated pursuant to P.L.1983, c.303 (C.52:27H-60 et seq.) or any supplement thereto; and (2) which has a population greater than 25,000 and less than 29,000 according to the latest federal decennial census in a county of the third class with a population density greater than 295 and less than 304 persons per square mile according to the latest federal decennial census.
 
	"Infrastructure improvements" means the construction or rehabilitation of any street, highway, utility, transportation or parking facilities, or other similar improvements; the acquisition of any interest in land as necessary or convenient for the acquisition of any right-of-way or other easement for the purpose of constructing infrastructure improvements; the acquisition, construction or reconstruction of land and site improvements, including demolition, clearance, removal, construction, reconstruction, fill, environmental enhancement or abatement, or other site preparation for development of a sports and entertainment district.
 
	"Obtained through a transient space marketplace" means that payment for the accommodation is made through a means provided by the marketplace or travel agency, either directly or indirectly, regardless of which person or entity receives the payment, and where the contracting for the accommodation is made through the marketplace or travel agency.	"Professionally managed unit" means a room, group of rooms, or other living or sleeping space for the lodging of occupants in the State, that is offered for rent as a rental unit that does not share any living or sleeping space with any other rental unit, and that is directly or indirectly owned or controlled by a person offering for rent two or more other units during the calendar year.
 
	"Project" means a sports and entertainment facility and may include infrastructure improvements that are associated with the sports and entertainment facility.
 
	"Project cost" means the cost of a project, including the financing, acquisition, development, construction, redevelopment, rehabilitation, reconstruction and improvement costs thereof, financing costs and the administrative costs, including any administrative costs of the authority if bonds are issued pursuant to section 16 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-205) and incurred in connection with a sports and entertainment facility which is financed, in whole or in part, by the revenues dedicated by a municipality to a project as authorized pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-194).
 
	"Residence" means a house, condominium, or other residential dwelling unit in a building or structure or part of a building or structure that is designed, constructed, leased, rented, let or hired out, or otherwise made available for use as a residence. 
 
	"Sports and entertainment facility" means any privately or publicly owned or operated facility located in a sports and entertainment district that is used primarily for sports contests, entertainment, or both, such as a theater, stadium, museum, arena, automobile racetrack, or other place where performances, concerts, exhibits, games or contests are held.
 
	"State Treasurer" or "treasurer" means the treasurer of the State of New Jersey.
 
	"Transient accommodation" means a room, group of rooms, or other living or sleeping space for the lodging of occupants, including but not limited to residences or buildings used as residences, that is obtained through a transient space marketplace or is a professionally managed unit. "Transient accommodation" does not include: a hotel or hotel room; a room, group of rooms, or other living or sleeping space used as a place of assembly; a dormitory or other similar residential facility of an elementary or secondary school or a college or university; a hospital, nursing home, or other similar residential facility of a provider of services for the care, support and treatment of individuals that is licensed by the State; a campsite, cabin, lean-to, or other similar residential facility of a campground or an adult or youth camp; a furnished or unfurnished private residential property, including but not limited to condominiums, bungalows, single-family homes and similar living units, where no maid service, room service, linen changing service or other common hotel services are made available by the lessor and where the keys to the furnished or unfurnished private residential property, whether a physical key, access to a keyless locking mechanism, or other means of physical ingress to the furnished or unfurnished private residential property, are provided to the lessee at the location of an offsite real estate broker licensed by the New Jersey Real Estate Commission pursuant to R.S.45:15-1 et seq.; or leases of real property with a term of at least 90 consecutive days. 
 
	"Transient space marketplace" means a marketplace or travel agency through which a person may offer transient accommodations to customers and through which customers may arrange for occupancies of transient accommodations. "Transient space marketplace" does not include a marketplace or travel agency that exclusively offers transient accommodations in the State owned by the owner of the marketplace or travel agency. 
 
	L.2007, c.30, s.3; amended 2018, c.49, s.3; 2018, c.132, s.5; 2019, c.235, s.3.

34:1B-193  Establishment of a sports and entertainment district.
	4.	The governing body of any eligible municipality may, by ordinance, establish a sports and entertainment district in order to encourage and promote the development of a project within the district.  A sports and entertainment district shall consist of an area of the municipality designated in a project plan prepared by the developer.  The project plan shall be approved by municipal ordinance, duly adopted by the governing body.

	The ordinance shall include or incorporate:

	a.	a description of the proposed project, the anticipated period of construction, and a description and map of the proposed sports and entertainment district;

	b.	an estimate of the amount of  tax revenues that are anticipated to be generated annually within the sports and entertainment district for that period of time covered by the project plan and an estimate of those revenues to be allocated to the project;

	c.	an assessment of the economic benefits of the project, including a projection of the value of private investment that is anticipated to  be generated, directly or indirectly, in the sports and entertainment district as a result of the undertaking of the project or other proposed development within the sports and entertainment district;

	d.	documentation as to the necessary approvals relating to the project;

	e.	demonstration that at least $20 million in private investment has been committed to the project; and

	f.	documentation that the district has been identified in the appropriate plan.

	L.2007, c.30,s.4.

34:1B-194  Tax revenues dedicated to sports and entertainment district; imposition of taxes.
	5.	The governing body of a municipality that establishes a sports and entertainment district may, as part of the ordinance establishing the district: impose one or more of the taxes enumerated in subsection a. of this section; dedicate some or all of those taxes; and dedicate some or all of the taxes enumerated in subsection b. of this section solely for the purposes of financing the project costs of a sports and entertainment facility for the life of the project, as appropriate, except that none of the taxes enumerated in subsection a. or b. of this section shall be imposed or dedicated for a period of more than 30 years.
 
	a.	The municipality may, by ordinance, impose any or all of the following:
 
	(1)	a tax at the rate of 2% on the receipts from every sale within the district of tangible personal property subject to taxation pursuant to subsection (a) of section 3 of P.L.1966, c.30 (C.54:32B-3);
 
	(2)	a tax at the rate of 2% on the receipts from every sale within the district of food and drink subject to taxation pursuant to subsection (c) of section 3 of P.L.1966, c.30 (C.54:32B-3);
 
	(3)	a tax at the rate of 2% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a room or rooms in a hotel or transient accommodation located within the district and subject to taxation pursuant to subsection (d) of section 3 of P.L.1966, c.30 (C.54:32B-3); or
 
	(4)	a tax at the rate of 2% on the admission charge to a place of amusement within the district and subject to taxation pursuant to subsection (e) of section 3 of P.L.1966, c.30 (C.54:32B-3).
 
	b.	The municipality may dedicate, by ordinance, any hotel and motel occupancy tax revenues collected within the district that the municipality is authorized to impose pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2003, c.114 (C.40:48F-1) and, at the discretion of the municipality, an additional charge of 2%.
 
	c.	A tax imposed under subsection a. of this section shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon the same transaction.
 
	d.	A copy of an ordinance adopted pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-193) shall be transmitted upon adoption or amendment thereof to the State Treasurer.  An ordinance so adopted or any amendment thereto shall provide that the tax provisions of the ordinance or any amendment to the tax provisions shall take effect on the first day of the first full month occurring 90 days after the date of transmittal to the State Treasurer.
 
	e.	A municipality that creates a district pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-193), which overlaps, in whole or in part, with an urban enterprise zone in which the receipts of certain sales are exempt to the extent of 50% of the tax imposed under the "Sales and Use Tax Act," P.L.1966, c.30 (C.54:32B-1 et seq.), pursuant to section 21 of P.L.1983, c.303 (C.52:27H-80), shall continue to administer those sales tax revenues collected within the designated urban enterprise zone as otherwise provided pursuant to P.L.1983, c.303 (C.52:27H-60 et seq.).
 
	L.2007, c.30, s.5; amended 2018, c.49, s.4.

34:1B-195  Provisions of ordinance imposing tax.
 	6.	An ordinance imposing a tax pursuant to subsection a. of section 5 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-194) shall contain the following provisions:

	a.	All taxes imposed by the ordinance shall be paid by the purchaser;

	b.	A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by the ordinance;

	c.	A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be separately charged and stated to the customer, or that the tax will be refunded to the customer;

	d.	Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a separate offense and each representation or advertisement by a vendor for each day the representation or advertisement continues shall be deemed a separate offense; and

	e.	Penalties as fixed in the ordinance, for violation of the foregoing provisions.

	L.2007, c.30,s.6.

34:1B-196  Collection of tax.
 	7. a. A tax imposed pursuant to a municipal ordinance adopted under the provisions of subsection a. of section 5 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-194) shall be collected on behalf of the municipality by the person collecting the receipts, charges or rent from the customer.
 
	b.	Each person required to collect a tax imposed by the ordinance shall be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected hereunder.  Any such person shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from a customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the same time; provided, however, that the chief fiscal officer of the municipality shall be joined as a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
 
	c.	Notwithstanding any other provision of law or administrative action to the contrary, transient space marketplaces shall be required to collect and pay on behalf of persons engaged in the business of providing transient accommodations located in this State the tax for transactions obtained through the transient space marketplace. For not less than four years following the end of the calendar year in which the transaction occurred, the transient space marketplace shall maintain the following data for those transactions consummated through the transient space marketplace:
 
	(1)	The name of the person who provided the transient accommodation;
 
	(2)	The name of the customer who procured occupancy of the transient accommodation;
 
	(3)	The address, including any unit designation, of the transient accommodation;
 
	(4)	The dates and nightly rates for which the consumer procured occupancy of the transient accommodation; 
 
	(5)	The municipal transient accommodation registration number, if applicable;
 
	(6)	A statement as to whether such booking services will be provided in connection with (i) short-term rental of the entirety of such unit, (ii) short-term rental of part of such unit, but not the entirety of such unit, and/or (iii) short-term rental of the entirety of such unit, or part thereof, in which a non-short-term occupant will continue to occupy such unit for the duration of such short-term rental;
 
	(7)	The individualized name or number of each such advertisement or listing connected to such unit and the uniform resource locator (URL) for each such listing or advertisement, where applicable; and 
 
	(8)	Such other information as the Division of Taxation may by rule require. 
 
The Division of Taxation may audit transient space marketplaces as necessary to ensure data accuracy and enforce tax compliance. 
 
	L.2007, c.30, s.7; amended 2018, c.49, s.5; 2019, c.235, s.4.

34:1B-197  Forwarding of tax collected to Director of Taxation.
 	8. a. A person required to collect a tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of  subsection a. of section 5 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-194) shall, on or before the dates required pursuant to section 17 of P.L.1966, c.30 (C.54:32B-17), forward to the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury the tax collected in the preceding month and make and file a return for the preceding month with the director on any form and containing any information as the director shall prescribe as necessary to determine liability for the tax in the preceding month during which the person was required to collect the tax.

	b.	The director may permit or require returns to be made covering other periods and upon any dates as the director may specify.  In addition, the director may require payments of tax liability at any intervals and based upon any classifications as the director may designate.  In prescribing any other periods to be covered by the return or intervals or classifications for payment of tax liability, the director may take into account the dollar volume of tax involved as well as the need for ensuring the prompt and orderly collection of the tax imposed.

	c.	The director may require amended returns to be filed within 20 days after notice and to contain the information specified in the notice.

	L.2007, c.30,s.8.

34:1B-198  Submission of ordinance as application to State Treasurer; criteria for approval.
 	9.	When an ordinance establishing or amending a district has passed first reading, it shall be submitted to the State Treasurer as an application, together with all included and incorporated certificates and documents and such additional documentation as the treasurer shall require.

	The treasurer shall approve the ordinance if it is determined that:

	a.	the planned sports and entertainment facility is likely to be realized and would not likely be accomplished by private enterprise without the creation of the district and the financing of the proposed project or projects;

	b.	the $20 million commitment of private investment is assured;

	c.	the creation of the district will contribute to the economic development of the municipality; and

	d.	the size of the proposed district, the financial needs in order to accomplish the project and the amount of the revenues anticipated to be raised from the discretionary taxes do not exceed the size and amount necessary to accomplish the purposes of the plan.

	L.2007, c.30,s.9.

34:1B-199  Treasurer's recommendations; approval; adoption of ordinance.
 	10.  a. The treasurer may make written recommendations as to any aspect of the ordinance and the plan and any related fiscal matters which in the opinion of the treasurer shall be changed in order to effectuate the plan.  The treasurer may condition the approval of the ordinance upon the adoption of the treasurer's recommendations by the municipality.

	b.	The treasurer shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the ordinance within 60 days of receipt of an application which the treasurer has deemed to be complete.  If the treasurer disapproves the ordinance the treasurer shall, within 30 days of signifying disapproval thereof, set forth reasons in writing for the disapproval.  The municipality may amend the ordinance and resubmit it to the treasurer.

	c.	Upon receipt of the approved ordinance from the treasurer, the municipal governing body may adopt the ordinance at a meeting of the governing body by a majority of the authorized membership thereof in the same manner as the adoption of other ordinances of the governing body.

	L.2007, c.30,s.10.

34:1B-200  Amending ordinance required for changing district boundaries, pledged revenues.
	11.  After adoption of the ordinance establishing a district, there shall be no expansion or contraction of the boundaries of the district or the designation of the pledged revenues without adoption of an amending ordinance approved by the treasurer as provided in sections 9 and 10 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-198 and C.34:1B-199).

	L.2007, c.30,s.11.

34:1B-201  Preparation of final financial plan by developer.
 	12.  Before any tax revenues are made available to the developer for the purposes of undertaking the sports and entertainment facility, the developer shall prepare a final financial plan for that project, which shall be consistent with the project plan prepared by the developer and approved by the treasurer pursuant to section 9 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-198), which shall be submitted to the governing body pursuant to section 13 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-202).  That plan shall include:

	a.	a description of the project or projects to be financed, including the projected cost and construction schedule;

	b.	a description of any development to be undertaken by any developer in connection with the project, including an estimate of the eligible revenues anticipated from the development;

	c.	demonstration that the developer has complied with the investment commitment required pursuant to subsection e. of section 4 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-193);

	d.	a description of the eligible revenues to be pledged to the support of the project, or to the bonds or other obligations to be issued or incurred; and

	e.	a description of other anticipated projects for the district  and the anticipated means of financing those projects.

	L.2007, c.30,s.12.

34:1B-202  Submission of final financial plan to municipality, approval by treasurer.
 	13.	The final financial plan prepared pursuant to section 12 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-201) shall be submitted to the governing body of the municipality for approval by ordinance.  When an ordinance approving a final financial plan has been introduced in writing at a meeting of the governing body and passed first reading, which may be by title, by a majority of the authorized membership thereof, it shall be submitted to the treasurer, together with all included and incorporated certificates and documents and such additional supporting documentation as the treasurer may by rule prescribe.

	The treasurer shall approve the plan if the treasurer determines that:

	a.	the project is likely to be realized and would not be accomplished by private enterprise without the public support authorized pursuant to P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-190 et seq.);

	b.	the pledged revenues will be sufficient to assist in the financing of the sports and entertainment facility, as anticipated in the financial forecasts; 

	c.	eligible revenues to be made available for project costs will be sufficient to back the bonds or other obligations to be issued or incurred pursuant to subsection a. of section 16 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-205) or to otherwise fulfill any financial commitments made by the developer to the State pursuant to subsection c. of section 16 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-205);

	d.	the developer has demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the treasurer, that the commitment of private funds required pursuant to subsection e. of section 4 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-193) has been satisfied; and

	e.	there are no other factors which, in the determination of the treasurer, should prevent the undertaking of the project.

	L.2007, c.30,s.13.

34:1B-203  Treasurer's recommendations relative to final financial plan.
	14. a. The treasurer may make written recommendations as to any aspect of the final financial plan and any related fiscal matters which, in the determination of the treasurer, must be addressed in order to effectuate the plan, and the treasurer may condition approval of the plan upon the adoption of the treasurer's recommendations.

	b.	The treasurer shall approve, approve with conditions, or  disapprove the plan within 60 days of the receipt of an application which the treasurer has deemed to be complete.  If the treasurer disapproves the plan, the treasurer shall set forth the reasons in writing within 30 days of the disapproval thereof.  The governing body may amend the ordinance and resubmit it to the treasurer.

	c.	Upon receipt of the approved ordinance from the treasurer, the municipal governing body may adopt the ordinance at a meeting of the governing body by a majority of the authorized membership thereof.  Any changes to the plan as embodied in the ordinance, including the pledge or utilization of eligible revenues subject, however, to any rights of bondholders shall be by amendment of the ordinance adopted and approved by the same method as the ordinance was initially approved in connection with the proposed final financial plan included in the ordinance establishing the district.

	L.2007, c.30,s.14.

34:1B-204  Collection, administration of tax.
 	15. a. The Director of the Division of Taxation shall collect and administer any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of subsection a. of section 5 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-194).  In carrying out the provisions of this section, the director shall have all the powers granted in P.L.1966, c.30 (C.54:32B-1 et seq.);

	b.	The director shall determine and certify to the treasurer on a quarterly or more frequent basis, as prescribed by the treasurer, the amount of revenues collected in each municipality pursuant to subsection a. of section 5 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-194);

	c.	The treasurer, upon the certification of the director and upon the warrant of the State Comptroller, shall pay and distribute on a quarterly or more frequent basis, as prescribed by the treasurer, those amounts determined and certified under subsection a. of this section into the fund established pursuant to subsection b. of section 16 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-205);  

	d.	A tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of subsection a. of  section 5 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-194) shall be governed by the provisions of the "State Uniform Tax Procedure Law," R.S.54:48-1 et seq.

	L.2007, c.30,s.15.

34:1B-205  Use of revenues; fund, uses.
 	16. a. Revenues collected pursuant to the taxes imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-194) shall be used to finance project costs whether those costs are incurred through the issuance of bonds or other financial assistance.  In the event that bonds are to be issued to cover project costs, the New Jersey Economic Development Authority may serve as the issuing agent of bonds to finance the undertaking of a project pursuant to P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-190 et seq.).

	b.	Upon the approval by the treasurer of a final financial plan pursuant to section 13 of  P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-202), the treasurer shall establish the "(name of municipality) Sports and Entertainment Facility Revenue Fund" into which shall be deposited those revenues collected through the imposition of taxes authorized under section 5 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-194), and any interest or other income earned thereon.  Moneys in the "(name of municipality) Sports and Entertainment Facility Revenue Fund" shall be managed and invested by the Division of Investment in the Department of the Treasury.  All moneys in the fund shall be disbursed by the treasurer either to be directed toward the repayment of the principal and interest on bonds  issued for the purposes of undertaking a project or as financial assistance undertaken pursuant to subsection c. of this section.

	c.	Moneys deposited in the fund may be used to provide financial assistance to a developer toward the costs of financing the infrastructure improvements of a project, except that such financial assistance shall only be given to a developer for infrastructure improvements that were undertaken after the date of an approval of the ordinance by the treasurer under section 9 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-198).  Financial assistance provided from the fund shall be limited to loans, loan guarantees, grants or secondary mortgages and provided solely for the purposes as provided in this subsection.  The form, amount and terms of financial assistance provided shall be determined by the treasurer, subject to the availability of funds, the terms of the financial plan, and any other requirements of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-190 et seq.).

	L.2007, c.30,s.16.

34:1B-206  Bonds not considered debt, liability of State.
 	17.  Bonds issued by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority or other State entity for the purposes as provided in section 16 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-205) shall not be a debt or liability of the State or any agency or instrumentality thereof, except as otherwise provided by section 16 of P.L.2007, c.30 (C.34:1B-205), either legal, moral or otherwise.

	L.2007, c.30,s.17.

34:1B-207  Short title.
 
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Urban Transit Hub Tax Credit Act."
 
	L.2007, c.346, s.1.

34:1B-208  Definitions relative to the "Urban Transit Hub Tax Credit Act."
	2.	As used in this act:

	"Affiliate" means an entity that directly or indirectly controls, is under common control with, or is controlled by the business.  Control exists in all cases in which the entity is a member of a controlled group of corporations as defined pursuant to section 1563 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C.s.1563) or the entity is an organization in a group of organizations under common control as defined pursuant to subsection (b) or (c) of section 414 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C.s.414).  A taxpayer may establish by clear and convincing evidence, as determined by the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, that control exists in situations involving lesser percentages of ownership than required by those statutes.  An affiliate of a business may contribute to meeting either the qualified investment or full-time employee requirements of a business that applies for a credit under section 3 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-209).
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Business" means a corporation that is subject to the tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), a corporation that is subject to the tax imposed pursuant to sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and 54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15) or N.J.S.17B:23-5, or is a partnership, an S corporation, or a limited liability corporation.  A business shall include an affiliate of the business if that business applies for a credit based upon any capital investment made by or full-time employees of an affiliate.
 
	"Capital investment" in a qualified business facility means expenses incurred after, but before the end of the eighth year after, the effective date of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-207 et seq.) for: a. the site preparation and construction, repair, renovation, improvement, equipping, or furnishing of a building, structure, facility or improvement to real property; and b. obtaining and installing furnishings and machinery, apparatus or equipment for the operation of a business in a building, structure, facility or improvement to real property.
 
	"Eligible municipality" means a municipality: (1) which qualifies for State aid pursuant to P.L.1978, c.14 (C.52:27D-178 et seq.) or which was continued to be a qualified municipality thereunder pursuant to P.L.2007, c.111; and (2) in which 30 percent or more of the value of real property was exempt from local property taxation during tax year 2006.  The percentage of exempt property shall be calculated by dividing the total exempt value by the sum of the net valuation which is taxable and that which is tax exempt.
 
	"Full-time employee" means a person employed by the business for consideration for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment, or a person who is employed by a professional employer organization pursuant to an employee leasing agreement between the business and the professional employer organization, in accordance with P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.) for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment, and whose wages are subject to withholding as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq. or an employee who is a resident of another State but whose income is not subject to the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq. or who is a partner of a business who works for the partnership for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment, and whose distributive share of income, gain, loss, or deduction, or whose guaranteed payments, or any combination thereof, is subject to the payment of estimated taxes, as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq.  "Full-time employee" shall not include any person who works as an independent contractor or on a consulting basis for the business.
 
	"Full-time employee at the qualified business facility" means a full-time position in a business in this State, which position the business has filled with a full-time employee, who shall have their primary office at the qualified business facility and spend at least 60 percent of their time at the qualified business facility.  This requirement shall supersede any law, regulation, or incentive agreement that imposes a requirement that the employee be present at the qualified business facility for a specified percentage of time greater than 60 percent.  This amendment shall not alter or terminate any waiver of the requirement that an employee spend time at the qualified business facility implemented by the authority due to COVID-19 public health emergency and state of emergency.
 
	"Mixed use project" means a project comprising both a qualified business facility and a qualified residential project.
 
	"Partnership" means an entity classified as a partnership for federal income tax purposes.
 
	"Professional employer organization" means an employee leasing company registered with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.).
 
	"Qualified business facility" means any building, complex of buildings or structural components of buildings, and all machinery and equipment located within a designated urban transit hub in an eligible municipality, used in connection with the operation of a business.
 
	"Qualified residential project" shall have the meaning ascribed to that term under section 34 of P.L.2009, c.90 (C.34:1B-209.2).
 
	"Residential unit" means a residential dwelling unit such as a rental apartment, a condominium or cooperative unit, a hotel room, or a dormitory room.
 
	"Urban transit hub" means:
 
	a. (1) property located within a 1/2-mile radius surrounding the mid point of a New Jersey Transit Corporation, Port Authority Transit Corporation or Port Authority Trans-Hudson Corporation rail station platform area, including all light rail stations, and
 
	(2)	property located within a one-mile radius of the mid point of the platform area of such a rail station if the property is in a qualified municipality under the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et seq.) or in an area that is the subject of a Choice Neighborhoods Transformation Plan funded by the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development, and 
 
	(3)	the site of the campus of an acute care medical facility located within a one-mile radius of the mid point of the platform area of such a rail station, and
 
	(4)	the site of a closed hospital located within a one-mile radius of the mid point of the platform area of such a rail station;
 
	b.	property located within a 1/2-mile radius surrounding the mid point of one of up to two underground light rail stations' platform areas that are most proximate to an interstate rail station;
 
	c.	property adjacent to, or connected by rail spur to, a freight rail line if the business utilizes that freight line at any rail spur located adjacent to or within a one-mile radius surrounding the entrance to the property for loading and unloading freight cars on trains;
 
	which property shall have been specifically delineated by the authority pursuant to subsection e. of section 3 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-209).
 
	A property which is partially included within the radius shall only be considered part of the urban transit hub if over 50 percent of its land area falls within the radius.
 
	"Rail station" shall not include any rail station located at an international airport, except that any property within a 1/2-mile radius surrounding the mid point of a New Jersey Transit Corporation rail station platform area at an international airport upon which a qualified business facility is constructed or renovated commencing after the effective date of P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-242 et al.) shall be deemed an urban transit hub, excluding any property owned or controlled by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
 
	L.2007, c.346, s.2; amended 2009, c.90, s.31; 2011, c.89, s.1; 2011, c.149, s.10; 2021, c.160, s.62.

34:1B-209  Credit for qualified business facilities, conditions for eligibility; allowance.
	3. a. (1) A business, upon application to and approval from the authority, shall be allowed a credit of 100 percent of its capital investment, made after the effective date of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-207 et seq.) but prior to its submission of documentation pursuant to subsection c. of this section, in a qualified business facility within an eligible municipality, pursuant to the restrictions and requirements of this section. To be eligible for any tax credits authorized under this section, a business shall demonstrate to the authority, at the time of application, that the State's financial support of the proposed capital investment in a qualified business facility will yield a net positive benefit to both the State and the eligible municipality. The value of all credits approved by the authority pursuant to P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-207 et seq.) shall not exceed $1,750,000,000, except as may be increased by the authority as set forth in paragraph (5) of subsection a. of section 35 of P.L.2009, c.90 (C.34:1B-209.3) and section 6 of P.L.2010, c.57 (C.34:1B-209.4).
 
	(2)	A business, other than a tenant eligible pursuant to paragraph (3) of this subsection, shall make or acquire capital investments totaling not less than $50,000,000 in a qualified business facility, at which the business shall employ not fewer than 250 full-time employees to be eligible for a credit under this section. A business that acquires a qualified business facility shall also be deemed to have acquired the capital investment made or acquired by the seller.
 
	(3)	A business that is a tenant in a qualified business facility, the owner of which has made or acquired capital investments in the facility totaling not less than $50,000,000, shall occupy a leased area of the qualified business facility that represents at least $17,500,000 of the capital investment in the facility at which the tenant business and up to two other tenants in the qualified business facility shall employ not fewer than 250 full-time employees in the aggregate to be eligible for a credit under this section. The amount of capital investment in a facility that a leased area represents shall be equal to that percentage of the owner's total capital investment in the facility that the percentage of net leasable area leased by the tenant is of the total net leasable area of the qualified business facility. Capital investments made by a tenant shall be deemed to be included in the calculation of the capital investment made or acquired by the owner, but only to the extent necessary to meet the owner's minimum capital investment of $50,000,000. Capital investments made by a tenant and not allocated to meet the owner's minimum capital investment threshold of $50,000,000 shall be added to the amount of capital investment represented by the tenant's leased area in the qualified business facility.
 
	(4)	A business shall not be allowed tax credits under this section if the business participates in a business employment incentive agreement, pursuant to P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et seq.), relating to the same capital and employees that qualify the business for this credit, or if the business receives assistance pursuant to P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.). A business that is allowed a tax credit under this section shall not be eligible for incentives authorized pursuant to P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.). A business shall not qualify for a tax credit under this section, based upon its capital investment and the employment of full-time employees, if that capital investment or employment was the basis for which a grant was provided to the business pursuant to the "InvestNJ Business Grant Program Act," P.L.2008, c.112 (C.34:1B-237 et seq.).
 
	(5)	Full-time employment for an accounting or a privilege period shall be determined as the average of the monthly full-time employment for the period.
 
	(6)	The capital investment of the owner of a qualified business facility is that percentage of the capital investment made or acquired by the owner of the building that the percentage of net leasable area of the qualified business facility not leased to tenants is of the total net leasable area of the qualified business facility.
 
	(7)	A business shall be allowed a tax credit of 100 percent of its capital investment, made after the effective date of P.L.2011, c.89 but prior to its submission of documentation pursuant to subsection c. of this section, in a qualified business facility that is part of a mixed use project, provided that (a) the qualified business facility represents at least $17,500,000 of the total capital investment in the mixed use project, (b) the business employs not fewer than 250 full-time employees in the qualified business facility, and (c) the total capital investment in the mixed use project of which the qualified business facility is a part is not less than $50,000,000. The allowance of credits under this paragraph shall be subject to the restrictions and requirements, to the extent that those are not inconsistent with the provisions of this paragraph, set forth in paragraphs (1) through (6) of this subsection, including, but not limited to, the requirement that the business shall demonstrate to the authority, at the time of application, that the State's financial support of the proposed capital investment in a qualified business facility will yield a net positive benefit to both the State and the eligible municipality.
 
	(8)	In determining whether a proposed capital investment will yield a net positive benefit, the authority shall not consider the transfer of an existing job from one location in the State to another location in the State as the creation of a new job, unless (a) the business proposes to transfer existing jobs to a municipality in the State as part of a consolidation of business operations from two or more other locations that are not in the same municipality whether in-State or out-of-State, or (b) the business's chief executive officer, or equivalent officer, submits a certification to the authority indicating that the existing jobs are at risk of leaving the State and that the business's chief executive officer, or equivalent officer, has reviewed the information submitted to the authority and that the representations contained therein are accurate, and the business intends to employ not fewer than 500 full-time employees in the qualified business facility. In the event that this certification by the business's chief executive officer, or equivalent officer, is found to be willfully false, the authority may revoke any award of tax credits in their entirety, which revocation shall be in addition to any other criminal or civil penalties that the business and the officer may be subject to. When considering an application involving intra-State job transfers, the authority shall require the company to submit the following information as part of its application: a full economic analysis of all locations under consideration by the company; all lease agreements, ownership documents, or substantially similar documentation for the business's current in-State locations; and all lease agreements, ownership documents, or substantially similar documentation for the potential out-of-State location alternatives, to the extent they exist. Based on this information, and any other information deemed relevant by the authority, the authority shall independently verify and confirm, by way of making a factual finding by separate vote of the authority's board, the business's assertion that the jobs are actually at risk of leaving the State, before a business may be awarded any tax credits under this section.
 
	b.	(1)  If applications under this section have been received by the authority prior to the effective date of the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.), then, to the extent that there remains sufficient financial authorization for the award of a tax credit, the authority is authorized to consider those applications and to make awards of tax credits to eligible applicants, provided that the authority shall take final action on those applications no later than December 31, 2013.
 
	(2)	A business shall apply for the credit under this section prior to the effective date of the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.), and shall submit its documentation for approval of its credit amount no later than December 31, 2023.
 
	(3)	If a business has submitted an application under this section and that application has not been approved for any reason, the lack of approval shall not serve to prejudice in any way the consideration of a new application as may be submitted for the qualified business facility for the provision of incentives offered pursuant to the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.).
 
	(4)	Tax credits awarded pursuant to P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-207 et seq.) for applications submitted to and approved by the authority prior to the effective date of the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.), shall be administered by the authority in the manner established prior to that date.
 
	(5)	With respect to an application received by the authority prior to the effective date of the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.) for a qualified business facility that is located on or adjacent to the campus of an acute care medical facility, (a) the minimum number of full-time employees required for eligibility under the program may be employed by any number of tenants or other occupants of the facility, in the aggregate, and the initial satisfaction of the requirement following completion of the project shall be deemed to satisfy the employment requirements of the program in all respects, and (b) if the capital investment in the facility exceeds $100,000,000, the determination of the net positive benefit yield shall be based on the benefits generated during a period of up to 30 years following the completion of the project, as determined by the authority.
 
	c.	(1)  The amount of credit allowed shall, except as otherwise provided, be equal to the capital investment made by the business, or the capital investment represented by the business's leased area, or area owned by the business as a condominium, and shall be taken over a 10-year period, at the rate of one-tenth of the total amount of the business's credit for each tax accounting or privilege period of the business, beginning with the tax period in which the business is first certified by the authority as having met the investment capital and employment qualifications, subject to any reduction or disqualification as provided by subsection d. of this section as determined by annual review by the authority. In conducting its annual review, the authority may require a business to submit any information determined by the authority to be necessary and relevant to its review.
 
	The credit amount that may be taken for a tax period of the business that exceeds the final liabilities of the business for the tax period may be carried forward for use by the business in the next 20 successive tax periods, and shall expire thereafter, provided that the value of all credits approved by the authority against tax liabilities pursuant to P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-207 et seq.) in any fiscal year shall not exceed $260,000,000.
 
	The amount of credit allowed for a tax period to a business that is a tenant in a qualified business facility shall not exceed the business's total lease payments for occupancy of the qualified business facility for the tax period.
 
	A business may elect to suspend its obligations for the 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023, or 2024 tax period, or any combination thereof, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, provided that the business shall make such election in writing to the authority before the issuance of the tax credit for the corresponding tax year and such suspension shall extend the term of the eligibility period by a corresponding amount of time. The authority shall modify the approval letter, and the business shall execute the modification within the time period provided by the authority. The modification shall provide that the failure to submit the annual report due to the suspension shall not be a forfeiture or an uncertified tax period.
 
	(2)	A business that is a partnership shall not be allowed a credit under this section directly, but the amount of credit of an owner of a business shall be determined by allocating to each owner of the partnership that proportion of the credit of the business that is equal to the owner of the partnership's share, whether or not distributed, of the total distributive income or gain of the partnership for its tax period ending within or at the end of the owner's tax period, or that proportion that is allocated by an agreement, if any, among the owners of the partnership that has been provided to the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury by the time and accompanied by the additional information as the director may require.
 
	(3)	The amount of credit allowed may be applied against the tax liability otherwise due pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), pursuant to sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or pursuant to N.J.S.17B:23-5.
 
	d. (1) If, in any tax period, fewer than 200 full-time employees of the business at the qualified business facility are employed in new full-time positions, the amount of the credit otherwise determined pursuant to final calculation of the award of tax credits pursuant to subsection c. of this section shall be reduced by 20 percent for that tax period and each subsequent tax period until the first period for which documentation demonstrating the restoration of the 200 full-time employees employed in new full-time positions at the qualified business facility has been reviewed and approved by the authority, for which tax period and each subsequent tax period the full amount of the credit shall be allowed; provided, however, that for businesses applying before January 1, 2010, there shall be no reduction if a business relocates to an urban transit hub from another location or other locations in the same municipality. For the purposes of this paragraph, a "new full-time position" means a position created by the business at the qualified business facility that did not previously exist in this State.
 
	(2)	If, in any tax period, the business reduces the total number of full-time employees in its Statewide workforce by more than 20 percent from the number of full-time employees in its Statewide workforce in the last tax accounting or privilege period prior to the credit amount approval under subsection a. of this section, then the business shall forfeit its credit amount for that tax period and each subsequent tax period, until the first tax period for which documentation demonstrating the restoration of the business's Statewide workforce to the threshold levels required by this paragraph has been reviewed and approved by the authority, for which tax period and each subsequent tax period the full amount of the credit shall be allowed.
 
	(3)	If, in any tax period, (a) the number of full-time employees employed by the business at the qualified business facility located in an urban transit hub within an eligible municipality drops below 250, or (b) the number of full-time employees, who are not the subject of intra-State job transfers, pursuant to paragraph (8) of subsection a. of this section, employed by the business at any other business facility in the State, whether or not located in an urban transit hub within an eligible municipality, drops by more than 20 percent from the number of full-time employees in its workforce in the last tax accounting or privilege period prior to the credit amount approval under this section, then the business shall forfeit its credit amount for that tax period and each subsequent tax period, until the first tax period for which documentation demonstrating the restoration of the number of full-time employees employed by the business at the qualified business facility to 250 or an increase above the 20 percent reduction has been reviewed and approved by the authority, for which tax period and each subsequent tax period the full amount of the credit shall be allowed.
 
	(4) (i) If the qualified business facility is sold in whole or in part during the 10-year eligibility period, the new owner shall not acquire the capital investment of the seller and the seller shall forfeit all credits for the tax period in which the sale occurs and all subsequent tax periods; provided, however, that any credits of tenants shall remain unaffected.
 
	(ii)	If a tenant subleases its tenancy in whole or in part during the 10-year eligibility period, the new tenant shall not acquire the credit of the sublessor, and the sublessor tenant shall forfeit all credits for the tax period of its sublease and all subsequent tax periods.
 
	(5)	Following the termination of the public health emergency declared by the Governor pursuant to Executive Order No. 103 of 2020, as extended, a business that has entered into an incentive agreement may elect, before March 31, 2024, to waive, for the period beginning on July 1, 2022 and ending on March 31, 2024, the requirement that a full-time employee who is employed by the business shall spend at least 60 percent of the employee's time at the qualified business facility; provided, however, that a business that makes such an election shall satisfy the following criteria:
 
	(i)	any full-time employee employed by the business shall spend at least 10 percent of the employee's time at the qualified business facility for the 2023 tax period and, if elected by the business, the 2024 tax period through March 31, 2024; and
 
	(ii)	following the receipt by the business of its tax credit certificate or tax credit transfer certificate for the 2022 tax period, the business shall make a payment of an amount equal to five percent of the amount of tax credit the business receives for the 2022 tax period through March 31, 2024, which payment shall be made to the authority, and which payment the authority shall hold and make available for the provision of loans, guarantees, equity investments, and grants, or other forms of financing to support small business and downtown or commercial corridor activation activities within the municipality in which the qualified business facility is located, as may be designated by the chief executive officer of the authority.  Such funds shall be deployed by the authority within 12 months of the authority's receipt of the funds, and the authority shall issue a report each fiscal year to the Legislature, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), detailing how the funds were distributed.
 
	(6)	Notwithstanding the provisions of section 2 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-208) or any other law or regulation to the contrary, beginning on April 1, 2024, and for all subsequent tax periods, a business located outside an enhanced area or government-restricted municipality, as those terms are defined in section 69 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-337),that has entered into an incentive agreement with the authority may elect to waive the requirement that a full-time employee who is employed by the business shall spend at least 60 percent of the employee's time at the qualified business facility, provided, however, that a business that makes this election shall satisfy the following criteria:
 
	(i)	 for a qualified business facility located outside an enhanced area or government-restricted municipality, as those terms are defined in section 69 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-337), any full-time employee employed by the business shall spend at least 40 percent of the employee's time at the qualified business facility during the tax period; 
 
	(ii)	the business shall extend by two years the time it is required to maintain the project at a location in New Jersey beyond the time set forth in the incentive agreement; and
 
	(iii) at the time the business submits its tax credit certificate certification for the tax period, the business shall make a non-refundable payment of an amount equal to 10 percent of the amount of the maximum annual tax credit that the business is eligible to receive for the tax period, which payment shall be made to the authority and which payment the authority shall hold and make available for the provision of loans, guarantees, equity investments, and grants or other forms of financing to support small business and downtown or commercial corridor activation activities within enhanced areas or government-restricted municipalities, as those terms are defined in section 69 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-337), as may be designated by the chief executive officer of the authority.  Such funds shall be deployed by the authority within 12 months of the authority's receipt of the funds, and the authority shall issue a report each fiscal year to the Legislature, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), detailing how the funds were distributed.
 
	(7)	Notwithstanding the provisions of any law to the contrary, the credit amount may first be taken by the tax certificate holder for the tax period for which it was issued, for the tax period in which it was issued, or in any tax period during the time the business is required to maintain the project at a location in New Jersey, as set forth in the incentive agreement.  The tax certificate holder may transfer the tax credit amount on or after the date of issuance for use by the transferee in the tax period for which it was issued, for the tax period in which it was issued, or in any of the next three successive tax periods.  The tax certificate holder or transferee may first use the credit against tax liabilities in the tax period in which it was issued or in a succeeding tax period, as authorized in this subsection, without being required to amend the tax return for the tax period for which the credit was issued, subject to the provisions of this section.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no more than the amount of tax credits equal to the total credit amount, divided by the duration of the tax credit term, in years, may be taken in any tax period.
 
	(8) Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection or any law or regulation to the contrary, a business that has elected to modify its obligations under an incentive agreement pursuant to P.L.2022, c.134 may request, before December 31, 2024, to reduce the number of Statewide employees specified in the incentive agreement, provided the business certifies that  the business is requesting to reduce the number of new or retained full-time jobs specified in the incentive agreement commencing with the 2020 tax period and, at the discretion of the business, whether the reduction shall continue for each subsequent tax period remaining in the eligibility period.
 
	e. (1) The Executive Director of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, in consultation with the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, shall adopt rules in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) as are necessary to implement P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-207 et seq.), including, but not limited to: examples of and the determination of capital investment; the enumeration of eligible municipalities; specific delineation of urban transit hubs; the determination of the limits, if any, on the expense or type of furnishings that may constitute capital improvements; the promulgation of procedures and forms necessary to apply for a credit, including the enumeration of the certification procedures and allocation of tax credits for different phases of a qualified business facility or mixed use project; and provisions for credit applicants to be charged an initial application fee, and ongoing service fees, to cover the administrative costs related to the credit.
 
	(2)	Through regulation, the authority shall establish standards based on the green building manual prepared by the Commissioner of Community Affairs, pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2007, c.132 (C.52:27D-130.6), regarding the use of renewable energy, energy-efficient technology, and non-renewable resources in order to reduce environmental degradation and encourage long-term cost reduction.
 
	f.	A business that has executed an approval letter may request before December 31, 2024 to terminate the award, commencing with the 2020 tax period or any subsequent tax period ending on or before December 31, 2024, due to the COVID-19 public health emergency; provided that the business shall submit a certification from the business's chief executive officer or equivalent officer stating that the termination is due, directly or indirectly, to the public health emergency and describing the impact of the public health emergency on the business. All credits for the tax period in which the termination is requested and all subsequent tax periods shall be forfeited, provided however that any credits of the business shall remain unaffected. A termination agreement executed by the authority and business shall not be amended.

	L.2007, c.346, s.3; amended 2009, c.90, s.32; 2011, c.89, s.2; 2011, c.149, s.11; 2012, c.35, s.1; 2013, c.161, s.4; 2015, c.252, s.1; 2017, c.314, s.1; 2020, c.138, s.1; 2022, c.134, s.3; 2023, c.261, s.3; 2024, c.40, s.3.

34:1B-209.1  Application for tax credit transfer certificate.
 
	33.	A business may apply to the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury and the executive director of the authority for a tax credit transfer certificate, covering one or more years, in lieu of the business being allowed any amount of the credit against the tax liability of the business.  The tax credit transfer certificate, upon receipt thereof by the business from the director and the executive director of the authority, may be sold or assigned, in full or in part, in an amount not less than $25,000 of tax credits to any other person that may have a tax liability pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), pursuant to sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and 54:18A-3), pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or pursuant to N.J.S.17B:23-5.  The certificate provided to the business shall include a statement waiving the business's right to claim that amount of the credit against the taxes that the business has elected to sell or assign.  The sale or assignment of any amount of a tax credit transfer certificate allowed under this section shall not be exchanged for consideration received by the business of less than 75 percent of the transferred credit amount before considering any further discounting to present value which shall be permitted. Any amount of a tax credit transfer certificate used by a purchaser or assignee against a tax liability shall be subject to the same limitations and conditions that apply to the use of the credit by the business that originally applied for and was allowed the credit.
 
	L.2009, c.90, s.33; amended 2013, c.161, s.5; 2014, c.63, s.1.

34:1B-209.2  Definitions.
  
	34.	As used in sections 34 and 35 of P.L.2009, c.90 (C.34:1B-209.2 and C.34:1B-209.3), the terms "affiliate," "authority," "capital investment," "eligible municipality," "partnership," "residential unit," and "urban transit hub" shall have the same meanings as ascribed thereto in the "Urban Transit Hub Tax Credit Act," P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-207 et seq.), as amended by P.L.2009, c.90 (C.52:27D-489a et al.), provided that all references therein to "business" and "qualified business facility" shall be deemed to refer respectively to "developer" and "qualified residential project," as such terms are defined in this section.  Provided however, for purposes of a "mixed use project" as that term is defined and used pursuant to subparagraph b. of paragraph (4) of subsection a. of section 35 of P.L.2009, c.90 (C.34:1B-209.3), "qualified business facility" means that term as defined pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-208).  In addition, as used in sections 34 and 35 of P.L.2009, c.90 (C.34:1B-209.2 and C.34:1B-209.3):
 
	"Developer" shall have the same meaning as "business," as such term is defined in the "Urban Transit Hub Tax Credit Act," P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-207 et seq.), as amended by P.L.2009, c.90 (C.52:27D-489a et al.).
 
	"Qualified residential project" means any building, complex of buildings or structural components of buildings consisting predominantly of residential units, located in an urban transit hub within an eligible municipality.
 
	L.2009, c.90, s.34; amended 2011, c.89, s.3.

34:1B-209.3  Developers allowed certain tax credits.
 
	35. a. (1) A developer, upon application to and approval from the authority, shall be allowed a credit of up to 35 percent of its capital investment, or up to 40 percent for a project located in a Garden State Growth Zone, made after the effective date of P.L.2009, c.90 (C.52:27D-489a et al.) but prior to its submission of documentation pursuant to subsection c. of this section, in a qualified residential project, pursuant to the restrictions and requirements of this section.  To be eligible for any tax credits authorized under this section, a developer shall demonstrate to the authority, through a project pro forma analysis at the time of application, that the qualified residential project is likely to be realized with the provision of tax credits at the level requested, but is not likely to be accomplished by private enterprise without the tax credits.  The value of all credits approved by the authority pursuant to this section for qualified residential projects may be up to $150,000,000, except as may be increased by the authority as set forth below and as set forth in paragraph (5) of this subsection; provided; however, that the combined value of all credits approved by the authority pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-209) and this section shall not exceed $1,750,000,000, except as may be increased by the authority as set forth in paragraph (5) of this subsection.  The authority shall monitor application and allocation activity under P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-207 et seq.), and if sufficient credits are available after taking into account allocation under P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-207 et seq.) to those qualified business facilities for which applications have been filed or for which applications are reasonably anticipated, and if the executive director judges certain qualified residential projects to be meritorious, the aforementioned $150,000,000 cap may, in the discretion of the executive director, from time to time, be exceeded for allocation to qualified residential projects in amounts as the executive director deems reasonable, justified, and appropriate.  In allocating all credits to qualified residential projects under this section, the executive director shall take into account, together with other factors deemed relevant by the executive director: input from the municipality in which the project is to be located; whether the project contributes to the recovery of areas affected by Hurricane Sandy; whether the project furthers specific State or municipal planning and development objectives, or both; and whether the project furthers a public purpose, such as catalyzing urban development or maximizing the value of vacant, dilapidated, outmoded, government-owned, or underutilized property, or both.
	(2)	A developer shall make or acquire capital investments totaling not less than $50,000,000 in a qualified residential project to be eligible for a credit under this section.  A developer that acquires a qualified residential project shall also be deemed to have acquired the capital investment made or acquired by the seller.
	(3)	The capital investment requirement may be met by the developer or by one or more of its affiliates.
	(4)	A developer of a mixed use project shall be allowed a credit pursuant to subparagraph (a) or (b) of this paragraph, but not both.
	(a)	A developer shall be allowed a credit in accordance with this section for a qualified residential project that includes a mixed use project.
	(b)	A developer shall be allowed a credit of up to 35 percent of its capital investment, or up to 40 percent for a project located in a Garden State Growth Zone, made after the effective date of P.L.2011, c.89, but prior to its submission of documentation pursuant to subsection c. of this section, in a qualified residential project that is part of a mixed use project, provided that:
	(i)	the capital investment in the qualified residential project represents at least $17,500,000 of the total capital investment in the mixed use project; and
	(ii)	the total capital investment in the mixed use project of which the qualified residential project is a part is not less than $50,000,000.
	The allowance of credits under this paragraph shall be subject to the restrictions and requirements, to the extent that those are not inconsistent with the provisions of this paragraph, set forth in paragraphs (1) through (3) of this subsection, including, but not limited to, the requirement prescribed in paragraph (1) of this subsection that the developer shall demonstrate to the authority, through a project pro forma analysis at the time of application, that the qualified residential project is likely to be realized with the provision of tax credits at the level requested but is not likely to be accomplished by private enterprise without the tax credits.
	As used in this subparagraph:
	"Mixed use project" means a project comprising both a qualified residential project and a qualified business facility.
	(5)	The authority may approve and allocate credits for qualified residential projects in a value sufficient to meet the requirements of all applications that were received by the authority between October 24, 2012 and December 21, 2012, without regard to the terms of any competitive solicitation, except for the $33,000,000 per project cap, and without need for reapplication by any applicant.  The authority shall take final action on those applications prior to the 120th day after the date of enactment of the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.).
	b. (1) A developer shall apply for the credit under this section on or prior to December 21, 2012 but may thereafter supplement an application as may be requested by the authority.  A developer shall submit its documentation for approval of its credit amount no later than December 31, 2023.
	(2)	If a developer has submitted an application under this section and the application has not been approved for any reason, the lack of approval shall not serve to prejudice in any way the consideration of a new application as may be submitted for the project for the provision of incentives offered pursuant to the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.).
	c.	The credit shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of subsections c. and e. of section 3 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-209), as amended by section 32 of P.L.2009, c.90, and section 33 of P.L.2009, c.90 (C.34:1B-209.1), except that:
	(1)	all references therein to "business" and "qualified business facility" shall be deemed to refer respectively to "developer" and "qualified residential project," as those terms are defined in section 34 of P.L.2009, c.90 (C.34:1B-209.2); and
	(2)	all references therein to credits claimed by tenants and to reductions or disqualifications in credits as determined by annual review of the authority shall be disregarded.
	For purposes of a "mixed use project" as that term is used and defined pursuant to subparagraph (b) of paragraph (4) of subsection a. of this section, "qualified business facility" means that term as defined pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-208).

	L.2009, c.90, s.35; amended 2011, c.89, s.4; 2012, c.35, s.2; 2013, c.161, s.6; 2015, c.252, s.2; 2017, c.314, s.2; 2020, c.138, s.2.

34:1B-209.4  Credit to business for wind energy facility; eligibility.
 	6. a. (1) A business, upon application to and approval from the authority, shall be awarded a credit of 100 percent of its capital investment, made after the effective date of P.L.2010, c.57 (C.48:3-87.1 et al.) but prior to its submission of documentation pursuant to subsection c. of this section, in a qualified wind energy facility located in the State, pursuant to the restrictions and requirements of this section.  The award of a tax credit pursuant to this section shall be structured so that the award shall consist of up to five compliance years, each equaling 20 percent of the total value of the tax credit, to a qualified business over four privilege periods or taxable years in which the business meets the requirements for the minimum number of new, full-time employees.  Otherwise eligible businesses with between 150 and 300 new, full-time jobs may receive an award based on a prorated formula developed by the authority, provided that the prorated minimum number of new, full-time jobs required in the fifth year shall be the same as the fourth year.  To be eligible for any tax credits authorized under this section, a business shall demonstrate to the authority, at the time of application, that the State's financial support of the proposed capital investment in a qualified wind energy facility will yield a net positive benefit to the State.  The value of all credits approved by the authority pursuant to this section shall not exceed the $350,000,000 made available under section 98 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-362).  Credits provided pursuant to this section shall not be applicable to the cap on the credits provided in section 3 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-209).
 
	(2) (a) A business, other than a tenant eligible pursuant to subparagraph (b) of this paragraph, shall make or acquire capital investments totaling not less than $50,000,000 in a qualified wind energy facility, at which the business, including tenants at the qualified wind energy facility, shall employ the minimum number of new, full-time employees, to be eligible for a credit under this section.  A business that acquires a qualified wind energy facility after the effective date of P.L.2010, c.57 (C.48:3-87.1 et al.) shall also be deemed to have acquired the capital investment made or acquired by the seller.
 
	(b)	A business that is a tenant in the qualified wind energy facility, the owner of which has made or acquired capital investments in the facility totaling more than $50,000,000, shall occupy a leased area of the qualified wind energy facility that represents at least $17,500,000 of the capital investment in the qualified wind energy facility at which the minimum number of new, full-time employees in the aggregate are employed, to be eligible for a credit under this section.  The amount of capital investment in a facility that a leased area represents shall be equal to that percentage of the owner's total capital investment in the facility that the percentage of net leasable area leased by the tenant is of the total net leasable area of the qualified business facility.  Capital investments made by a tenant shall be deemed to be included in the calculation of the capital investment made or acquired by the owner, but only to the extent necessary to meet the owner's minimum capital investment of $50,000,000.  Capital investments made by a tenant and not allocated to meet the owner's minimum capital investment threshold of $50,000,000 shall be added to the amount of capital investment represented by the tenant's leased area in the qualified wind energy facility.
 
	(c)	The calculation of the number of new, full-time employees required pursuant to subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this paragraph may include the number of new, full-time positions resulting from an equipment supply coordination agreement with equipment manufacturers, suppliers, installers and operators associated with the supply chain required to support the qualified wind energy facility. 
 
	For the purposes of this paragraph, "full time employee" shall not include an employee who is a resident of another state and whose income is not subject to the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq., unless that state has entered into a reciprocity agreement with the State of New Jersey.
 
	(3)	A business shall not be awarded a tax credit pursuant to this section if the business receives a business employment incentive grant pursuant to the "Business Employment Incentive Program Act," P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et al.), relating to the same capital and employees that qualify the business for this credit, or if the business receives assistance pursuant to the "Business Retention and Relocation Assistance Act," P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.).  A business that is awarded a tax credit under this section shall not be eligible for incentives authorized pursuant to the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.).
 
	(4)	Full-time employment for an accounting or privilege period shall be determined as the average of the monthly full-time employment for the period.
 
	b.	A business shall apply for the credit by July 1, 2025, and a business shall submit its documentation for approval of its credit amount by July 1, 2028.
 
	c.	The credit awarded pursuant to this section shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of subsection c. of section 3 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-209) and section 33 of P.L.2009, c.90 (C.34:1B-209.1), except that all references therein to "qualified business facility" shall be deemed to refer to "qualified wind energy facility," as that term is defined in subsection f. of this section.
 
	d.	The amount of the credit awarded pursuant to this section shall, except as otherwise provided, be equal to the capital investment made by the business, or the capital investment represented by the business's leased area, and shall be taken over a five-year period, at the rate of one-fifth of the total amount of the business's credit for each tax accounting or privilege period of the business, beginning with the privilege period or taxable year in which the business is first approved by the authority as having met the investment capital and employment qualifications, subject to any disqualification as determined by annual review by the authority.  In conducting its annual review, the authority may require a business to submit any information determined by the authority to be necessary and relevant to its review.  The credit amount for any privilege period or taxable year ending after the date 18 years after the effective date of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-207 et seq.) during which the documentation of a business's credit amount remains unapproved shall be forfeited, although credit amounts for the remainder of the years of the five-year credit period shall remain available.  The amount of the credit awarded for a privilege period or taxable year to a business that is a tenant in a qualified wind energy facility shall not exceed the business's total lease payments for occupancy of the qualified wind energy facility for the privilege period or taxable year.
 
	e.	The authority shall adopt rules and regulations pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) as are necessary to implement this section, including, but not limited to: examples of and the determination of capital investment; the nature of businesses and employment positions constituting and participating in an equipment supply coordination agreement; a determination of the types of businesses that may be eligible and expenses that may constitute capital improvements; the promulgation of procedures and forms necessary to apply for a credit; and provisions for applicants to be charged an initial application fee, and ongoing service fees, to cover the administrative costs related to the credit.
 
	The rules and regulations established by the authority pursuant to this subsection shall be effective immediately upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law and shall be effective for a period not to exceed 12 months and may, thereafter, be amended, adopted or readopted in accordance with the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	f.	As used in this section: the terms "authority," "business," and "capital investment" shall have the same meanings as defined in section 2 of the "Urban Transit Hub Tax Credit Act," P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-208), except that all references therein to "qualified business facility" shall be deemed to refer to "qualified wind energy facility" as defined in this subsection. 
 
	In addition, as used in this section:
 
	"Equipment supply coordination agreement" means an agreement between a business and equipment manufacturer, supplier, installer, and operator that supports a qualified offshore wind project, or other wind energy project as determined by the authority, and that indicates the number of new, full-time jobs to be created by the agreement participants towards the employment requirement as set forth in paragraph (2) of subsection a. of this section.
 
	"Minimum number of new, full-time employees" means:
 
	(1)	for the first year, at least a cumulative 100 new, full-time employees compared to the number of full-time employees at the time of application; 
 
	(2)	for a privilege period or taxable year following the first year, at least a cumulative 150 new, full-time employees compared to the number of full-time employees at the time of application;
 
	(3)	for a privilege period or taxable year following the second year, at least a cumulative 200 new, full-time employees compared to the number of full-time employees at the time of application; and 
 
	(4)	for a privilege period or taxable year following the third year and fourth year, at least a cumulative 300 new, full-time employees compared to the number of full-time employees at the time of application.
 
	"Qualified offshore wind project" shall have the same meaning as provided in section 3 of P.L.1999, c.23 (C.48:3-51).
 
	"Qualified wind energy facility" means any building, complex of buildings, or structural components of buildings, including water access infrastructure, and all machinery and equipment used in the manufacturing, assembly, development or administration of component parts that support the development and operation of a qualified offshore wind project, or other wind energy project as determined by the authority.
 
	L.2010, c.57, s.6; amended 2012, c.35, s.3; 2013, c.161, s.25; 2018, c.17, s.7; 2020, c.156, s.109; 2021, c.160, s.51.

34:1B-210  Findings, declarations relative to abolishing the New Jersey Commerce Commission.

	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	It is the policy of the State of New Jersey to stimulate economic growth and development by efforts that are efficient and coordinated across all sectors, departments, and agencies.
 
	b.	The State's efforts to deliver effective economic growth and development assistance and improve the New Jersey economy currently flow through a number of different programs, enacted and amended incrementally over time, which are administered by a number of different entities. 
 
	c.	Greater coordination of the State's economic development efforts will achieve benefits, including short- and long-term budget savings during this period of unprecedented fiscal challenges facing the State, as well as enhancements to the effectiveness of the State's economic growth and development efforts.
 
	d.	By consolidating the New Jersey Commerce Commission and transferring its primary functions to the Division of Business Assistance, Marketing, and International Trade in the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, the coordination of these related but distinct functions will be advanced. 
 
	e.	Such consolidation will enhance the work of the Division of Business Assistance, Marketing, and International Trade, which markets New Jersey and the opportunities in this State to the business community of the nation and the world, and the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, which provides financing on specific business projects, by improving cooperation and coordination among the agencies charged with these separate functions.
 
	f.	Further, the State's economic development activities will be improved by consolidating the New Jersey Development Authority for Small Businesses, Minorities and Women's Enterprises into the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, which can deliver the financial and other assistance needed for such businesses and enterprises, and by consolidating other economic development entities.
 
	g.	State efforts to classify businesses that are small or minority- or women-owned to participate in State purchasing and procurement processes also will be more effective if the registration and certification programs of the New Jersey Commerce Commission are placed directly within the Department of the Treasury, which serves as the procurement agency of the State.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.1.

34:1B-211  Definitions relative to C.34:1B-210 et seq.
  
	2.	For purposes of sections 1 through 26 of P.L.2008, c.27 (C.34:1B-210 et seq.), the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established by P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.).
 
	"Authority board" means the board of directors of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established pursuant to P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.).
 
	"Director" means the Director of the Division of Business Assistance, Marketing, and International Trade.
 
	"Division" means the Division of Business Assistance, Marketing, and International Trade established by this act.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.2.

34:1B-212  New Jersey Commerce Commission abolished.
 
	3. a. The New Jersey Commerce Commission created by P.L.1998, c.44 (C.52:27C-61 et al.) as a body corporate and politic and allocated in, but not of, the Department of the Treasury, is abolished and all of its functions, powers, and duties, except as otherwise provided in this act, are continued and transferred to the Division of Business Assistance, Marketing, and International Trade in the New Jersey Economic Development Authority. 
 
	b.	The functions, powers, and duties of the New Jersey Commerce Commission not specifically allocated under this act are continued and are transferred to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, to be allocated within the authority as determined by the authority board. 
 
	c.	Except as otherwise provided in this act, whenever, in any law, rule, regulation, order, reorganization plan, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding, or otherwise, reference is made to the New Jersey Commerce Commission, Board of Directors of the New Jersey Commerce Commission, the Commerce, Economic Growth and Tourism Commission, the Commerce and Economic Growth Commission, the Department of Commerce and Economic Development, the Commissioner of the Department of Commerce and Economic Development, or the Chief Executive Officer and Secretary of the Commerce and Economic Growth Commission, the same shall mean and refer to the division.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.3.

34:1B-213  Disposition of Executive Director, employees of New Jersey Commerce Commission.
 
	4.	With respect to the Executive Director and employees of the New Jersey Commerce Commission:
 
	a.	Notwithstanding the "State Agency Transfer Act," P.L.1971, c.375 (C.52:14D-1 et seq.), the office and term of the Executive Director of the New Jersey Commerce Commission, established by section 31 of P.L.2007, c.253 (C.52:27C-71.1), shall terminate not later than ninety days following the effective date of this act.
 
	b.	Employees of the New Jersey Commerce Commission who are employed by the Commission on the date of enactment of P.L.2008, c.27 (C.34:1B-210 et al.) are continued and transferred to the division, except for:  (1) employees assigned to perform the work of the Urban Enterprise Zone Authority who may be transferred to the Department of the Treasury; or (2) employees who are transferred as otherwise specified in this act.  Such transfers shall be consistent with the "State Agency Transfer Act," P.L.1971, c.375 (C.52:14D-1 et seq.). Nothing contained in this act shall be construed to alter the representation status, bargaining rights and bargained-for terms and conditions of employment, or lack thereof, of any New Jersey Commerce Commission employee in office or employment on the effective date of this act, nor shall the establishment of the division and its placement in the authority alter such conditions for employees of the authority in office or employment on that effective date, except as specifically provided herein.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.4.

34:1B-214  Regulations continued.
 
	5.	Except as otherwise provided in this act, regulations of the New Jersey Commerce Commission shall continue in effect until amended or repealed pursuant to law.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.5.

34:1B-215  Division of Business Assistance, Marketing, and International Trade established.
 
	6. a. In order to improve efficiency, achieve savings, and enhance the productivity of the State's interaction with the private sector, there is hereby established in the New Jersey Economic Development Authority the Division of Business Assistance, Marketing, and International Trade.  To preserve the independence of the financing functions of the authority, notwithstanding this allocation, the division shall maintain a budget separate from the authority which shall be funded through annual appropriation by the Legislature from the General Fund. 
 
	b.	The division shall be under the supervision of a director, appointed by the Governor, who shall be employed by and report to the Executive Director of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.  The director shall be a person qualified by training and experience to direct the work of the division.
 
	c.	The functions, powers, and duties of the board of directors of the New Jersey Commerce Commission are continued and are transferred to the authority board except as otherwise provided in this act.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.6.

34:1B-216  Transfer of functions, powers, duties of Executive Director.
 
	7. a. The functions, powers, and duties of the Executive Director of the New Jersey Commerce Commission, established pursuant to section 31 of P.L.2007, c.253 (C.52:27C-71.1), except as otherwise provided, are continued and transferred to the Director of the Division of Business Assistance, Marketing, and International Trade.
 
	b.	Whenever, in any law, rule, regulation, order, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding, or otherwise, reference is made to the Executive Director of the New Jersey Commerce Commission, the same shall mean and refer to the director of the division.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.7.

34:1B-217  Transfer of functions, powers, duties of Office of Marketing and Communications.
 
	8. a. The functions, powers, and duties of the Office of Marketing and Communications in the New Jersey Commerce Commission are continued and are transferred to the Division of Business Assistance, Marketing, and International Trade.
 
	b.	Whenever, in any law, rule, regulation, order, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding, or otherwise, reference is made to the Office of Marketing and Communications in the New Jersey Commerce Commission, the same shall mean and refer to the division.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.8.

34:1B-218  Transfer of functions, powers, duties of Office of Business Advocacy.
 
	9. a. The functions, powers, and duties of the Office of Business Advocacy in the New Jersey Commerce Commission are continued and are transferred to the Division of Business Assistance, Marketing, and International Trade.
 
	b.	Whenever, in any law, rule, regulation, order, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding or otherwise, reference is made to the Office of Business Advocacy in the New Jersey Commerce Commission, the same shall mean and refer to the division.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.9.

34:1B-219  Transfer of certain functions, powers, duties of New Jersey Commerce Commission.
 
	10. a. The functions, powers, and duties of the New Jersey Commerce Commission regarding those business retention and relocation assistance programs that include the Business Retention and Relocation Act Grant Program established by section 3 of P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-114), the Business Retention and Relocation Act Tax Credit Certificate Transfer Program established by section 17 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-120.2), the Sales Tax Exemption Program established by sections 19 through 22 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.34:1B-185 through 34:1B-188), and the Urban Enterprise Zone Energy Sales Tax Exemption Program established by section 23 of P.L.2004, c.65 (C.52:27H-87.1), except as otherwise provided, are continued and transferred to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority to be administered within that authority as the Authority Board so determines. 
 
	b.	Whenever, in any law, rule, regulation, order, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding, or otherwise, reference is made to the Business Retention and Relocation Act Grant Program, Business Retention and Relocation Act Tax Credit Certificate Transfer Program, Sales Tax Exemption Program or Urban Enterprise Zone Energy Sales Tax Exemption Program in the New Jersey Commerce Commission, the same shall mean and refer to the authority.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.10.

34:1B-220  Transfer of Energy Sales Tax Exemption Program for certain counties.
 
	11. a. The functions, powers, and duties of the New Jersey Commerce Commission for the Energy Sales Tax Exemption Program for Certain Counties, established by subsection c. of section 1 of P.L.2005, c.374 (C.52:27H-87.1) as amended, except as otherwise provided, are continued and are transferred to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority to be administered within that authority as the authority board so determines.
 
	b.	Whenever, in any law, rule, regulation, order, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding, or otherwise, reference is made to the Energy Sales Tax Exemption Program for Certain Counties in the New Jersey Commerce Commission, the same shall mean and refer to the authority.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.11.

34:1B-221  Transfer of Brownfields Reimbursement Program.
 
	12. a. The functions, powers, and duties of the New Jersey Commerce Commission for the Brownfields Reimbursement Program, established by sections 34 through 39 of P.L.1997, c.278 (C.58:10B-26 through 58:10B-31), except as otherwise provided, are continued and are transferred to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority to be administered within that authority as the authority board so determines.  The authority shall, after consultation with the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, adopt rules and regulations pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) necessary to govern the proper conduct and operation of the program.
 
	b.	Whenever, in any law, rule, regulation, order, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding, or otherwise, reference is made to the Brownfields Reimbursement Program in the New Jersey Commerce Commission, the same shall mean and refer to the authority.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.12.

34:1B-222  Transfer of Municipal Landfill Closure and Remediation Reimbursement Program.
 
	13. a. The functions, powers, and duties of the New Jersey Commerce Commission for the Municipal Landfill Closure and Remediation Reimbursement Program established by P.L.1996, c.124 (C.13:1E-116.1 through 13:1E-116.7), except as otherwise provided, are continued and are transferred to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority to be administered within that authority as the authority board so determines.  The authority shall, after consultation with the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, adopt rules and regulations pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) necessary to govern the proper conduct and operation of the program.
 
	b.	Whenever, in any law, rule, regulation, order, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding, or otherwise, reference is made to the Municipal Landfill Closure and Remediation Reimbursement Program in the New Jersey Commerce Commission, the same shall mean and refer to the authority.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.13.

34:1B-223  Transfer of New Jersey Economic Development Site Program.
 
	14. a. The functions, powers, and duties of the New Jersey Commerce Commission for the New Jersey Economic Development Site Program, established by P.L.1996, c.70, P.L.1997, c.97 (C.34:1B-140 through 34:1B-143), and section 31 of P.L.1998, c.44 (C.52:27C-91), except as otherwise provided, are continued and are transferred to the Division of Business Assistance, Marketing, and International Trade. 
 
	b.	Whenever, in any law, rule, regulation, order, contract, reorganization plan, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding, or otherwise, reference is made to the New Jersey Economic Development Site Program in the New Jersey Commerce Commission, the same shall mean and refer to the division.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.14.

34:1B-224  Transfer of Urban Transit Hub Tax Credit Program.
  
	15. a. The functions, powers, and duties of the New Jersey Commerce Commission relating to the Urban Transit Hub Tax Credit Program established by P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-207 through 34:1B-209), except as otherwise provided, are continued and are transferred to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority to be administered within that authority as the authority board so determines.
 
	b.	Whenever, in any law, rule, regulation, order, reorganization plan, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding, or otherwise, reference is made to the Urban Transit Hub Tax Credit Program in the New Jersey Commerce Commission, the same shall mean and refer to the authority.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.15.

34:1B-225  Transfer of New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zone Authority, Office of Urban Enterprise Zone Authority.
 
	16. a. The New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zone Authority in the New Jersey Commerce Commission, transferred to the Department of the Treasury pursuant to subsection a. of section 28 of P.L.1998, c.44 (C.52:27C-88), and the Office of Urban Enterprise Zone Authority in the New Jersey Commerce Commission which provides services necessary and incidental to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to subsection d. of section 28 of P.L.1998, c.44 (C.52:27C-88), together with their respective functions, powers, and duties, are continued and are transferred to the Department of Community Affairs, provided however, that the authority shall be in, but not of, that department. 
 
	b.	Whenever, in any law, rule, regulation, order, reorganization plan, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding, or otherwise, reference is made to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zone Authority or the Office of Urban Enterprise Zone Authority in the Department of the Treasury or the New Jersey Commerce Commission, the same shall mean and refer to the Department of Community Affairs.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.16.

34:1B-226  Transfer of Division of International Trade and Protocol.
 
	17. a. The functions, powers, and duties of the New Jersey Commerce Commission relating to the international trade functions of the Division of International Trade, established by section 23 of P.L.1981, c.122 (C.52:27H-22), and supplemented by sections 1 and 2 of P.L.1985, c.160 (C.52:27H-22.1 and 52:27H-22.2), sections 1 through 3 of P.L.1987, c.303 (C.52:27H-22.2a through 52:27H-22.2c), sections 1 through 3 of P.L.1987, c.334 (C.52:27H-22.4 through 52:27H-22.6), and sections 1 through 8 of P.L.1995, c.275 (C.52:27H-22.7 through 52:27H-22.14), and most recently known as the Office of International Trade and Protocol, except as otherwise provided, are continued and are transferred to the Division of Business Assistance, Marketing, and International Trade.  The office and term of the Director of the Division of International Trade shall terminate upon the effective date of this act.
 
	b.	Whenever, in any law, rule, regulation, order, reorganization plan, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding, or otherwise, reference is made to the Division of International Trade or the Office of International Trade and Protocol in the New Jersey Commerce Commission, the same shall mean and refer to the division.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.17.

34:1B-227  Transfer of Division of Development for Small Businesses and Women's and Minority Businesses.
 
	18. a. The functions, powers, and duties of the Division of Development for Small Businesses and Women's and Minority Businesses, presently known as the Office of Business Services in the New Jersey Commerce Commission, created by section 3 of P.L.1987, c.55 (C.52:27H-21.9), except as otherwise provided, are continued and are transferred to the Department of the Treasury to be administered within that department as the Treasurer so determines.  The office and term of the director of the Division of Development for Small Businesses and Women's and Minority Businesses, established by law, shall terminate upon the effective date of this act.  Any employees of the Commission who are assigned to perform the work of the Office of Business Services may be transferred to the Department of the Treasury subject to the protections set forth in subsection b. of section 4 of this act. 
 
	b.	Whenever, in any law, rule, regulation, order, reorganization plan, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding, or otherwise, reference is made to the Division of Development for Small Businesses and Women's and Minority Businesses, more recently known as the Office of Business Services, or the Director of that office, in the New Jersey Commerce Commission, the same shall mean and refer to the State Treasurer.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.18.

34:1B-228  Transfer of authority to appoint certain executive directors.
 
	19. a. The functions, powers, and duties of the New Jersey Commerce Commission to appoint executive directors of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, established pursuant to P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.), and the New Jersey Commission on Science and Technology, established pursuant to P.L.1985, c.102 (C.52:9X-1 et seq.) are continued and are transferred to the Governor.  Each such executive director shall be employed by and report to the board of the respective agency and shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the board of the respective agency.
 
	b.	The functions, powers, and duties of the New Jersey Commerce Commission to serve as a member of the board of agencies and to provide administrative assistance to agencies are transferred to the Division of Business Assistance, Marketing, and International Trade unless otherwise provided by this act.
 
 	c.	Notwithstanding the provisions of any law, rule, regulation, or order to the contrary, the functions, powers, and duties of the New Jersey Commerce Commission and the executive director of the New Jersey Commerce Commission are transferred to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority and the Executive Director of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, respectively, with regard to the following statutorily established boards, councils, commissions, authorities, and other organizations:
 
	(1)	State Employment and Training Commission, established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-2);
 
	(2)	State Council for Adult Literacy Education Services, established pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1999, c.107 (C.34:15C-18);
 
	(3)	Council on Armed Forces and Veterans' Affairs, established pursuant to P.L.1983, c.61 (C.52:27H-45 et seq.) and transferred to and established in the Department of Military and Veterans' Affairs, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1992, c.86 (C.38A:3-16);
 
	(4)	The Foundation for Technology Advancement, authorized to be established pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2005, c.373 (C.52:27C-96);
 
	(5)	The Main Street New Jersey Advisory Board, established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2001, c.238 (C.52:27D-456);
 
	(6)	The Brownfields Redevelopment Task Force, established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1997, c.278 (C.58:10B-23);
 
	(7) The Fort Monmouth Economic Revitalization Planning Authority, established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2006, c.16 (C.52:27I-4);
 
	(8)	The South Jersey Transportation Authority, established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1991, c.252 (C.27:25A-4);
 
	(9)	The Aquaculture Advisory Council, established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1997, c.236 (C.4:27-5);
 
	(10) The Clean Air Council, established pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1967, c.106 (C.26:2C-3.2);
 
	(11) The Community Financial Services Advisory Board, established pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1991, c.294 (C.17:16Q-3); and
 
	(12) The New Jersey Redevelopment Authority, established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1996, c.62 (C.55:19-23).
 
	d.	Notwithstanding the provisions of any law, rule, regulation, or order to the contrary, the functions, powers, and duties of the New Jersey Commerce Commission and the executive director of the New Jersey Commerce Commission, except as otherwise provided in this act, are transferred to the Division and the Director of the Division, respectively, with regard to any council, commission, committee, task force, or other organization established by executive order.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.19.

34:1B-229  Transfer of tourism-related functions to Department of State.
 
	20. a. The functions, powers, and duties of the New Jersey Commerce Commission, pursuant to P.L.1992, c.165 (C.40:54D-1 et seq.), with respect to a tourism improvement and development authority, established pursuant to section 18 of P.L.1992, c.165 (C.40:54D-18), are continued and are transferred to the Department of State, to be administered within that department as the Secretary so determines. Any employees of the New Jersey Commerce Commission who are assigned to perform the work of the Tourism Improvement and Development Authority may be transferred to the Department of State subject to the protections set forth in subsection b. of section 4 of this act.
 
	b.	Whenever, in any law, rule, regulation, order, reorganization plan, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding, or otherwise, reference is made to the New Jersey Commerce Commission, the Department of Commerce and Economic Development, or the Commissioner of the Department of Commerce and Economic Development, with respect to a tourism improvement and development authority, the same shall mean and refer to the New Jersey Department of State.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.20.

34:1B-232  Export Finance Company Advisory Council abolished.
 
 	23. a. The Export Finance Company Advisory Council, established pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1995, c.209 (C.34:1B-99) in, but not of, the Department of the Treasury, is abolished and all of its functions, powers, and duties are continued and transferred to the Division of Business Assistance, Marketing, and International Trade. 
 
	b.	Except as otherwise provided in this act, whenever in any law, rule, regulation, order, reorganization plan, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding, or otherwise, reference is made to the Export Finance Company Advisory Council in, but not of, the Department of the Treasury, the same shall mean and refer to the division.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.23.

34:1B-233  Transfer of Motion Picture and Television Development Commission.
 
 	24. a. The Motion Picture and Television Development Commission, established pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1977, c.44 (C.34:1B-24), is transferred in, but not of, the Division of Business Assistance, Marketing, and International Trade in the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, but notwithstanding this transfer, the Motion Picture and Television Development Commission shall be independent of any supervision and control by the authority or by any board or officer thereof. 
 
	b.	Whenever, in any law, rule, regulation, order, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding or otherwise, reference is made to the Motion Picture and Television Development Commission, the same shall mean and refer to the Motion Picture and Television Development Commission in, but not of, the division. 
 
	c.	The Division of Business Assistance, Marketing, and International Trade shall provide staff services necessary to support the functions of the Motion Picture and Television Development Commission.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.24.

34:1B-234  New Jersey Development Authority for Small Businesses, Minorities and Women's Enterprises abolished.
  
	25. a. The New Jersey Development Authority for Small Businesses, Minorities and Women's Enterprises created by section 3 of P.L.1985, c.386 (C.34:1B-49), in but not of the Department of the Treasury, is abolished and all of its functions, powers, and duties are continued and transferred to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority to be allocated within the New Jersey Economic Development Authority as determined by the authority board. 
 
	b.	Except as otherwise provided in this act, whenever in any law, rule, regulation, order, reorganization plan, contract, document, judicial or administrative proceeding, or otherwise, reference is made to the New Jersey Development Authority for Small Businesses, Minorities and Women's Enterprises, the same shall mean and refer to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.25.

34:1B-236  Authorization, procedure for transfers.
 
	30.	All transfers directed by this act shall take place in accordance with the "State Agency Transfer Act," P.L.1971, c.375 (C.52:14D-1 et seq.), except as provided in this act. 
 
	L.2008, c.27, s.30.

34:1B-237  Short title.
  
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "InvestNJ Business Grant Program Act."
 
	L.2008, c.112, s.1.

34:1B-238  Definitions relative to the "InvestNJ Business Grant Program Act."
 
	2.	As used in this act:

	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Business" means any entity including, but not limited to a corporation, an S corporation, limited liability corporation, partnership, limited liability partnership, and sole proprietorship, and shall include all entities related by common ownership or control.
 
	"Capital investment" means expenses of at least $5,000 incurred for the direct use and operation of a business for (1) the site preparation and construction, renovation, improvement, equipping of, or obtaining and installing fixtures and machinery, apparatus or equipment in, a newly constructed, renovated or improved building, structure, facility, or improvement to real property; and (2) obtaining and installing fixtures and machinery, apparatus or equipment in a building, structure, or facility. Provided however, that "capital investment" shall not include soft costs such as financing and design, furniture or decorative items such as artwork or plants, or office equipment if the office equipment is property with a recovery period of less than five years.  The recovery period of any property, for purposes of this section, shall be determined as of the date such property is first placed in service or use in this State by the business, determined in accordance with section 168 of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. s.168).  "Capital investment" shall also include remediation of a business facility site, but only to the extent the remediation has not received financial assistance from another federal, State or local government funding source.
 
	"Chief Executive Officer" means the Chief Executive Officer of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.
 
	"Eligible position" means a full-time position filled by an individual whose wages are subject to withholding as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq.  An eligible position shall include only a position for which a business provides employee health benefits under a group health plan as defined under section 14 of P.L.1997, c.146 (C.17B:27-54), a health benefits plan as defined under section 1 of P.L.1992, c.162 (C.17B:27A-17), or a policy or contract of health insurance covering more than one person issued pursuant to Article 2 of chapter 27 of Title 17B of the New Jersey Statutes.  An eligible position shall not include an independent contractor or a consultant.
 
	L.2008, c.112, s.2.

34:1B-239  Invest in New Jersey Business Grant Program.
 
	3. a. There is established the Invest in New Jersey Business Grant Program to be administered by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.  The program shall include an investment grant component to provide an incentive to businesses, during the current national economic crisis, to encourage capital investments by the award of grants of up to 7 percent of the qualifying capital investment made by a business in New Jersey during a limited period.
 
	b.	The Chief Executive Officer shall approve the issuance of a grant to a business that:
 
	(1)	has operated continuously for at least two years prior to filing an application for a grant;
 
	(2)	employs at least 5 full-time employees; and
 
	(3)	makes a capital investment in New Jersey after the effective date of P.L.2008, c.112 (C.34:1B-237 et seq.) but prior to January 1, 2011.
 
	c.	A business seeking to participate in the investment grant component shall submit an application in such form as required by the Chief Executive Officer.  Such application shall include such information as the officer shall determine is necessary to administer the grant program.  All applications shall be submitted prior to January 1, 2011.
 
	d.	The Chief Executive Officer shall review and may approve an application for the grant program.  The Chief Executive Officer shall issue payment of the grant amount pursuant to a series of scheduled payments as the Chief Executive Officer may determine and subject to the submission of proof by an approved applicant of the expenditures contributing to the capital investment. A grantee that fails to comply with a grant agreement that shall be made as a condition of a grant award shall repay any grant amount received and, if so determined by the Chief Executive Officer, shall pay a penalty not in excess of ten percent of the grant amount. 
 
	e.	The value of the grant shall be 7 percent of the capital investment provided that no grantee shall receive more than $1,000,000 pursuant to this section.  Provided further, that the sum of grants awarded pursuant to this section shall not exceed $70,000,000 of which not more than $20,000,000 shall be allocated for capital investment grants described under paragraph (2) of "capital investment" as defined in section 2 of this act.
 
	f.	For the purpose of determining eligibility for a grant pursuant to this section, the authority shall exclude any expenses incurred at a site for which the business is receiving a business employment incentive grant pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et al.), a business retention and relocation assistance grant pursuant to P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.) or an urban transit hub tax credit pursuant to P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-207 et seq.), and shall exclude any expenses covered by a retail sales purchase exemption pursuant to section 20 of P.L.1983, c.303 (C.52:27H-79), section 25 of P.L.1980, c.105 (C.54:32B-8.13), section 26 of P.L.1980, c.105 (C.54:32B-8.14), section 28 of P.L.1980, c.105 (C.54:32B-8.16), section 41 of P.L.1980, c.105 (C.54:32B-8.29), section 45 of P.L.1980, c.105 (C.54:32B-8.33), or section 1 of P.L.1981, c.546 (C.54:32B-8.36).
 
	L.2008, c.112, s.3.

34:1B-240  Employment grant component for eligible businesses.
  
	4. a. There is also established under the Invest in New Jersey Business Grant Program to be administered by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, an employment grant component to provide an incentive to businesses, during the current national economic crisis, to create full-time jobs that are retained for at least one year by the award of a grant of $3,000 to qualified businesses for each eligible position created.
 
	b.	The Chief Executive Officer shall approve the issuance of a grant to a business that:
 
	(1)	has operated continuously in this State for at least two years prior to filing an application for a grant;
 
	(2)	employs at least 5 full-time employees;
 
	(3)	adds an eligible position created in New Jersey after December 1, 2008 and before January 1, 2011, for a period of at least 12 consecutive months in this State; and 
 
	(4)	the applicant has experienced a net increase in employment of eligible positions in this State during the same 12 consecutive months.
 
	c.	A business seeking to participate in the grant program shall submit an application in such form as required by the Chief Executive Officer.  Such application shall include such information as the Chief Executive Officer shall determine is necessary to administer the grant program.  All applications shall be submitted prior to January 1, 2011.
 
	d.	The Chief Executive Officer shall review and may approve an application for the grant program.  The Chief Executive Officer shall issue payment of the grant upon the submission of proof by an approved applicant of the employment of an individual in the eligible position during a period of at least 12 consecutive months in this State and proof of the other requirements set forth in subsection b. of this section.  Such submission shall be subject to review and audit by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	e.	The value of the grant shall be $3,000 for each eligible position, provided that no grantee shall receive more than $500,000 in grants pursuant to this section.  Provided further, that the sum of grants awarded pursuant to this section shall not exceed $50,000,000.
 
	f.	For the purpose of determining eligibility for a grant pursuant to this section, the authority shall not include any position that is included in the calculation of a business employment incentive grant pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et al.), a business retention and  relocation assistance grant pursuant to P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.) or an urban transit hub tax credit pursuant to P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-207 et seq.).
 
	L.2008, c.112, s.4.

34:1B-241  Rules, regulations.
 
	5.	The authority may promulgate rules and regulations necessary for the effective implementation of P.L.2008, c.112 (C.34:1B-237 et seq.).  Notwithstanding any provision of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) to the contrary, the authority may adopt, immediately upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, such regulations as are necessary to implement the provisions of P.L.2008, c.112 (C.34:1B-237 et seq.), which shall be effective for a period not to exceed 12 months following enactment, and may thereafter be amended, adopted, or readopted by the authority in accordance with the requirements of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).  Such regulations may include, but shall not be limited to: examples of and the determination of capital investment; the determination of the limits, if any, on the expense or type of furnishings that may constitute capital investments; and the promulgation of procedures and forms necessary to apply for a benefit under P.L.2008, c.112 (C.34:1B-237 et seq.).
 
	L.2008, c.112, s.5.

34:1B-241.1  Definitions relative to small business loan program including certain dairy farms, operations.
 
	1.	As used in P.L.2011, c.201 (C.34:1B-241.1 et seq.):
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Department" means the Department of Agriculture established pursuant to R.S.4:1-1.
 
	"Eligible farming operation" means two or more business entities that are engaged in farming operations in the State, that are applying together for participation in the small business loan program established pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2019, c.240 (C.34:1B-241.2), and that, at the time of the application, are independently owned and operated, participate in an agricultural commodity or product marketing and development program operated by the Department of Agriculture, and satisfy other criteria that may be established by the authority pursuant to P.L.2019, c.240.
 
	"Eligible small business" means a business entity that, at the time of application for participation in the small business loan program established pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2011, c.201 (C.34:1B-241.2), is independently owned and operated, operates primarily within this State, and which satisfies other criteria that may be established by the authority.  "Eligible small business" shall include qualified dairy farmers and eligible farming operations.
 
	"Farm equipment" means equipment used directly for farming operations.
 
	"Farming operations" mean any activities connected to the commercial growing, harvesting, processing, producing, or raising of agricultural products in the State, including crops, dairy animals, livestock, fur-bearing animals, poultry, bees, crops used in fermented alcoholic beverages and wine, and any products therefrom, including organic agricultural products; aquacultural products; horticultural products; and silviculture products.
 
	"Qualified dairy farmer" means a person or business entity that produces valued-added dairy products and that, at the time of application for participation in the small business loan program and receipt of a loan under the program, is independently owned and operated, operates primarily within this State, and satisfies other criteria that may be established by the authority.
 
	"Value-added dairy product" means a dairy product created by a qualified dairy farmer by means of a change in the physical state of a dairy commodity, and shall include, but not be limited to, cheese, cultured sour cream, yogurt, kefir, butter, ice cream, evaporated milk, condensed milk, and concentrated milk.
 
	L.2011, c.201, s.1; amended 2019, c.240, s.1.

34:1B-241.2  Maintenance, administration of loan program.
	2. a. The authority shall maintain and administer a small business loan program for the purpose of providing loans to eligible small businesses.  The authority shall consult with the department in administering the small business loan program as it applies to: (1) an eligible small business that is an eligible farming operation; (2) defining the types of dairy products that shall be considered as value-added dairy products under the small business loan program, not inconsistent with section 1 of P.L.2019, c.240 (C.34:1B-241.1); (3) developing small business loan program guidelines for qualified dairy farmers and eligible farming operations; and (4) developing materials to provide to qualified dairy farmers seeking to expand value-added dairy production in this State.
 
	b. (1) Loans made through the small business loan program may be made to an eligible small business.  The loan funds may be applied to any aspect of the eligible small business that supports its capital purchases, employee training, and salaries for new positions as determined by the authority.
 
	(2)	Notwithstanding paragraph (1) of subsection b. of this section, loans made by the authority to an eligible farming operation may only be applied to aspects of the eligible farming operation that support the farming operation's farm equipment purchases, as determined by the authority.  Farm equipment purchased from loan funds made pursuant to P.L.2019, c.240 shall be used by all of the business entities in the eligible farming operation.
 
	(3)	Two or more business entities engaged in farming operations in the State seeking to participate in the loan program established pursuant to subsection a. of this section shall submit a joint application in a form as the authority shall require and shall include information as the authority determines is necessary in consideration of a loan authorized pursuant to P.L.2019, c.240.
 
	c. (1) In order to receive a loan pursuant to the small business loan program, a business, at the time of application, shall provide proof that it is an eligible small business and shall enter into a small business loan agreement with the authority.
 
	(2)	In order to receive a loan from the authority pursuant to P.L.2019, c.240, a business entity engaged in farming operations in the State, at the time of application, shall provide proof, in a manner determined by the authority, that it and at least one other business entity meet the requirements to be an eligible farming operation, including, but not limited to, proof that each business entity is engaged in farming operations in the State and will use the farm equipment purchased with the loan funds.
 
	d.	The authority shall review and may approve applications for the small business loan program.
 
	e.	A business seeking to participate in the small business loan program shall submit an application in a form as the authority shall require.  The application shall include information the authority shall determine is necessary in consideration of the provisions of P.L.2011, c.123 (C.52:14B-21.1 et seq.).
 
	f.	Loans to an eligible small business under this section shall:
 
	(1)	be made pursuant to a small business loan agreement made pursuant to subsection c. of this section;
 
	(2)	bear interest at rates and terms deemed appropriate by the authority; and
 
	(3)	contain other terms and conditions considered appropriate by the authority that are consistent with the purposes of P.L.2011, c.201 (C.34:1B-241.1 et seq.) and with rules and regulations adopted by the authority pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2011, c.201 (C.34:1B-241.3).
 
	The provisions of a loan agreement with an eligible farming operation shall include, but need not be limited to, a statement of an eligible farming operation's proportional shares of ownership, its farm equipment usage and maintenance responsibilities, and its loan repayment responsibilities for any loan proceeds received under the loan program.
 
	g.	The authority may, in its discretion, require an eligible small business that receives a loan under the small business loan program administered pursuant to P.L.2011, c.201 (C.34:1B-241.1 et seq.) to submit an audited financial statement to the authority in order to ensure the business's continued vitality.  An audited financial statement from an eligible farming operation shall include each business entity in the eligible farming operation using the farm equipment.
 
	h.	The authority may, either through the adoption of rules and regulations, or through the terms of the small business loan agreement made pursuant to subsection c. of this section, establish terms governing the incidence of default by a recipient of a loan under the small business loan program, administered pursuant to P.L.2011, c.201 (C.34:1B-241.1 et seq.).
 
	i.	In determining whether to provide a loan to an eligible small business, the authority shall consider, along with other criteria that the authority in its discretion deems appropriate, whether the business commits to increasing its full-time employment level in the State.
 
	L.2011, c.201, s.2; amended 2019, c.240, s.2.

34:1B-241.3  Rules, regulations.
 
 	3.	The authority may adopt such rules and regulations pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of P.L.2011, c.201 (C.34:1B-241.1 et seq.).
 
	L.2011, c.201, s.3.

34:1B-242  Short title.
 
 	1.	Sections 1 through 9 of this act shall be known and may be cited as the "Grow New Jersey Assistance Act."
 
	L.2011, c.149, s.1.

34:1B-243  Definitions relative to the "Grow New Jersey Act."
	2.	As used in P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-242 et seq.):
 
	"Affiliate" means an entity that directly or indirectly controls, is under common control with, or is controlled by the business.  Control exists in all cases in which the entity is a member of a controlled group of corporations as defined pursuant to section 1563 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. s.1563) or the entity is an organization in a group of organizations under common control as defined pursuant to subsection (b) or (c) of section 414 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. s.414).  A taxpayer may establish by clear and convincing evidence, as determined by the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, that control exists in situations involving lesser percentages of ownership than required by those statutes.  An affiliate of a business may contribute to meeting either the qualified investment or full-time employee requirements of a business that applies for a credit under section 3 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-209).
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Aviation district" means all areas within the boundaries of the "Atlantic City International Airport," established pursuant to section 24 of P.L.1991, c.252 (C.27:25A-24), and the Federal Aviation Administration William J. Hughes Technical Center and the area within a one-mile radius of the outermost boundary of the "Atlantic City International Airport" and the Federal Aviation Administration William J. Hughes Technical Center.
 
	"Business" means an applicant proposing to own or lease premises in a qualified business facility that is:
 
	a corporation that is subject to the tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5);
 
	a corporation that is subject to the tax imposed pursuant to sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15) or N.J.S.17B:23-5;
 
	a partnership;
 
	an S corporation;
 
	a limited liability company; or
 
	a non-profit corporation.
 
	If the business or tenant is a cooperative or part of a cooperative, then the cooperative may qualify for credits by counting the full-time employees and capital investments of its member organizations, and the cooperative may distribute credits to its member organizations. If the business or tenant is a cooperative that leases to its member organizations, the lease shall be treated as a lease to an affiliate or affiliates.
 
	A business shall include an affiliate of the business if that business applies for a credit based upon any capital investment made by or full-time employees of an affiliate.
 
	"Capital investment" in a qualified business facility means expenses by a business or any affiliate of the business incurred after application for:
 
	a.	site preparation and construction, repair, renovation, improvement, equipping, or furnishing on real property or of a building, structure, facility, or improvement to real property;
 
	b.	obtaining and installing furnishings and machinery, apparatus, or equipment, including but not limited to material goods subject to bonus depreciation under sections 168 and 179 of the federal Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. s.168 and s.179), for the operation of a business on real property or in a building, structure, facility, or improvement to real property;
 
	c.	receiving Highlands Development Credits under the Highlands Transfer Development Rights Program authorized pursuant to section 13 of P.L.2004, c.120 (C.13:20-13); or
 
	d.	any of the foregoing.
 
	In addition to the foregoing, in a Garden State Growth Zone, the following qualify as a capital investment: any development, redevelopment, and relocation costs, including, but not limited to, site acquisition if made within 24 months of application to the authority, engineering, legal, accounting, and other professional services required; and relocation, environmental remediation, and infrastructure improvements for the project area, including, but not limited to, on- and off-site utility, road, pier, wharf, bulkhead, or sidewalk construction or repair.
 
	In addition to the foregoing, if a business acquires or leases a qualified business facility, the capital investment made or acquired by the seller or owner, as the case may be, if pertaining primarily to the premises of the qualified business facility, shall be considered a capital investment by the business and, if pertaining generally to the qualified business facility being acquired or leased, shall be allocated to the premises of the qualified business facility on the basis of the gross leasable area of the premises in relation to the total gross leasable area in the qualified business facility. The capital investment described herein may include any capital investment made or acquired within 24 months prior to the date of application so long as the amount of capital investment made or acquired by the business, any affiliate of the business, or any owner after the date of application equals at least 50 percent of the amount of capital investment, allocated to the premises of the qualified business facility being acquired or leased on the basis of the gross leasable area of the premises in relation to the total gross leasable area in the qualified business facility made or acquired prior to the date of application.
 
	"College or university" means a county college, an independent institution of higher education, a public research university, or a State college.
 
	"Commitment period" means the period of time that is 1.5 times the eligibility period.
 
	"County college" means an educational institution established by one or more counties, pursuant to chapter 64A of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes.
 
	"Deep poverty pocket" means a population census tract having a poverty level of 20 percent or more, and which is located within the qualified incentive area and has been determined by the authority to be an area appropriate for development and in need of economic development incentive assistance.
 
	"Disaster recovery project" means a project located on property that has been wholly or substantially damaged or destroyed as a result of a federally-declared disaster which, after utilizing all disaster funds available from federal, State, county, and local funding sources, demonstrates to the satisfaction of the authority that access to additional funding authorized pursuant to the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.), is necessary to complete the redevelopment project, and which is located within the qualified incentive area and has been determined by the authority to be in an area appropriate for development and in need of economic development incentive assistance.
 
	"Distressed municipality" means a municipality that is qualified to receive assistance under P.L.1978, c.14 (C.52:27D-178 et seq.), a municipality under the supervision of the Local Finance Board pursuant to the provisions of the "Local Government Supervision Act (1947)," P.L.1947, c.151 (C.52:27BB-1 et seq.), a municipality identified by the Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs to be facing serious fiscal distress, a SDA municipality, or a municipality in which a major rail station is located.
 
	"Doctoral university" means a university located within New Jersey that is classified as a doctoral university under the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education's Basic Classification methodology on the effective date of P.L.2017, c.221.
 
	"Eligibility period" means the period in which a business may claim a tax credit under the Grow New Jersey Assistance Program, beginning with the tax period in which the authority accepts certification of the business that it has met the capital investment and employment requirements of the Grow New Jersey Assistance Program and extending thereafter for a term of not more than 10 years, with the term to be determined solely at the discretion of the applicant.
 
	"Eligible position" or "full-time job" means a full-time position in a business in this State, which position the business has filled with a full-time employee, who shall have their primary office at the qualified business facility and spend at least 60 percent of their time at the qualified business facility. This requirement shall supersede any law, regulation, or incentive agreement that imposes a requirement that the employee be present at the qualified business facility for a specified percentage of time greater than 60 percent. This amendment shall not alter or terminate any waiver of the requirement that an employee spend time at the qualified business facility implemented by the authority due to COVID-19 public health emergency and state of emergency.
 
	"Full-time employee" means a person:
 
	a.	who is employed by a business for consideration for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment; or
 
	b.	who is employed by a professional employer organization pursuant to an employee leasing agreement between the business and the professional employer organization, in accordance with P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.) for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment, and whose wages are subject to withholding as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq.; or
 
	c.	who is a resident of another State but whose income is not subject to the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq. or who is a partner of a business who works for the partnership for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment, and whose distributive share of income, gain, loss, or deduction, or whose guaranteed payments, or any combination thereof, is subject to the payment of estimated taxes, as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq.; and
 
	d.	who, except for purposes of the Statewide workforce, is provided, by the business, with employee health benefits under a health benefits plan authorized pursuant to State or federal law.  For an eligible business that submitted certifications and annual reports required in an incentive agreement pursuant to subsection e. of section 4 of P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-245) on or after January 1, 2020, the requirement that employee health benefits are to be provided shall be deemed to be satisfied if the benefits are provided by the business or pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement, no later than 90 days of employee start date, under a health benefits plan authorized pursuant to State or federal law.
 
	With respect to a logistics, manufacturing, energy, defense, aviation, or maritime business, excluding primarily warehouse or distribution operations, located in a port district having a container terminal:
 
	the requirement that employee health benefits are to be provided shall be deemed to be satisfied if the benefits are provided in accordance with industry practice by a third party obligated to provide such benefits pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement;
 
	full-time employment shall include, but not be limited to, employees that have been hired by way of a labor union hiring hall or its equivalent;
 
	35 hours of employment per week at a qualified business facility shall constitute one "full-time employee," regardless of whether or not the hours of work were performed by one or more persons.
 
	For any project located in a Garden State Growth Zone which qualifies under the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), or any project located in the Atlantic City Tourism District as established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2011, c.18 (C.5:12-219) and regulated by the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority, and which will include a retail facility of at least 150,000 square feet, of which at least 50 percent will be occupied by either a full-service supermarket or grocery store, 30 hours of employment per week at a qualified business facility shall constitute one "full-time employee," regardless of whether the hours of work were performed by one or more persons, and the requirement that employee health benefits are to be provided shall be deemed to be satisfied if the employees of the business are covered by a collective bargaining agreement.
 
	"Full-time employee" shall not include any person who works as an independent contractor or on a consulting basis for the business.
 
	Full-time employee shall also not include any person who at the time of project application works in New Jersey for consideration for at least 35 hours per week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment but who prior to project application was not provided, by the business, with employee health benefits under a health benefits plan authorized pursuant to State or federal law.
 
	"Garden State Create Zone" means the campus of a doctoral university, and the area within a three-mile radius of the outermost boundary of the campus of a doctoral university, according to a map appearing in the doctoral university's official catalog or other official publication on the effective date of P.L.2017, c.221.
 
	"Garden State Growth Zone" or "growth zone" means the four New Jersey cities with the lowest median family income based on the 2009 American Community Survey from the US Census, (Table 708. Household, Family, and Per Capita Income and Individuals, and Families Below Poverty Level by City: 2009); a municipality which contains a Tourism District as established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2011, c.18 (C.5:12-219) and regulated by the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority; or an aviation district.
 
	"Highlands development credit receiving area or redevelopment area" means an area located within a qualified incentive area and designated by the Highlands Water Protection and Planning Council for the receipt of Highlands Development Credits under the Highlands Transfer Development Rights Program authorized pursuant to section 13 of P.L.2004, c.120 (C.13:20-13).
 
	"Incentive agreement" means the contract between the business and the authority, which sets forth the terms and conditions under which the business shall be eligible to receive the incentives authorized pursuant to the program.
 
	"Incentive effective date" means the date a business submits the documentation required pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection b. of section 6 of P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-247 ) in a form satisfactory to the authority.
 
	"Independent institution of higher education" means a college or university incorporated and located in New Jersey, which by virtue of law or character or license is a nonprofit educational institution authorized to grant academic degrees and which provides a level of education which is equivalent to the education provided by the State's public institutions of higher education, as attested by the receipt of and continuation of regional accreditation by the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools, and which is eligible to receive State aid under the provisions of the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of New Jersey, but does not include any educational institution dedicated primarily to the education or training of ministers, priests, rabbis or other professional persons in the field of religion.
 
	"Major rail station" means a railroad station located within a qualified incentive area which provides access to the public to a minimum of six rail passenger service lines operated by the New Jersey Transit Corporation.
 
	"Mega project" means:
 
	a.	a qualified business facility located in a port district housing a business in the logistics, manufacturing, energy, defense, or maritime industries, either:
 
	(1) having a capital investment in excess of $20,000,000, and at which more than 250 full-time employees of the business are created or retained; or
 
	(2) at which more than 1,000 full-time employees of the business are created or retained;
 
	b.	a qualified business facility located in an aviation district housing a business in the aviation industry, in a Garden State Growth Zone, or in a priority area housing the United States headquarters and related facilities of an automobile manufacturer, either:
 
	(1) having a capital investment in excess of $20,000,000, and at which more than 250 full-time employees of the business are created or retained, or
 
	(2) at which more than 1,000 full-time employees of the business are created or retained;
 
	c.	a qualified business facility located in an urban transit hub housing a business of any kind, having a capital investment in excess of $50,000,000, and at which more than 250 full-time employees of the business are created or retained;
 
	d.	a project located in an area designated in need of redevelopment, pursuant to P.L.1992, c.79 (C.40A:12A-1 et al.) prior to the enactment of P.L.2014, c.63 (C.34:1B-251 et al.) within Atlantic, Burlington, Camden, Cape May, Cumberland, Gloucester, Ocean, or Salem counties having a capital investment in excess of $20,000,000, and at which more than 150 full-time employees of the business are created or retained; or
 
	e.	a qualified business facility primarily used by a business principally engaged in research, development, or manufacture of a drug or device, as defined in R.S.24:1-1, or primarily used by a business licensed to conduct a clinical laboratory and business facility pursuant to the "New Jersey Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act," P.L.1975, c.166 (C.45:9-42.26 et seq.), either:
 
	(1) having a capital investment in excess of $20,000,000, and at which more than 250 full-time employees of the business are created or retained, or
 
	(2) at which more than 1,000 full-time employees of the business are created or retained.
 
	"Minimum environmental and sustainability standards" means standards established by the authority in accordance with the green building manual prepared by the Commissioner of Community Affairs pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2007, c.132 (C.52:27D-130.6), regarding the use of renewable energy, energy-efficient technology, and non-renewable resources in order to reduce environmental degradation and encourage long-term cost reduction.
 
	"Moderate-income housing" means housing affordable, according to United States Department of Housing and Urban Development or other recognized standards for home ownership and rental costs, and occupied or reserved for occupancy by households with a gross household income equal to more than 50 percent but less than 80 percent of the median gross household income for households of the same size within the housing region in which the housing is located.
 
	"Municipal Revitalization Index" means the 2007 index by the Office for Planning Advocacy within the Department of State measuring or ranking municipal distress.
 
	"New full-time job" means an eligible position created by the business at the qualified business facility that did not previously exist in this State. For the purposes of determining a number of new full-time jobs, the eligible positions of an affiliate shall be considered eligible positions of the business.
 
	"Other eligible area" means the portions of the qualified incentive area that are not located within a distressed municipality, or the priority area.
 
	"Partnership" means an entity classified as a partnership for federal income tax purposes.
 
	"Port district" means the portions of a qualified incentive area that are located within:
 
	a.	the "Port of New York District" of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, as defined in Article II of the Compact Between the States of New York and New Jersey of 1921; or
 
	b.	a 15-mile radius of the outermost boundary of each marine terminal facility established, acquired, constructed, rehabilitated, or improved by the South Jersey Port District established pursuant to "The South Jersey Port Corporation Act," P.L.1968, c.60 (C.12:11A-1 et seq.).
 
	"Priority area" means the portions of the qualified incentive area that are not located within a distressed municipality and which:
 
	a.	are designated pursuant to the "State Planning Act," P.L.1985, c.398 (C.52:18A-196 et seq.), as Planning Area 1 (Metropolitan), Planning Area 2 (Suburban), a designated center under the State Development and Redevelopment Plan, or a designated growth center in an endorsed plan until June 30, 2013, or until the State Planning Commission revises and readopts New Jersey's State Strategic Plan and adopts regulations to revise this definition;
 
	b.	intersect with portions of: a deep poverty pocket, a port district, or federally-owned land approved for closure under a federal Commission on Base Realignment and Closure action;
 
	c.	are the proposed site of a disaster recovery project, a qualified incubator facility, a highlands development credit receiving area or redevelopment area, a tourism destination project, or transit oriented development; or
 
	d.	contain: a vacant commercial building having over 400,000 square feet of office, laboratory, or industrial space available for occupancy for a period of over one year; or a site that has been negatively impacted by the approval of a "qualified business facility," as defined pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-208).
 
	"Professional employer organization" means an employee leasing company registered with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.).
 
	"Program" means the "Grow New Jersey Assistance Program" established pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-244).
 
	"Public research university" means a public research university as defined in section 3 of P.L.1994, c.48 (C.18A:3B-3).
 
	"Qualified business facility" means any building, complex of buildings or structural components of buildings, and all machinery and equipment located within a qualified incentive area, used in connection with the operation of a business that is not engaged in final point of sale retail business at that location unless the building, complex of buildings or structural components of buildings, and all machinery and equipment located within a qualified incentive area, are used in connection with the operation of:
 
	a.	a final point of sale retail business located in a Garden State Growth Zone that will include a retail facility of at least 150,000 square feet, of which at least 50 percent is occupied by either a full-service supermarket or grocery store; or
 
	b.	a tourism destination project located in the Atlantic City Tourism District as established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2011, c.18 (C.5:12-219).
 
	"Qualified incentive area" means:
 
	a.	an aviation district;
 
	b.	a port district;
 
	c.	a distressed municipality or urban transit hub municipality;
 
	d.	an area (1) designated pursuant to the "State Planning Act," P.L.1985, c.398 (C.52:18A-196 et seq.), as:
 
	(a) Planning Area 1 (Metropolitan);
 
	(b) Planning Area 2 (Suburban); or
 
	(c) Planning Area 3 (Fringe Planning Area);
 
	(2) located within a smart growth area and planning area designated in a master plan adopted by the New Jersey Meadowlands Commission pursuant to subsection (i) of section 6 of P.L.1968, c.404 (C.13:17-6) or subject to a redevelopment plan adopted by the New Jersey Meadowlands Commission pursuant to section 20 of P.L.1968, c.404 (C.13:17-21);
 
	(3) located within any land owned by the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, established pursuant to P.L.1971, c.137 (C.5:10-1 et seq.), within the boundaries of the Hackensack Meadowlands District as delineated in section 4 of P.L.1968, c.404 (C.13:17-4);
 
	(4) located within a regional growth area, rural development area zoned for industrial use as of the effective date of P.L.2016, c.75, town, village, or a military and federal installation area designated in the comprehensive management plan prepared and adopted by the Pinelands Commission pursuant to the "Pinelands Protection Act," P.L.1979, c.111 (C.13:18A-1 et seq.);
 
	(5) located within the planning area of the Highlands Region as defined in section 3 of P.L.2004, c.120 (C.13:20-3) or a highlands development credit receiving area or redevelopment area;
 
	(6) located within a Garden State Growth Zone;
 
	(7) located within land approved for closure under any federal Commission on Base Realignment and Closure action; or
 
	(8) located only within the following portions of the areas designated pursuant to the "State Planning Act," P.L.1985, c.398 (C.52:18A-196 et seq.), as Planning Area 4A (Rural Planning Area), Planning Area 4B (Rural/Environmentally Sensitive) or Planning Area 5 (Environmentally Sensitive) if Planning Area 4A (Rural Planning Area), Planning Area 4B (Rural/Environmentally Sensitive) or Planning Area 5 (Environmentally Sensitive) is located within:
 
	(a) a designated center under the State Development and Redevelopment Plan;
 
	(b) a designated growth center in an endorsed plan until the State Planning Commission revises and readopts New Jersey's State Strategic Plan and adopts regulations to revise this definition as it pertains to Statewide planning areas;
 
	(c) any area determined to be in need of redevelopment pursuant to sections 5 and 6 of P.L.1992, c.79 (C.40A:12A-5 and C.40A:12A-6) or in need of rehabilitation pursuant to section 14 of P.L.1992, c.79 (C.40A:12A-14);
 
	(d) any area on which a structure exists or previously existed including any desired expansion of the footprint of the existing or previously existing structure provided the expansion otherwise complies with all applicable federal, State, county, and local permits and approvals;
 
	(e) the planning area of the Highlands Region as defined in section 3 of P.L.2004, c.120 (C.13:20-3) or a highlands development credit receiving area or redevelopment area; or
 
	(f) any area on which an existing tourism destination project is located.
 
	"Qualified incentive area" shall not include any property located within the preservation area of the Highlands Region as defined in section 3 of P.L.2004, c.120 (C.13:20-3).
 
	"Qualified incubator facility" means a commercial building located within a qualified incentive area: which contains 50,000 or more square feet of office, laboratory, or industrial space; which is located near, and presents opportunities for collaboration with, a research institution, teaching hospital, college, or university; and within which, at least 50 percent of the gross leasable area is restricted for use by one or more technology startup companies during the commitment period.
 
	"Retained full-time job" means an eligible position that currently exists in New Jersey and is filled by a full-time employee but which, because of a potential relocation by the business, is at risk of being lost to another state or country, or eliminated. For the purposes of determining a number of retained full-time jobs, the eligible positions of an affiliate shall be considered eligible positions of the business. For the purposes of the certifications and annual reports required in the incentive agreement pursuant to subsection e. of section 4 of P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-245), to the extent an eligible position that was the basis of the award no longer exists, a business shall include as a retained full-time job a new eligible position that is filled by a full-time employee provided that the position is included in the order of date of hire and is not the basis for any other incentive award. For a project located in a Garden State Growth Zone which qualified for the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), retained full-time job shall include any employee previously employed in New Jersey and transferred to the new location in the Garden State Growth Zone which qualified for the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.).
 
	"SDA district" means an SDA district as defined in section 3 of P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-3).
 
	"SDA municipality" means a municipality in which an SDA district is situate.
 
	"State college" means a State college or university established pursuant to chapter 64 of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes.
 
	"Targeted industry" means any industry identified from time to time by the authority which shall initially include advanced transportation and logistics, advanced manufacturing, aviation, autonomous vehicle and zero-emission vehicle research or development, clean energy, life sciences, hemp processing, information and high technology, finance and insurance, professional services, film and digital media, non-retail food and beverage businesses including food innovation, and other innovative industries that disrupt current technologies or business models.
 
	"Technology startup company" means a for profit business that has been in operation fewer than five years and is developing or possesses a proprietary technology or business method of a high-technology or life science-related product, process, or service which the business intends to move to commercialization.
 
	"Tourism destination project" means a qualified non-gaming business facility that will be among the most visited privately owned or operated tourism or recreation sites in the State, and which is located within the qualified incentive area and has been determined by the authority to be in an area appropriate for development and in need of economic development incentive assistance, including a non-gaming business within an established Tourism District with a significant impact on the economic viability of that District.
 
	"Transit oriented development" means a qualified business facility located within a 1/2-mile radius, or one-mile radius for projects located in a Garden State Growth Zone, surrounding the mid-point of a New Jersey Transit Corporation, Port Authority Transit Corporation, or Port Authority Trans-Hudson Corporation rail, bus, or ferry station platform area, including all light rail stations.
 
	"Urban transit hub" means an urban transit hub, as defined in section 2 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-208), that is located within an eligible municipality, as defined in section 2 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-208) and also located within a qualified incentive area.
 
	"Urban transit hub municipality" means a municipality: a. which qualifies for State aid pursuant to P.L.1978, c.14 (C.52:27D-178 et seq.), or which has continued to be a qualified municipality thereunder pursuant to P.L.2007, c.111; and b. in which 30 percent or more of the value of real property was exempt from local property taxation during tax year 2006. The percentage of exempt property shall be calculated by dividing the total exempt value by the sum of the net valuation which is taxable and that which is tax exempt.
 
	L.2011, c.149, s.2; amended 2013, c.161, s.7; 2014, c.63, s.2; 2015, c.217, s.1; 2016, c.75, s.1; 2017, c.221, s.1; 2018, c.120, s.1; 2020, c.156, s.120; 2021, c.160, s.61; 2023, c.143, s.3.

34:1B-244  Grow New Jersey Assistance Program.
 	3. a. The Grow New Jersey Assistance Program is hereby established as a program under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority and shall be administered by the authority.  The purpose of the program is to encourage economic development and job creation and to preserve jobs that currently exist in New Jersey but which are in danger of being relocated outside of the State.  To implement this purpose, the program may provide tax credits to eligible businesses for an eligibility period not to exceed 10 years. 
 
	To be eligible for any tax credits pursuant to P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-242 et al.), a business's chief executive officer or equivalent officer shall demonstrate to the authority, at the time of application, that: 
 
	(1)	the business, expressly including its landlord or seller, will make, acquire, or lease a capital investment equal to, or greater than, the applicable amount set forth in subsection b. of this section at a qualified business facility at which it will: 
 
	(a)	retain full-time jobs in an amount equal to or greater than the applicable number set forth in subsection c. of this section; 
 
	(b)	create new full-time jobs in an amount equal to or greater than the applicable number set forth in subsection c. of this section; or 
 
	(c)	in combination, retain full-time jobs and create new full-time jobs in an amount equal to or greater than the applicable number set forth in subsection c. of this section; 
 
	(2)	the qualified business facility shall be constructed in accordance with the minimum environmental and sustainability standards; 
 
	(3)	the capital investment resultant from the award of tax credits and the resultant retention and creation of full-time jobs will yield a net positive benefit to the State equaling at least 110 percent of the requested tax credit allocation amount, which determination is calculated prior to taking into account the value of the requested tax credit and shall be based on the benefits generated during the first 20 years following the completion of the project, except that:
 
	(a)	for a mega project or a project located in a Garden State Growth Zone, the determination shall be based on the benefits generated during a period of up to 30 years following the completion of the project, as determined by the authority, and
 
	(b)	for a project located in a Garden State Growth Zone which qualified for the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), the net positive benefit determination shall be based on the benefits generated during a period of up to 35 years following completion of the project, as determined by the authority, and shall equal at least 100 percent of the requested tax credit allocation amount and may utilize the value of those property taxes subject to the provisions of section 24 of P.L.2013 c.161 (C.52:27D-489s), or the value of those property taxes that would have been assessed on the new construction, improvements, or substantial rehabilitation of structures on real property if the structures were not exempt because they are on real property owned by a public entity, and incremental sales and excise taxes that are derived from activities within the area and which are rebated or retained by the municipality pursuant to the "New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act," P.L.1983, c.303 (C.52:27H-60 et seq.) or any other law providing for such rebate or retention; and
 
	(4)	except as provided in subsection f. of this section, the award of tax credits will be a material factor in the business's decision to create or retain the minimum number of new or retained full-time jobs for eligibility under the program.
 
	With respect to the provisions of paragraph (3) of this subsection, in the case of a project located in a Garden State Growth Zone, the authority, in its discretion, may award bonuses in its net positive benefit calculation.
 
	b.	For all projects approved after the effective date of P.L.2013, c.161, the minimum capital investment required to be eligible under this program shall be as follows: 
 
	(1)	for the rehabilitation, improvement, fit-out, or retrofit of an existing industrial, warehousing, logistics, or research and development premises for continued similar use by the business in at least 51 percent of the gross leasable area of the premises, a minimum investment of $20 per square foot of gross leasable area; 
 
	(2)	for the new construction of an industrial, warehousing, logistics, or research and development premises for similar use by the business in at least 51 percent of the gross leasable area of the premises, a minimum investment of $60 per square foot of gross leasable area; 
 
	(3)	for the rehabilitation, improvement, fit-out, or retrofit of an existing premises that does not qualify pursuant to paragraph (1) or (2) of this subsection, a minimum investment of $40 per square foot of gross leasable area; and 
 
	(4)	for the new construction of a premises that does not qualify pursuant to paragraph (1) or (2) of this subsection, a minimum investment of $120 per square foot of gross leasable area.
 
	The minimum capital investment required by this subsection shall be reduced by one-third for projects located in a Garden State Growth Zone or projects located within Atlantic, Burlington, Camden, Cape May, Cumberland, Gloucester, Ocean, or Salem counties.
 
	c.	The minimum number of new or retained full-time jobs required to be eligible under this program shall be as follows: 
 
	(1)	for a business that is a technology startup company or a manufacturing company, a minimum of 10 new or 25 retained full-time jobs; 
 
	(2)	for a business engaged primarily in a targeted industry other than a technology startup company or a manufacturing company, a minimum of 25 new or 35 retained full-time jobs; and 
 
	(3)	for any other business, a minimum of 35 new or 50 retained full-time jobs.
 
	The minimum number of new or retained full-time jobs required by this subsection shall be reduced by one-quarter for projects located in a Garden State Growth Zone or projects located within Atlantic, Burlington, Camden, Cape May, Cumberland, Gloucester, Ocean, or Salem counties.
 
	d.	To assist the authority in determining whether a proposed capital investment will yield a net positive benefit, the business's chief executive officer, or equivalent officer, shall submit a certification to the authority indicating: (1) that any existing full-time jobs are at risk of leaving the State or being eliminated; (2) that any projected creation or retention, as applicable, of new full-time jobs would not occur but for the provision of tax credits under the program; and (3) that the business's chief executive officer, or equivalent officer, has reviewed the information submitted to the authority and that the representations contained therein are accurate, provided however, that in satisfaction of the provisions of paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection, the certification with respect to a project in a Garden State Growth Zone that qualifies under the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), or a project located in a Garden State Growth Zone which contains a Tourism District as established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2011, c.18 (C.5:12-219) and regulated by the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority, shall indicate that the provision of tax credits under the program is a material factor in the business decision to make a capital investment and locate in a Garden State Growth Zone that qualifies under the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), or a Garden State Growth Zone which contains a Tourism District as established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2011, c.18 (C.5:12-219) and regulated by the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority.  In the event that this certification by the business's chief executive officer, or equivalent officer, is found to be willfully false, the authority may revoke any award of tax credits in their entirety, which revocation shall be in addition to any other criminal or civil penalties that the business and the officer may be subject to.  When considering an application involving intra-State job transfers, the authority shall require the business to submit the following information as part of its application: a full economic analysis of all locations under consideration by the business; all lease agreements, ownership documents, or substantially similar documentation for the business's current in-State locations; and all lease agreements, ownership documents, or substantially similar documentation for the potential out-of-State location alternatives, to the extent they exist.  Based on this information, and any other information deemed relevant by the authority, the authority shall independently verify and confirm, by way of making a factual finding by separate vote of the authority's board, the business's assertion that the jobs are actually at risk of leaving the State, and as to the date or dates at which the authority expects that those jobs would actually leave the State, or, with respect to projects located in a Garden State Growth Zone that qualifies under the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), or projects located in a Garden State Growth Zone which contains a Tourism District as established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2011, c.18 (C.5:12-219) and regulated by the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority, the business's assertion that the provision of tax credits under the program is a material factor in the business's decision to make a capital investment and locate in a Garden State Growth Zone that qualifies under the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), or in a Garden State Growth Zone which contains a Tourism District as established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2011, c.18 (C.5:12-219) and regulated by the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority, before a business may be awarded any tax credits under this section.
 
	e.	A project that consists solely of point-of-final-purchase retail facilities shall not be eligible for a grant of tax credits.  If a project consists of both point-of-final-purchase retail facilities and non-retail facilities, only the portion of the project consisting of non-retail facilities shall be eligible for a grant of tax credits.  For a qualified business facility that is a mixed-use project that includes retail facilities and that is located in a Garden State Growth Zone or the Atlantic City Tourism District as established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2011, c.18 (C.5:12-219) and regulated by the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority, retail facilities in an amount up to 7.5 percent of the mixed-use project may be included in the mixed-use project application for a grant of tax credits along with the non-retail facilities, and that application may include in the aggregate the pro-rata number of full-time employees employed by any number of tenants or other occupants of the included retail facilities.  If a warehouse facility is part of a point-of-final-purchase retail facility and supplies only that facility, the warehouse facility shall not be eligible for a grant of tax credits.  For the purposes of this section, a retail facility of at least 150,000 square feet, of which at least 50 percent is occupied by a full-service supermarket or grocery store, located in a Garden State Growth Zone which qualified under the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), or a tourism destination project in the Atlantic City Tourism District as established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2011, c.18 (C.5:12-219), or catalog distribution centers shall not be considered point-of-final-purchase retail facilities.
 
	f.	The authority may determine as eligible for tax credits under the program any business that is required to respond to a request for proposals and to fulfill a contract with the federal government although the business's chief executive officer or equivalent officer has not demonstrated to the authority that the award of tax credits will be a material factor in the business's decision to retain the minimum number of retained full-time jobs, as otherwise required by this section.  The authority may, in its discretion, consider the economic benefit of the retained jobs servicing the contract in conducting a net benefit analysis required by paragraph (4) of subsection a. of this section.  For the purposes of this subsection, "retained full-time jobs" includes jobs that are at risk of being eliminated. Applications to the authority for eligibility under the program pursuant to the criteria set forth in this subsection shall be completed by December 31, 2013.  Submission of a proposal to the federal government prior to authority approval shall not disqualify a business from the program.
 
	g.	Nothing shall preclude a business from applying for tax credits under the program for more than one project pursuant to one or more applications.
 
	h.	A business shall not be required to purchase pinelands development credits under the "Pinelands Protection Act," P.L.1979, c.111 (C.13:18A-1 et seq.), the pinelands comprehensive management plan, or any other rule or regulation adopted pursuant to that act in connection with any approval or relief obtained related to a qualified business facility located in an aviation district on or after the effective date of P.L.2018, c.120, except if seeking to develop in permanently protected open space pursuant to the Pinelands Protection Act. 
 
	L.2011, c.149, s.3; amended 2013, c.161, s.8; 2014, c.63, s.3; 2018, c.120, s.2.

34:1B-245  Incentive agreement required prior to issuance of tax credits.
 	4.	The authority shall require an eligible business to enter into an incentive agreement prior to the issuance of tax credits.  The incentive agreement shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
 
	a.	A detailed description of the proposed project which will result in job creation or retention, and the number of new or retained full-time jobs that are approved for tax credits.
 
	b.	The eligibility period of the tax credits, including the first year for which the tax credits may be claimed.
 
	c.	Personnel information that will enable the authority to administer the program.
 
	d.	A requirement that the applicant maintain the project at a location in New Jersey for the commitment period, with at least the minimum number of full-time employees as required by this program, except as otherwise agreed to pursuant to subsection h. of section 6 of P.L.2011, c.159 (C.34:1B-247) and a provision to permit the authority to recapture all or part of any tax credits awarded, at its discretion, if the business does not remain in compliance with this provision for the required term, and in the instance of the business terminating an existing incentive agreement in order to participate in an incentive agreement authorized pursuant to the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.), such permitted recapture may be calculated to recognize the period of time that the business was in compliance prior to termination.
 
	e.	A method for the business to certify that it has met the capital investment and employment requirements of the program pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection a. of section 3 of P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-244) and to report annually to the authority the number of full-time employees for which the tax credits are to be made.
 
	f.	A provision permitting an audit of the payroll records of the business from time to time, as the authority deems necessary.
 
	g.	A provision which permits the authority to amend the agreement.
 
	h.	A provision establishing the conditions under which the agreement may be terminated.
 
	L.2011, c.149, s.4; amended 2013, c.161, s.9; 2020, c.156, s.121.

34:1B-246  Total amount of tax credit for eligible business.
 	5. a. The total amount of the tax credit for an eligible business for each new or retained full-time job shall be as set forth in subsections b. through f. of this section.  The total tax credit amount shall be calculated and credited to the business annually for each year of the eligibility period. Notwithstanding any other provisions of P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.), a business may assign its ability to apply for the tax credit under this subsection to a non-profit organization with a mission dedicated to attracting investment and completing development and redevelopment projects in a Garden State Growth Zone.  The non-profit organization or organization operating a qualified incubator facility may make an application on behalf of a business which meets the requirements for the tax credit, or a group of non-qualifying businesses or positions, located at a qualified business facility, that shall be considered a unified project for the purposes of the incentives provided under this section.  For any project located in a Garden State Growth Zone that qualifies under the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), or any project located in a Garden State Growth Zone which contains a Tourism District as established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2011, c.18 (C.5:12-219) and regulated by the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority, and which will include a retail facility of at least 150,000 square feet, of which at least 50 percent will be occupied by either a full-service supermarket or grocery store, a business may assign its ability to apply for the tax credit under this subsection to the developer of the facility.  The developer may make an application on behalf of the business which meets the requirements for the tax credit, or a group of non-qualifying businesses located at the business facility, that shall be considered a unified project for the purposes of the incentives provided under this section, and the developer may apply for tax credits available based on the number of jobs provided by the business or businesses and the total capital investment of the business or businesses and the developer.
 
	b.	The base amount of the tax credit for each new or retained full-time job shall be as follows: 
 
	(1) (a) for a qualified business facility located within an urban transit hub municipality, located within a Garden State Growth Zone, or which is a mega project, $5,000 per year;
 
	(b)  for a qualified business facility located within a Garden State Create Zone and used by an eligible business in a targeted industry to conduct a collaborative research relationship with a doctoral university within the zone, $5,000 per year;
 
	(2)	for a qualified business facility located within a distressed municipality but not qualifying under paragraph (1) of this subsection, $4,000 per year; 
 
	(3)	for a project in a priority area, $3,000 per year; and 
 
	(4)	for a project in other eligible areas, $500 per year.
 
	c.	In addition to the base amount of the tax credit, the amount of the tax credit to be awarded for each new or retained full-time job shall be increased if the qualified business facility meets any of the following priority criteria or other additional or replacement criteria determined by the authority from time to time in response to evolving economic or market conditions: 
 
	(1)	for a qualified business facility located in a deep poverty pocket or in an area that is the subject of a Choice Neighborhoods Transformation Plan funded by the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development, an increase of $1,500 per year; 
 
	(2)	for a qualified business facility located in a qualified incubator facility, an increase of $500 per year; 
 
	(3)	for a qualified business facility located in a mixed-use development that incorporates sufficient moderate income housing on site to accommodate a minimum of 20 percent of the full-time employees of the business, an increase of $500 per year; 
 
	(4)	for a qualified business facility located within a transit oriented development, an increase of $2,000 per year; 
 
	(5)	for a qualified business facility, other than a mega project, at which the capital investment in industrial premises for industrial use by the business is in excess of the minimum capital investment required for eligibility pursuant to subsection b. of section 3 of P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-244), an increase of $1,000 per year for each additional amount of investment that exceeds the minimum amount required for eligibility by 20 percent, with a maximum increase of $3,000 per year;
 
	(6)	for a business with new full-time jobs and retained full-time jobs at the project with an average salary in excess of the existing average salary for the county in which the project is located, or, in the case of a project in a Garden State Growth Zone, a business that employs full-time positions at the project with an average salary in excess of the average salary for the Garden State Growth Zone, an increase of $250 per year during the commitment period for each 35 percent by which the project's average salary levels exceeds the county or Garden State Growth Zone average salary, with a maximum increase of $1,500 per year; 
 
	(7)	for a business with large numbers of new full-time jobs and retained full-time jobs during the commitment period, the increases shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 
 
	(a)	if the number of new full-time jobs and retained full-time jobs is between 251 and 400, $500 per year; 
 
	(b)	if the number of new full-time jobs and retained full-time jobs is between 401 and 600, $750 per year; 
 
	(c)	 if the number of new full-time jobs and retained full-time jobs is between 601 and 800, $1000 per year; 
 
	(d)	if the number of new full-time jobs and retained full-time jobs is between 801 and 1,000, $1,250 per year; 
 
	(e)	if the number of new full-time jobs and retained full-time jobs is in excess of 1,000, $1,500 per year; 
 
	(8)	for a business in a targeted industry, an increase of $500 per year; 
 
	(9)	for a qualified business facility exceeding the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design's "Silver" rating standards or completes substantial environmental remediation, an additional increase of $250 per year; 
 
	(10) for a mega project or a project located within a Garden State Growth Zone at which the capital investment in industrial premises for industrial use by the business exceeds the minimum capital investment required for eligibility pursuant to subsection b. of section 3 of P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-244), an increase of $1,000 per year for each additional amount of investment that exceeds the minimum amount by 20 percent, with a maximum increase of $5,000 per year;
 
	(11) for a project in which a business retains at least 400 jobs and is located within the municipality in which it was located immediately prior to the filing of the application hereunder and is the United States headquarters of an automobile manufacturer, an increase of $1,500 per year;
 
	(12) for a project located in a municipality in Atlantic, Burlington, Camden, Cape May, Cumberland, Gloucester, Ocean, and Salem counties with a 2007 Municipality Revitalization Index greater than 465, an increase of $1,000 per year;
 
	(13) for a project located within a half-mile of any light rail station constructed after the effective date of P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.), an increase of $1,000 per year;
 
	(14) for a marine terminal project in a municipality located outside the Garden State Growth Zone, but within the geographical boundaries of the South Jersey Port District, an increase of $1,500 per year; 
 
	(15) for a project located within an area determined to be in need of redevelopment pursuant to sections 5 and 6 of P.L.1992, c.79 (C.40A:12A-5 and C.40A:12A-6), and which is located within a quarter mile of at least one United States Highway and at least two New Jersey State Highways, an increase of $1,500 per year; 
 
	(16) for a project that generates solar energy on site for use within the project of an amount that equals at least 50 percent of the project's electric supply service needs, an increase of $250 per year; 
 
	(17) for a qualified business facility that includes a vacant commercial building having over 1,000,000 square feet of office or laboratory space available for occupancy for a period of over one year, an increase of $1,000 per year; and
 
	(18) for an eligible business in a targeted industry at a qualified business facility on the campus of a college or university other than a doctoral university, or at a qualified business facility within a three-mile radius of the outermost boundary of the campus of a college or university other than a doctoral university, which facility is used by the business to conduct a collaborative research relationship with the college or university, an increase of $1,000 per year.  The boundary of the campus of a college or university shall be based upon a map appearing in the college's or university's official catalog or other official publication on the effective date of P.L.2017, c.221. 
 
	d.	The gross amount of the tax credit for an eligible business for each new or retained full-time job shall be the sum of the base amount as set forth pursuant to subsection b. of this section and the various additional bonus amounts for which the business is eligible pursuant to subsection c. of this section, subject to the following limitations:
 
	(1)	for a mega project or a project in a Garden State Growth Zone, the gross amount for each new or retained full-time job shall not exceed $15,000 per year; 
 
	(2)	for a qualified business facility located within an urban transit hub municipality or a Garden State Create Zone, the gross amount for each new or retained full-time job shall not exceed $12,000 per year;
 
	(3)	for a qualified business facility in a distressed municipality the gross amount for each new or retained full-time job shall not exceed $11,000 per year;
 
	(4)	for a qualified business facility in other priority areas, the gross amount for each new or retained full-time job shall not exceed $10,500 per year; 
 
	(5)	for a qualified business facility in other eligible areas, the gross amount for each new or retained full-time job shall not exceed $6,000 per year; and
 
	(6)	for a disaster recovery project, the gross amount for each new or retained full-time job shall not exceed $2,000 per year.
 
	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein and in the provisions of subsections a. through f. of this section, but subject to the provisions of paragraph (1) of subsection f. of this section, for a project located within a Garden State Growth Zone which qualifies for the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), which creates 35 or more full-time jobs new to the municipality, the total tax credit shall be:
 
	(a)	for a project which creates 35 or more full-time jobs new to the municipality and makes a capital investment of at least $5,000,000, the total tax credit amount per full-time job shall be the greater of: (i) the total tax credit amount for a qualifying project in a Garden State Growth Zone as calculated pursuant to subsections a. through f. of this section; or (ii) the total capital investment of the project divided by the total number of full-time jobs at that project but not greater than $2,000,000 per year over the grant term of ten years;
 
	(b)	for a project which creates 70 or more full-time jobs new to the municipality and makes a capital investment of at least $10,000,000, the total tax credit amount per full-time job shall be the greater of: (i) the total tax credit amount for a qualifying project in a Garden State Growth Zone as calculated pursuant to subsections a. through f. of this section; or (ii) the total capital investment of the project divided by the total number of full-time jobs at that project but not greater than $3,000,000 per year over the grant term of ten years;
 
	(c)	for a project which creates 100 or more full-time jobs new to the municipality and makes a capital investment of at least $15,000,000, the total tax credit amount per full-time job shall be the greater of: (i) the total tax credit amount for a qualifying project in a Garden State Growth Zone as calculated pursuant to subsections a. through f. of this section; or (ii) the total capital investment of the project divided by the total number of full-time jobs at that project but not greater than $4,000,000 per year over the grant term of ten years;
 
	(d)	for a project which creates 150 or more full-time jobs new to the municipality and makes a capital investment of at least $20,000,000, the total tax credit amount per full-time job shall be the greater of: (i) the total tax credit amount for a qualifying project in a Garden State Growth Zone as calculated pursuant to subsections a. through f. of this section; or (ii) the total capital investment of the project divided by the total number of full-time jobs at that project but not greater than $5,000,000 per year over the grant term of ten years; or
 
	(e)	for a project which creates 250 or more full-time jobs new to the municipality and makes a capital investment of at least $30,000,000, the total tax credit amount per full-time job shall be the greater of: (i) the total tax credit amount for a qualifying project in a Garden State Growth Zone as calculated pursuant to subsections a. through f. of this section; or (ii) the total capital investment of the project divided by the total number of full-time jobs as defined herein at that project divided by the ten-year grant term.
 
	e.	After the determination by the authority of the gross amount of tax credits for which a business is eligible pursuant to subsection d. of this section, the final total tax credit amount shall be calculated as follows: (1) for each new full-time job, the business shall be allowed tax credits equaling 100 percent of the gross amount of tax credits for each new full-time job; and (2) for each retained full-time job, the business shall be allowed tax credits equaling the lesser of 50 percent of the gross amount of tax credits for each retained full-time job, or one-tenth of the capital investment divided by the number of retained and new full-time jobs per year over the grant term of ten years, unless the jobs are part of a mega project which is the United States headquarters of an automobile manufacturer located within a priority area or in a Garden State Growth Zone, in which case the business shall be entitled to tax credits equaling 100 percent of the gross amount of tax credits for each retained full-time job, or unless the new qualified business facility would replace a facility that has been wholly or substantially damaged as a result of a federally-declared disaster, in which case the business shall be entitled to tax credits equaling 100 percent of the gross amount of tax credits for each retained full-time job.
 
	f.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections a. through e. of this section, for each application approved by the authority's board, the amount of tax credits available to be applied by the business annually shall not exceed: 
 
	(1)	$35,000,000 and provides a net benefit to the State as provided herein with respect to a qualified business facility in a Garden State Growth Zone which qualifies under the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), or which contains a Tourism District as established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2011, c.18 (C.5:12-219) and regulated by the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority;
 
	(2)	$30,000,000 and provides a net benefit to the State as provided herein with respect to a mega project or a qualified business facility in a Garden State Growth Zone; 
 
	(3)	$10,000,000 and provides a net benefit to the State as provided herein with respect to a qualified business facility in an urban transit hub municipality or a Garden State Create Zone; 
 
	(4)	$8,000,000 and provides a net benefit to the State as provided herein with respect to a qualified business facility in a distressed municipality; 
 
	(5)	$4,000,000 and provides a net benefit to the State as provided herein with respect to a qualified business facility in other priority areas, but not more than 90 percent of the withholdings of the business from the qualified business facility; and 
 
	(6)	$2,500,000 and provides a net benefit to the State as provided herein with respect to a qualified business facility in other eligible areas, but not more than 90 percent of the withholdings of the business from the qualified business facility.
 
	Under paragraphs (1) through (6) of this subsection, with the exception of a project located within a Garden State Growth Zone which qualifies for the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), or which contains a Tourism District as established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2011, c.18 (C.5:12-219) and regulated by the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority, that divides the total capital investment of the project by the total number of full-time jobs at that project, for each application for tax credits in excess of $4,000,000 annually, the amount of tax credits available to be applied by the business annually shall be the lesser of the maximum amount under the applicable subsection or an amount determined by the authority necessary to complete the project, with such determination made by the authority's utilization of a full economic analysis of all locations under consideration by the business; all lease agreements, ownership documents, or substantially similar documentation for the business's current in-State locations, as applicable; and all lease agreements, ownership documents, or substantially similar documentation for the potential out-of-State location alternatives, to the extent they exist.  Based on this information, and any other information deemed relevant by the authority, the authority shall independently verify and confirm the amount necessary to complete the project.
 
	L.2011, c.149, s.5; amended 2013, c.161, s.10; 2014, c.63, s.4; 2017, c.221, s.2.

34:1B-247  Limits on combined value of approved credits.
	6. a. (1) The combined value of all credits approved by the authority pursuant to P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-207 et seq.) and P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-242 et al.) prior to December 31, 2013 shall not exceed $1,750,000,000, except as may be increased by the authority as set forth in paragraph (5) of subsection a. of section 35 of P.L.2009, c.90 (C.34:1B-209.3). Following the enactment of the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.), there shall be no monetary cap on the value of credits approved by the authority attributable to the program pursuant to the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.).
 
	(2)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2013, c.161)
 
	(3)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2013, c.161)
 
	(4)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2013, c.161)
 
	(5)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2013, c.161)
 
	b. (1) A business shall submit an application for tax credits prior to July 1, 2019. The authority shall not approve an application for tax credits unless the application was submitted prior to July 1, 2019.
 
	(2) (a) A business shall submit its documentation indicating that it has met the capital investment and employment requirements and all conditions of approvals specified in the incentive agreement for certification of its tax credit amount, to the authority's satisfaction, within three years following the date of approval of its application by the authority. The authority shall have the discretion to grant two six-month extensions of this deadline. If the authority accepts the documentation, the authority shall request that the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury issue a tax credit based on the approved documentation to be used by the business during the eligibility period. Except as provided in subparagraphs (b) and (c) of this paragraph, in no event shall the incentive effective date occur later than four years following the date of approval of an application by the authority.
 
	(b)	As of the effective date of P.L.2017, c.314, a business which applied for the tax credit prior to July 1, 2014 under P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-242 et al.), shall submit its documentation to the authority no later than July 28, 2019, indicating that it has met the capital investment and employment requirements specified in the incentive agreement for certification of its tax credit amount.
 
	(c)	If the Governor declares an emergency, then the chief executive officer of the authority shall have the discretion to grant an extension for the duration of the emergency and the board of the authority, upon recommendation of the chief executive officer, may grant two additional six-month extensions; provided that (i) the extensions are due to the economic disruption caused by the emergency; (ii) the project is delayed due to unforeseeable acts related to the project beyond the eligible business's control and without its fault or negligence; (iii) the eligible business is using best efforts, with all due diligence, to proceed with the completion of the project and the submission of the certification; and (iv) the eligible business has made, and continues to make, all reasonable efforts to prevent, avoid, mitigate, and overcome the delay.
 
	(3)	Full-time employment for an accounting or privilege period shall be determined as the average of the monthly full-time employment for the period.
 
	(4)	A business seeking a credit for a mega project shall apply for the credit within four years after the effective date of the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.).
 
	c. (1) In conducting its annual review, the authority may require a business to submit any information determined by the authority to be necessary and relevant to its review.
 
	The credit amount may be taken by the tax certificate holder for the tax period for which it was issued or may be carried forward for use by the tax certificate holder in any of the next 20 successive tax periods and shall expire thereafter. The tax certificate holder may transfer the tax credit amount on or after the date of issuance or at any time after the date of issuance for use by the transferee in the tax period for which it was issued or in any of the next 20 successive tax periods.  In the case of a tax certificate received after the end of the tax period for which the tax certificate was issued, whether by transfer or original issuance, a tax certificate holder or transferee shall not be required to amend the tax return for the tax period for which the tax certificate was issued or any successive tax period if the credit is first applied in the tax period in which it was issued or in a succeeding tax period, as authorized in subsection k. of this section, and subject to the carry-forward provision in this section.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no more than the amount of tax credits equal to the total credit amount, divided by the duration of the eligibility period, in years, may be taken in any tax period.
 
	A business may elect to suspend its obligations for the 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023, or 2024 tax period, or any combination thereof, provided that the business shall make such election in writing to the authority no later than December 31, 2025 and such suspension shall extend the term of the eligibility period by a corresponding amount of time. The authority shall amend the incentive agreement, and the business shall execute the amended incentive agreement within the time period provided by the authority. The amended incentive agreement shall provide that the failure to submit the annual report due to the suspension shall not be a forfeiture or an uncertified tax period.
 
	(2)	Credits granted to a partnership shall be passed through to the partners, members, or owners, respectively, pro-rata or pursuant to an executed agreement among the partners, members, or owners documenting an alternate distribution method provided to the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury accompanied by any additional information as the director may require.
 
	(3)	The amount of credit allowed may be applied against the tax liability otherwise due pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), pursuant to sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or pursuant to N.J.S.17B:23-5.
 
	(4)	In order to respond to the profoundly negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the State's economy and finances, the authority may request a tax certificate holder, at the tax certificate holder's discretion, to defer the application of a credit amount allowed pursuant to this section to a later tax period. Upon request, the authority and the tax certificate holder shall negotiate the terms of the deferral, which shall hold the certificate holder harmless, which will be made in the incentive agreement or as an addendum to the incentive agreement.
 
	d. (1) If, in any tax period, the business reduces the total number of full-time employees in its Statewide workforce by more than 20 percent from the number of full-time employees in its Statewide workforce in the last tax period prior to the credit amount approval under section 3 of P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-244), then the business shall forfeit its credit amount for that tax period and each subsequent tax period, until the first tax period for which documentation demonstrating the restoration of the business's Statewide workforce to the threshold levels required by the incentive agreement has been reviewed and approved by the authority, for which tax period and each subsequent tax period the full amount of the credit shall be allowed.
 
	(2)	If, in any tax period, the number of full-time employees employed by the business at the qualified business facility located within a qualified incentive area drops below 80 percent of the number of new and retained full-time jobs specified in the incentive agreement, then the business shall forfeit its credit amount for that tax period and each subsequent tax period, until the first tax period for which documentation demonstrating the restoration of the number of full-time employees employed by the business at the qualified business facility to 80 percent of the number of jobs specified in the incentive agreement.
 
	(3) (a) If the qualified business facility is sold by the owner in whole or in part during the eligibility period, the new owner shall not acquire the capital investment of the seller and the seller shall forfeit all credits for the tax period in which the sale occurs and all subsequent tax periods, provided however that any credits of the business shall remain unaffected.
 
	(b)	In connection with a regional distribution facility of foodstuffs, the business entity or entities which own or lease the facility shall qualify as a business regardless of: (i) the type of the business entity or entities which own or lease the facility; (ii) the ownership or leasing of the facility by more than one business entity; or (iii) the ownership of the business entity or entities which own or lease the facility. The ownership or leasing, whether by members, shareholders, partners, or other owners of the business entity or entities, shall be treated as ownership or leasing by affiliates. The members, shareholders, partners, or other ownership or leasing participants and others that are tenants in the facility shall be treated as affiliates for the purpose of counting the full-time employees and capital investments in the facility. The business entity or entities may distribute credits to members, shareholders, partners, or other ownership or leasing participants in accordance with their respective interests. If the business entity or entities or their members, shareholders, partners, or other ownership or leasing participants lease space in the facility to members, shareholders, partners, or other ownership or leasing participants or others as tenants in the facility, the leases shall be treated as a lease to an affiliate, and the business entity or entities shall not be subject to forfeiture of the credits. For the purposes of this section, leasing shall include subleasing and tenants shall include subtenants.
 
	(4) (a) For a project located within a Garden State Growth Zone, if, in any tax period, the number of full-time employees employed by the business at the qualified business facility located within a qualified incentive area increases above the number of full-time employees specified in the incentive agreement, then the business shall be entitled to an increased base credit amount for that tax period and each subsequent tax period, for each additional full-time employee added above the number of full-time employees specified in the incentive agreement, until the first tax period for which documentation demonstrating a reduction of the number of full-time employees employed by the business at the qualified business facility, at which time the tax credit amount will be adjusted accordingly pursuant to this section.
 
	(b)	For a project located within a Garden State Growth Zone which qualifies under the "Municipal Rehabilitation and Economic Recovery Act," P.L.2002, c.43 (C.52:27BBB-1 et al.), or which contains a Tourism District as established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2011, c.18 (C.5:12-219) and regulated by the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority, and which qualifies for a tax credit pursuant to subsubparagraph (ii) of subparagraphs (a) through (e) of paragraph (6) of subsection d. of section 5 of P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-246), if, in any tax period the number of full-time employees employed by the business at the qualified business facility located within a qualified incentive area increases above the number of full-time employees specified in the incentive agreement such that the business shall then meet the minimum number of employees required in subparagraph (b), (c), (d), or (e) of paragraph (6) of subsection d. of section 5 of P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-246), then the authority shall recalculate the total tax credit amount per full-time job by using the certified capital investment of the project allowable under the applicable subsubparagraph and the number of full-time jobs certified on the date of the recalculation and applying those numbers to subparagraph (b), (c), (d), or (e) of paragraph (6) of subsection d. of section 5 of P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-246), until the first tax period for which documentation demonstrating a reduction of the number of full-time employees employed by the business at the qualified business facility, at which time the tax credit amount shall be adjusted accordingly pursuant to this section.
 
	e.	The authority shall not enter into an incentive agreement with a business that has previously received incentives pursuant to the "Business Retention and Relocation Assistance Act," P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.), the "Business Employment Incentive Program Act," P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et al.), or any other program administered by the authority unless:
 
	(1)	the business has satisfied all of its obligations underlying the previous award of incentives or is compliant with section 4 of P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-245); or
 
	(2)	the capital investment incurred and new or retained full-time jobs pledged by the business in the new incentive agreement are separate and apart from any capital investment or jobs underlying the previous award of incentives.
 
	f.	A business which has already applied for a tax credit incentive award prior to the effective date of the "New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of 2013," P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489p et al.), but who has not yet been approved for the tax credits, or has not executed an agreement with the authority, may proceed under that application or seek to amend the application or reapply for a tax credit incentive award for the same project or any part thereof for the purpose of availing itself of any more favorable provisions of the program.
 
	g.	A business that has entered into an incentive agreement may request before December 31, 2024 to terminate the incentive agreement, commencing with the 2020 tax period or any subsequent tax period ending on or before December 31, 2024, due to the COVID-19 public health emergency; provided that the business shall submit a certification from the business's chief executive officer or equivalent officer stating that the termination is due, directly or indirectly, to the public health emergency and describing the impact of the public health emergency on the business. All credits for the tax period in which the termination occurs and all subsequent tax periods shall be forfeited, provided however that any credits of the business shall remain unaffected. A termination agreement executed by the authority and business shall not be amended.
 
	h.	A business that has entered into an incentive agreement may request, before December 31, 2024, to reduce the number of new or retained full-time jobs specified in the incentive agreement based on a certification of the business of the eligible positions at the qualified business facility commencing with the 2020 tax period and, at the discretion of the business, whether the reduction shall continue for each subsequent tax period remaining in the eligibility period, provided that the business maintains the minimum number of new or retained full-time jobs required to be eligible pursuant to subsection c. of section 3 of P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-244). The reduction in employment shall first apply to the number of new full-time employees, and then shall apply to the number of retained full-time employees.
 
	The authority shall calculate a new tax credit total amount for the 2020 tax period and the remainder of the eligibility period based on the reduced employment and shall amend the incentive agreement to reflect the recalculated award amount. In no event shall the modification result in an increase in employment or tax credit amount.
 
	i.	Following the termination of the public health emergency declared by the Governor pursuant to Executive Order No. 103 of 2020, as extended, a business that has entered into an incentive agreement may elect, before March 31, 2024, to waive, for the period beginning on July 1, 2022 and ending on March 31, 2024, the requirement that a full-time employee who is employed by the business shall spend at least 60 percent of the employee's time at the qualified business facility; provided, however, that a business that makes such an election shall satisfy the following criteria:
 
	(1)	any full-time employee employed by the business shall spend at least 10 percent of the employee's time at the qualified business facility for the 2023 tax period and, if elected by the business, the 2024 tax period through March 31, 2024; and
 
	(2)	following the receipt by the business of its tax credit certificate or tax credit transfer certificate for the 2022 tax period, the business shall make a payment of an amount equal to five percent of the amount of tax credit the business receives for the 2022 tax period through March 31, 2024, which payment shall be made to the authority, and which payment the authority shall hold and make available for the provision of loans, guarantees, equity investments, and grants, or other forms of financing to support small business and downtown or commercial corridor activation activities within the municipality in which the qualified business facility is located, as may be designated by the chief executive officer of the authority.  Such funds shall be deployed by the authority within 12 months of the authority's receipt of the funds, and the authority shall issue a report each fiscal year to the Legislature, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), detailing how the funds were distributed.
 
	j.	Notwithstanding the provisions of section 2 of P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-243) or any other law or regulation to the contrary, beginning on April 1, 2024, and for all subsequent tax periods, a business located outside an enhanced area or government-restricted municipality, as those terms are defined in section 69 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-337) that has entered into an incentive agreement with the authority may elect to waive the requirement that a full-time employee who is employed by the business shall spend at least 60 percent of the employee's time at the qualified business facility, provided, however, that a business that makes this election shall satisfy the following criteria:
 
	(1)	 for a qualified business facility located outside an enhanced area or government-restricted municipality, as those terms are defined in section 69 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-337), any full-time employee employed by the business shall spend at least 40 percent of the employee's time at the qualified business facility during the tax period; 
 
	(2)	the business shall extend by two years the term of its commitment period beyond the time set forth in the incentive agreement; and
 
	(3)	at the time the business submits its tax credit certificate certification for the tax period, the business shall make a non-refundable payment of an amount equal to 10 percent of the amount of the maximum annual tax credit that the business is eligible to receive for the tax period, which payment shall be made to the authority and which payment the authority shall hold and make available for the provision of loans, guarantees, equity investments, and grants or other forms of financing to support small business and downtown or commercial corridor activation activities within enhanced areas or government-restricted municipalities, as those terms are defined in section 69 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-337), as may be designated by the chief executive officer of the authority.  Such funds shall be deployed by the authority within 12 months of the authority's receipt of the funds, and the authority shall issue a report each fiscal year to the Legislature, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), detailing how the funds were distributed.
 
	k.	Notwithstanding the provisions of any law to the contrary, the credit amount may first be taken by the tax certificate holder for the tax period for which it was issued, for the tax period in which it was issued, or in any tax period during the commitment period set forth in the incentive agreement.  The tax certificate holder may transfer the tax credit amount on or after the date of issuance for use by the transferee in the tax period for which it was issued, for the tax period in which it was issued, or in any of the next three successive tax periods.  The tax certificate holder or transferee may first use the credit against tax liabilities in the tax period in which it was issued or in a succeeding tax period, as authorized in this subsection, without being required to amend the tax return for the taxpayer for which the credit was issued, subject to the provisions of this section.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no more than the amount of tax credits equal to the total credit amount, divided by the duration of the tax credit term, in years, may be taken in any tax period.
 
	l.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection b. of this section or any law or regulation to the contrary, a business that has elected to modify its obligations under an incentive agreement pursuant to P.L.2022, c.134 may request, before December 31, 2024, to reduce the number of Statewide employees specified in the incentive agreement, provided the business certifies that the business is requesting to reduce the number of new or retained full-time jobs specified in the incentive agreement commencing with the 2020 tax period and, at the discretion of the business, whether the reduction shall continue for each subsequent tax period remaining in the eligibility period.
 
	L.2011, c.149, s.6; amended 2012, c.35, s.4; 2013, c.161, s.11; 2014, c.63, s.5; 2015, c.252, s.4; 2017, c.313, s.1; 2017, c.314, s.4; 2018, c.120, s.3; 2020, c.8, s.3; 2020, c.156, s.108; 2021, c.160, s.57; 2022, c.134, s.4; 2023, c.261, s.4; 2024, c.40, s.4; 2025, c.127, s.15.

34:1B-248  Application for tax credit transfer certificate.
 	7.	A business may apply to the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury and the chief executive officer of the authority for a tax credit transfer certificate, covering one or more years, in lieu of the business being allowed any amount of the credit against the tax liability of the business.  The tax credit transfer certificate, upon receipt thereof by the business from the director and the chief executive officer of the authority, may be sold or assigned, in full or in part, in an amount not less than $25,000, to any other person that may have a tax liability pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), pursuant to sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and 54:18A-3), pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or pursuant to N.J.S.17B:23-5. The certificate provided to the business shall include a statement waiving the business's right to claim that amount of the credit against the taxes that the business has elected to sell or assign.  The sale or assignment of any amount of a tax credit transfer certificate allowed under this section shall not be exchanged for consideration received by the business of less than 75 percent of the transferred credit amount before considering any further discounting to present value which shall be permitted, except that the 75 percent minimum measure of consideration shall not apply to the sale or assignment of a tax credit transfer certificate to an affiliate irrespective of whether the affiliate met the capital investment and employment requirements specified in the incentive agreement.  Any amount of a tax credit transfer certificate used by a purchaser or assignee against a tax liability shall be subject to the same limitations and conditions that apply to the use of the credit by the business that originally applied for and was allowed the credit.
 
	L.2011, c.149, s.7; amended 2014, c.63, s.6; 2017, c.313, s.2.

34:1B-249  Rules, regulations adopted by chief executive officer, authority.
 	8. a. The chief executive officer of the authority, in consultation with the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, shall adopt rules in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) as are necessary to implement P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-242 et al.), including but not limited to: examples of and the determination of capital investment; the enumeration of qualified incentive areas; the enumeration of specific targeted industries; specific delineation of the incentive areas; the determination of the limits, if any, on the expense or type of furnishings that may constitute capital improvements; the promulgation of procedures and forms necessary to apply for a tax credit, including the enumeration of the certification procedures and allocation of tax credits for different phases of a qualified business facility; and provisions for tax credit applicants to be charged an initial application fee, and ongoing service fees, to cover the administrative costs related to the tax credit.
 
	b.	Through regulation, the authority shall establish standards by which qualified business facilities shall be constructed or renovated in compliance with the minimum environmental and sustainability standards.
 
	c.	Through regulation, the chief executive officer of the authority, in consultation with the Secretary of Higher Education, shall establish standards for collaborative research relationships between businesses in targeted industries and colleges and universities sufficient to qualify a business for an enhanced base or bonus tax credit amount under P.L.2017, c.221).
 
	L.2011, c.149, s.8; amended 2013, c.161, s.12; 2017, c.221, s.3.

34:1B-250  Certain sales, conveyances authorized.
  
	9. a. Notwithstanding the provisions of P.L.1962, c. 220 (C.52:31-1.1 et seq.), P.L. 2011, c.85, or any other law or regulation to the contrary, and without the requirement for the approval by any other party or entity, the State Treasurer is hereby authorized to sell and convey, to the New Jersey Performing Arts Center, in one or more series of transactions, all or any portion of the State of New Jersey's right, title and interest in the land and improvements located in the City of Newark, County of Essex, now subject to the sublease between the State Treasurer and the New Jersey Performing Arts Center which appear on the tax map of the City of Newark and are designated as Block 125, Lots 23, 26 and 115, Block 126.01, Lot 21, such portion of Block 17, Lot 1, which was designated for commercial development pursuant to the sublease, and Block 17, Lots 20 and 21.  Such conveyances shall be on such terms and conditions, and for such consideration, as shall be determined by the State Treasurer in the State Treasurer's sole discretion.  The proceeds from any such sales and conveyances shall be deposited and applied as provided by law.  In the event that the identification of any of the property contained in this section by block and lot number is inaccurate, the State Treasurer is authorized to convey such blocks and lots which are subject to the sublease between the State Treasurer and the New Jersey Performing Arts Center as represent the actual parcels to be conveyed.
 
	b.	The State Treasurer is hereby authorized to enter into any agreements, and to amend any existing agreements, required to effectuate this sale and conveyance to the New Jersey Performing Arts Center and any such agreements and amendments shall not require the approval of any other party or entity, notwithstanding any other law or regulation to the contrary.
 
	c.	The New Jersey Economic Development Authority is hereby authorized to sell and convey all or any portion of its right, title, and interest in the property described in subsection a. of this section to the New Jersey Performing Arts Center, in one or more series of transactions on such terms and conditions, and for such consideration, as shall be determined by the authority in its sole discretion and to enter into any agreements and amend any existing agreements required to effectuate this sale and conveyance.  Any such sale or conveyance shall not require the approval of any other party or entity, notwithstanding any other law or regulation to the contrary.
 
	L.2011, c.149, s.9.

34:1B-251  Definitions relative to certain economic development projects.
	10. a. For the purposes of this section:

	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Government entity" means the State government, a local unit of government, or a State or local government agency or authority.
 
	"Providing public infrastructure" means undertaking and paying for the construction of public infrastructure; contributing money or paying debt service for the construction of public infrastructure; or deeding land to a government entity for use as public infrastructure.
 
	"Public infrastructure" means: (1) buildings and structures, such as schools; fire houses; police stations; recreation centers; public works garages; and water and sewer treatment and pumping facilities; (2) open space with improvements such as athletic fields; playgrounds; planned parks; (3) open space without improvements; and (4) public transportation facilities such as train stations and public parking facilities.  To qualify as public infrastructure under this section, the facilities, land, or both, shall have a minimum fair market value of $5 million; provided, however, that multiple lands and facilities, valued individually at less than $5 million, that are part of the same redevelopment project may be aggregated to achieve the minimum $5 million requirement.  In the case of open space without improvements, the land shall have a minimum fair market value of at least $1 million prior to its dedication as open space.  Sidewalks, streets, roads, ramps, and jug handles shall not be deemed public infrastructure for the purposes of this section.
 
	"Tax credit" means a credit equal to 100 percent of the applicant's cost of providing public infrastructure for use to offset a tax liability.
 
	"Tax liability" means a liability for the taxes imposed pursuant to the "Corporation Business Tax (1945)," P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-1 et seq.), and liability for basic, general, additional, and supplemental realty transfer fees imposed pursuant to P.L.1968, c.49 (C.46:15-5 et seq.), as amended and supplemented.
 
	"Urban transit hub municipality" means an urban transit hub municipality, as defined in section 2 of P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-243).
 
	b.	Commencing with October 24, 2014, the effective date of P.L.2014, c.63 (C.34:1B-251 et al.), and ending on December 31 of the fifth complete year next following, an applicant that has agreed to, or has provided, public infrastructure may apply to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority for a tax credit under the following conditions:
 
	(1)	The applicant or another entity by contract or development agreement either makes a new capital investment in an amount equal to or greater than $10,000,000 at any time during the term set forth in this subsection, or causes another entity by contract or development agreement to construct a building, complex of buildings or other similar structures or facilities, which relies on the completed public infrastructure and completes construction during the term set forth in this subsection.
 
	(2)	The applicant has not received a tax credit under the "Grow New Jersey Assistance Program" established by section 3 of P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-244).
 
	(3)	The applicant has not received a grant under a State or a local Economic Redevelopment and Growth Grant program pursuant to section 4 or section 5 of P.L.2009, c.90 (C.52:27D-489d or C.52:27D-489e).
 
	(4)	The applicant is not a "Garden State Growth Zone Development Entity," as defined in section 23 of P.L.2013, c.161 (C.52:27D-489r).
 
	(5)	The applicant is not partnered with the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority for the capital investment pursuant to this section.
 
	c.	The New Jersey Economic Development Authority shall grant an application for a tax credit if the government entity receiving the public infrastructure adopts a resolution and files it with the authority, consenting to the award of the tax credit and the ownership of the public infrastructure is transferred to that government entity, and either: (1) the construction commences after January 1, 2013; (2) the construction is completed, as evidenced by a certificate of occupancy or other certificate of completion, after January 1, 2013; (3) the first monetary or debt service payment occurs after January 1, 2013; or (4) the land is deeded to the government entity after January 1, 2013. 
 
	d. (1) (a) Except as provided in subparagraph (b) of this paragraph, the total amount of tax credits that may be awarded to an eligible applicant for a single project shall not exceed $5,000,000.
 
	(b)	In the case of an applicant engaged in a brownfields redevelopment project comprising park and infrastructure development within an urban transit hub municipality, the total amount of tax credits the authority may award to the applicant shall not exceed $2,000,000 cumulative of all applications submitted under this section by the applicant.  As used in this subparagraph, "applicant" means an entity applying for a tax credit pursuant to subsection b. of this section and shall include its subsidiaries, its parent, affiliated entities, and common principal owners.
 
	(c)	The total value of all tax credits approved by the authority pursuant to this section shall not exceed $22,000,000.
 
	(2)	A tax credit granted pursuant to this section may be transferred in the same manner as tax credits are transferred pursuant to section 7 of P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-248) and utilized in the same manner as provided pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection c. of section 6 of P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-247).
 
	(3)	Except for the limitations set forth in paragraph (1) of this subsection, nothing in this section shall prohibit an applicant from applying for and being awarded multiple tax credit awards based on separate public infrastructure projects.
 
	e.	The chief executive of the authority, in consultation with the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, may adopt rules and regulations pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), necessary to implement the provisions of this section.
 
	L.2014, c.63, s.10; amended 2015, c.217, s.2; 2017, c.313, s.3.

34:1B-252  Definitions relative to certain small business funding.
 	1.	As used in sections 1 and 2 of P.L.2016, c.84 (C.34:1B-252 et seq.):

	"Association" means a non-profit business advocacy association whose membership comprises small businesses in need of surety bonding.
 
	"Authority" shall have the same meaning as provided in section 3 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-3).
 
	"Fund" means the "Small Business Bonding Readiness Assistance Fund" established pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2016, c.84 (C.34:1B-253).
 
	"Program" means the "Small Business Bonding Readiness Assistance Program" established pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2016, c.84 (C.34:1B-253).
 
	"Small business" means a business engaged in the conduct of a trade or business in this State that qualifies as a "small business concern" within the meaning of the federal "Small Business Act," Pub.L.85-536 (15 U.S.C. s.631 et seq.) for the purpose of the small business's eligibility for performing a contract offered by the federal government or for assistance from the United States Small Business Administration.  "Small business" shall also include a small business established in this State that is certified, pursuant to federal law, under the United States Small Business Administration's 8(a) Business Development Program or the HUBZone Program, or as a Small Disadvantaged Business, or as a Section 3 business concern by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
 
	L.2016, c.84, s.1.

34:1B-253  "Small Business Bonding Readiness Assistance Program," "Small Business Bonding Readiness Assistance Fund."
	2. a. (1) The New Jersey Economic Development Authority shall establish and maintain a program to be known as the "Small Business Bonding Readiness Assistance Program" to provide support services to small businesses and to assist small businesses in securing surety bonding so that small businesses may bid on public works projects or perform contracts offered by the State or by the federal government.
 
	(2)	The authority shall enter into an agreement with a non-profit business advocacy association concerning the association's provision of support services and assistance to small businesses seeking surety bonding.  The support services and assistance provided shall be designed to increase small businesses' bonding knowledge and capacity in order for small businesses to qualify for surety bonding.  The support services and assistance to small businesses shall focus on improving small businesses' financial presentation, operational efficiency, profitability, and surety bonding capacity and knowledge through a series of workshops and strategic consulting sessions.
 
	b.	The authority shall establish the terms and conditions by which a small business may apply for the program.
 
	c.	The authority shall establish and maintain within the program a special non-lapsing revolving fund to be known as the "Small Business Bonding Readiness Assistance Fund" to provide grant funding to small businesses that participate in the program, grant funding to an association that provides small businesses participating in the program with support services and assistance, and to administer the program.
 
	d.	In administering the program and the fund, the authority shall establish:
 
	(1)	procedures and timelines for applications for the program;
 
	(2)	criteria for determining grant amounts to be disbursed from the fund to small businesses to meet their surety bond requirement;
 
	(3)	reporting requirements for small businesses accepted into the program and who receive a grant from the fund; and
 
	(4)	any other policies deemed necessary by the authority for the administration of the program and the fund.  The authority, in its sole discretion, may amend these policies at any time if the policies are established or amended in a manner consistent with the provisions of P.L.2016, c.84 (C.34:1B-252 et seq.).
 
	e.	The fund may be credited with:
 
	(1)	moneys made available by the authority for the purpose of the fund; and
 
	(2)	moneys received by the authority from any public or private donations.  The authority is authorized to seek and accept gifts, grants, or donations from private or public sources for deposit in the fund, except that the authority may not accept a gift, grant, or donation that is subject to conditions that are inconsistent with any other law of this State.
 
	L.2016, c.84, s.2.

34:1B-254  Definitions relative to financing of certain businesses.
	1.	As used in P.L.2017, c.261 (C.34:1B-254 et seq.):

	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Qualified business" means a business that qualifies, under criteria established by the authority, as a small, woman-owned, or minority-owned New Jersey-based business, manufacturer, redeveloper, or non-profit organization.
 
	"Regional center" means an area designated as a "regional center" in the State Development and Redevelopment Plan adopted pursuant to the "State Planning Act," P.L.1985, c.398 (C.52:18A-196 et al.).
 
	"Urban center" means an area designated as an "urban center" in the State Development and Redevelopment Plan adopted pursuant to the "State Planning Act," P.L.1985, c.398 (C.52:18A-196 et al.).
 
	L.2017, c.261, s.1.

34:1B-255  Certain businesses included.
 	2.	In the case of any undertaking by which the authority makes direct loans to qualified businesses located in an urban center that are unable to obtain funding from conventional sources, notwithstanding the assistance of an authority guarantee, the authority shall include within such an undertaking qualified businesses located in a regional center or in an area designated pursuant to P.L.1985, c.398 (C.52:18A-196 et seq.) as Planning Area 1 (Metropolitan).
 
	L.2017, c.261, s.2.

34:1B-256  Findings, declarations relative to tax credits for certain business headquarters.
 	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a. (1) the Grow New Jersey Assistance Program (Grow Program) is the State's premier job creation and retention business incentive program that offers eligible businesses creating or retaining jobs in New Jersey tax credits for making certain capital investments at certain locations in the State;
 
	(2)	according to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority (authority), the State agency that administers the Grow Program, as of the end of July 2017, the authority approved 229 projects, amounting to more than $4.4 billion in tax credits to be awarded after these businesses create or retain jobs and make capital investments;
 
	(3)	the authority reports that, collectively, these eligible businesses are to make a total capital investment of $3.85 billion, create 28,800 new full-time jobs, retain 30,420 jobs at risk of leaving the State, and create 15,730 estimated construction jobs, having an estimated net benefit to the State of $13.4 billion; and
 
	(4)	although the Grow Program is achieving its intended result of having businesses locate in the commercial areas of the State's cities and shuttered suburban office parks, thereby revitalizing these commercial areas, the State has opportunities from time to time to attract corporate headquarters that have the effect of transforming the economy of a region of the State.
 
	b.	Therefore, the Legislature determines that it is in the economic interest of the residents of this State that a new, enhanced business incentive program be created to supplement the Grow Program, where an eligible business creating at least 30,000 new, full-time, high-paying jobs and making a capital investment of at least $3 billion at a site in this State, be awarded an enhanced amount of tax credits by the authority for undertaking the construction of a corporate headquarters that has the effect of transforming the economy of a region of the State.
 
	L.2017, c.282, s.1.

34:1B-257  Definitions relative to tax credits for certain business headquarters.
 	2.	As used in P.L.2017, c.282 (C.34:1B-256 et seq.):

	"Affiliate" means an entity that directly or indirectly controls, is under common control with, or is controlled by the business. Control exists in all cases in which the entity is a member of a controlled group of corporations as defined pursuant to section 1563 of the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. s.1563) or the entity is an organization in a group of organizations under common control as defined pursuant to subsection (b) or (c) of section 414 of the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. s.414).  A taxpayer may establish by clear and convincing evidence, as determined by the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, that control exists in situations involving lesser percentages of ownership than required by those statutes.
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Business" means an applicant proposing to own or lease premises in a transformative corporate headquarters that is a corporation that is subject to the tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5.  A business shall include an affiliate of the business if that business applies for a credit based upon any capital investment made by or full-time employees of an affiliate.
 
	"Capital investment" in a transformative corporate headquarters means expenses by a business or any affiliate of the business incurred after application for:
 
	a.	site preparation and construction, repair, renovation, improvement, equipping, or furnishing on real property or of a building, structure, facility, or improvement to real property; and
 
	b.	obtaining and installing furnishings and machinery, apparatus, or equipment, including but not limited to material goods subject to bonus depreciation under sections 168 and 179 of the federal Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. s.168 and s.179), for the operation of a business on real property or in a building, structure, facility, or improvement to real property.
 
	In addition to the foregoing, if a business acquires or leases a transformative corporate headquarters, the capital investment made or acquired by the seller or owner, as the case may be, if pertaining primarily to the premises of the transformative corporate headquarters, shall be considered a capital investment by the business and, if pertaining generally to the transformative corporate headquarters being acquired or leased, shall be allocated to the premises of the transformative corporate headquarters on the basis of the gross leasable area of the premises in relation to the total gross leasable area in the transformative corporate headquarters.  The capital investment described herein may include any capital investment made or acquired within 24 months prior to the date of application so long as the amount of capital investment made or acquired by the business, any affiliate of the business, or any owner after the date of application equals at least 50 percent of the amount of capital investment, allocated to the premises of the transformative corporate headquarters being acquired or leased on the basis of the gross leasable area of the premises in relation to the total gross leasable area in the transformative corporate headquarters made or acquired prior to the date of application.
 
	"Commitment period" means the period of time that is one and a half times the eligibility period for each applicable phase agreement.
 
	"Director" means the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.
 
	"Eligibility period" means the period in which a business may claim a tax credit under the Transformative Headquarters Economic Assistance Program for a given project phase, beginning with the tax period in which the authority accepts certification of the business that it has met the capital investment and employment requirements of the respective phase of the program and extending thereafter for a term of not more than 10 years, with the term to be determined solely at the discretion of the applicant.
 
	"Eligible position" or "full-time job" means a new full-time position at a transformative corporate headquarters, which the business has filled with a full-time employee of that business.
 
	"Full-time employee" means a person:
 
	a.	who is employed by a business for consideration for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment; and
 
	b.	who is provided, by the business, with employee health benefits under a health benefits plan authorized pursuant to State or federal law.
 
	"Full-time employee" shall not include any person who works as an independent contractor or on a consulting basis for the business.  Full-time employee shall also not include any person who, at the time of the transformative corporate headquarters application, works in New Jersey for consideration for at least 35 hours per week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment but who prior to the application was not provided, by the business, with employee health benefits under a health benefits plan authorized pursuant to State or federal law.
 
	"Government entity" means the State government, a local unit of government, or a State or local government agency or authority.
 
	"Incentive agreement" means the contract between the business and the authority, which sets forth the terms and conditions under which the business shall be eligible to receive the incentives authorized pursuant to the Transformative Headquarters Economic Assistance Program.
 
	"Incentive phase agreement" means a sub-agreement of the incentive agreement that governs the timing, capital investment, employment levels, and other applicable details of the respective phase.
 
	"Incentive phase agreement effective date" means the date the authority issues a tax credit for a portion of the total tax credits awarded proportionate to the number of new full-time jobs created during the respective phase, based on documentation submitted by a business pursuant to subsection a. of section 6 of P.L.2017, c.282 (C.34:1B-261).
 
	"Minimum environmental and sustainability standards" means standards established by the authority in accordance with the green building manual prepared by the Commissioner of Community Affairs pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2007, c.132 (C.52:27D-130.6), regarding the use of renewable energy, energy-efficient technology, and non-renewable resources in order to reduce environmental degradation and encourage long-term cost reduction.
 
	"New full-time job" means an eligible position created by the business at the transformative corporate headquarters that did not previously exist in this State.
 
	"Program" means the "Transformative Headquarters Economic Assistance Program" established pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2017, c.282 (C.34:1B-258).
 
	"Providing public infrastructure" means:
 
	a.	undertaking and paying for the construction of public infrastructure;
 
	b.	contributing money or paying debt service for the construction of public infrastructure; or
 
	c.	deeding land to a government entity for use as public infrastructure.
 
	"Public infrastructure" means:
 
	a.	buildings and structures such as:  schools; fire houses; police stations; recreation centers; public works garages; and water and sewer treatment and pumping facilities;
 
	b.	open space with improvements such as: athletic fields; playgrounds; and planned parks;
 
	c.	open space without improvements;
 
	d.	public transportation facilities such as: train stations and public parking facilities; and
 
	e.	sidewalks, streets, roads, ramps, and jug handles.
 
	To qualify as "public infrastructure," the facilities, land, or both, shall have a minimum fair market value of $5,000,000; provided, however, that multiple lands and facilities, valued individually at less than $5,000,000, that are part of the same redevelopment project may be aggregated to achieve the minimum $5,000,000 requirement.  In the case of open space without improvements, the land shall have a minimum fair market value of at least $1,000,000 prior to its dedication as open space.
 
	"Qualified business facility" means within any building, complex of buildings or structural components of buildings, and all machinery and equipment, at one or more sites zoned for that purpose located anywhere within this State, used in connection with the operation of a business.
 
	"Transformative corporate headquarters" or "headquarters" means the corporate headquarters of a business that is a qualified business facility at which the business intends to create at least 30,000 new full-time jobs and make at least $3,000,000,000 in capital investment.
 
	L.2017, c.282, s.2.

34:1B-258  Transformative Headquarters Economic Assistance Program.
	3. a. The Transformative Headquarters Economic Assistance Program is hereby established as a program under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority and shall be administered by the authority.  The purpose of the program shall be to encourage economic development and job creation in New Jersey by providing tax credits to a business establishing a transformative corporate headquarters in this State, at which at least 30,000 new full-time jobs will be created and at least $3,000,000,000 in capital investment will be made.  To implement this purpose, the program may provide tax credits claimed by an eligible business for an eligibility period not to exceed 10 years per project phase.
 
	b.	To be eligible for any tax credits pursuant to P.L.2017, c.282 (C.34:1B-256 et seq.), a business's chief executive officer or equivalent officer shall demonstrate to the authority, at the time of application, that:
 
	(1)	the business, expressly including its landlord or seller, will make, acquire, or lease a capital investment equal to, or greater than, $3,000,000,000 at a transformative corporate headquarters at which it intends to create new full-time jobs in an amount equal to or greater than 30,000;
 
	(2)	the transformative corporate headquarters shall be constructed in accordance with the minimum environmental and sustainability standards as determined by the authority;
 
	(3) (a) the capital investment resultant from the award of tax credits and the resultant creation of full-time jobs will yield a net positive benefit to the State equaling at least 115 percent of the requested tax credit allocation amount where the net positive benefit determination shall be calculated for each phase and based on the benefits generated during a period of up to 50 years following completion of each phase of the transformative corporate headquarters, as determined by the authority, and shall equal at least 115 percent of the requested tax credit allocation amount; 
 
	(b)	an individual phase may generate a net benefit of less than 115 percent of the tax credit allocation amount, provided that the total of all phases calculated up to that point, including the current phase, is at least 115 percent; and
 
	(c) the calculation of future phases of the headquarters shall not be used to claim a net positive benefit to the State equaling at least 115 percent of the requested tax credit allocation amount towards the calculation of the current phase; and
 
	(4)	the award of tax credits will be a material factor in the business's decision to create at least 30,000 new full-time jobs at the headquarters for eligibility under the program.
 
	c.	The minimum capital investment required to be eligible under the program shall be $120 per square foot of gross leasable area for construction of a transformative corporate headquarters.
 
	d.	To assist the authority in determining whether a proposed capital investment will yield a net positive benefit, the business's chief executive officer, or equivalent officer, shall submit a certification to the authority indicating:
 
	(1)	that any projected creation of new full-time jobs at a transformative corporate headquarters would not occur but for the provision of tax credits under the program; and
 
	(2)	that the business's chief executive officer, or equivalent officer, has reviewed the information submitted to the authority and that the representations contained therein are accurate, provided however, that in satisfaction of the provisions of paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection b. of this section, the certification shall indicate that the provision of tax credits under the program is a material factor in the business decision to create the minimum number of  new full-time jobs set forth in the business's application and make a minimum amount of capital investment of $3,000,000,000 at a transformative corporate headquarters.
 
	In the event that this certification by the business's chief executive officer, or equivalent officer, is found to be willfully false, the authority may revoke any award of tax credits in their entirety, which revocation shall be in addition to any other criminal or civil penalties that the business and the officer may be subject to.
 
	L.2017, c.282, s.3.

34:1B-259  Incentive agreement prior to issuance of tax credits.
 	4.	The authority shall require an eligible business to enter into an incentive agreement prior to the issuance of tax credits.  The incentive agreement shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
 
	a.	a detailed description of the proposed transformative corporate headquarters, including the phases for completion of the headquarters and the number of new full-time jobs that are approved for tax credits;
 
	b.	an incentive phase agreement which for each phase, identifies a description of the phase, the expected capital investment and number of new full-time jobs, and the time following acceptance of the incentive agreement when each phase is to begin and be completed, with the awarding of tax credits under the incentive agreement to be predicated on the number of full-time jobs created through the fulfillment of each incentive phase agreement;
 
	c.	the eligibility period of the tax credits for each phase, including the first year for which the tax credits may be claimed;
 
	d.	personnel information that will enable the authority to administer the program;
 
	e. (1)  a  requirement that the applicant maintain each phase of the headquarters at a location in New Jersey for the commitment period and a provision to permit the authority to recapture all or part of any tax credits awarded, at its discretion, if the business does not remain in compliance with this provision for the required term according to the incentive phase agreement schedule required pursuant to subsection b. of this section;
 
	(2)	a provision which requires the applicant to complete a number of phases of the headquarters equal to 30,000 new full-time jobs and $3,000,000,000 in capital investment prior to the 20th year following authority approval of the incentive agreement and a provision setting forth the requirements pursuant to subsection c. of section 8 of P.L.2017, c.282 (C.34:1B-263) in the event the headquarters fails to achieve the required employment level of new full-time jobs or capital investment by the 20th year of the incentive agreement;
 
	(3)	a provision that up to $25,000,000 of the tax credits awarded to the business may be sold annually, pursuant to subsection c. of section 7 of P.L.2017, c.282 (C.34:1B-262), to a third party, provided that the maximum amount of tax credits the business may sell shall be $500,000,000, and that the proceeds from the sales of tax credit are used for providing public infrastructure;
 
	(4)	a provision that each phase shall have a minimum investment of $300,000,000 and that the first phase shall employ a minimum of 5,000 new full-time jobs; and
 
	(5)	in the instance of the business terminating an existing incentive agreement in order to participate in an incentive agreement authorized pursuant to P.L.2017, c.282 (C.34:1B-256 et seq.), the permitted recapture may be calculated to recognize the period of time that the business was in compliance prior to termination.
 
	f.	a method for the business to certify that the business has met the employment and capital investment requirements of the program, pursuant to incentive phase agreements and the incentive agreement towards the headquarters completion and job creation schedule, and to report annually to the authority the number of new full-time employees against which the tax credits are to be made;
 
	g.	a provision permitting an audit of the payroll records of the business from time to time, as the authority deems necessary;
 
	h.	a provision which permits the authority to amend the agreement; and
 
	i.	a provision establishing the conditions under which the agreement may be terminated.
 
	L.2017, c.282, s.4.

34:1B-260  Total amount of tax credit.
  	5. a.  The total amount of the tax credit awarded for an eligible business for each new full-time job shall be $10,000 per year for 10 years.  The total tax credit amount shall be calculated and credited to the business annually for each year of the eligibility period following the creation of the full-time job pursuant to the incentive phase agreements.
 
	b.	Following the enactment of P.L.2017, c.282 (C.34:1B-256 et seq.), there shall be no monetary cap on the value of credits approved by the authority attributable to the program.
 
	L.2017, c.282, s.5.

34:1B-261  Application for tax credits.
 	6. a.  (1)  A business shall submit an application for tax credits to the authority prior to July 1, 2019.  If the business requests additional time to submit its application, the authority shall have the discretion to grant one six-month extension of this deadline.  A business shall submit its documentation indicating that it has met the capital investment and employment requirements for the first phase, as specified in the incentive agreement and the incentive phase agreement, for certification of its tax credit amount within three years following the date of approval of its application by the authority.  The authority shall have the discretion to grant two, one-year extensions of this deadline.
 
	(2)	Full-time employment for a tax period shall be determined as the average of the monthly full-time employment for the tax period.
 
	b.	In conducting its annual review, the authority may require a business to submit any information determined by the authority to be necessary and relevant to its review.
 
	L.2017, c.282, s.6.

34:1B-262  Application of tax credit against tax liability.
 	7. a.  The total tax credit amount calculated and credited to the business annually for each year of the eligibility period may be applied against the tax liability otherwise due and required to be paid by the business pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and 54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5 for the privilege period or the tax accounting period of the business that coincides with the year of the business's eligibility period for which the tax credit has been issued.
 
	b.	The order of priority of the application of the tax credit issued to a business by the authority pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2017, c.282 (C.34:1B-260), and any other tax credits allowed by law, shall be as prescribed by the director.  The amount of the tax credit applied under this section against the tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and 54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5 for the privilege period or the tax accounting period, with any other credits allowed by law, shall not reduce the tax liability otherwise due and required to be paid to an amount less than zero.  If the tax credit issued to a business exceeds the amount of tax otherwise due and required to be paid, the amount of that excess may be carried over, if necessary, to the 50 privilege periods or tax accounting periods following the privilege period or taxable year for which the tax credit is first allowed to be applied.
 
	c.	A business issued an annual installment of a tax credit may apply to the authority and the director for a tax credit transfer certificate in lieu of the business being allowed any amount of the tax credit against the tax liability otherwise due and required to be paid by the business, subject to the limitations on the annual and total amounts of tax credits that may be sold pursuant to paragraph (3) of subsection e. of section 4 of P.L.2017, c.282 (C.34:1B-259).  The tax credit transfer certificate, upon receipt thereof by the business from the authority and the director, may be sold or assigned, in full or in part, to any other person that may have a tax liability pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and 54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5. The certificate issued to the business shall include a statement waiving the business's right to claim that amount of the annual installment of the tax credit against the taxes that the business has elected to sell or assign.  The sale or assignment of any amount of a tax credit transfer certificate allowed pursuant to this subsection shall not be sold or exchanged for consideration received by the business of less than 75 percent of the transferred tax credit amount.  The amount of any tax credit transfer certificate used by a purchaser or assignee against a tax liability otherwise due and required to be paid shall be subject to the same limitations and conditions that apply to the use of the credit by the business that was issued the annual installment of the tax credit.
 
	L.2017, c.282, s.7.

34:1B-263  Forfeiture, reduction of tax credit.
	8. a. If, in any tax period, the number of new full-time employees employed by the business at the headquarters drops below 80 percent of the number of new full-time jobs specified in the incentive phase agreements for all phases completed, then the business shall forfeit its credit amount for that tax period and each subsequent tax period, until the first tax period for which documentation demonstrating the restoration of the number of full-time employees employed by the business at the headquarters to 80 percent of the number of jobs specified in the incentive phase agreements for all phases completed.
 
	b.	If the headquarters is sold by the owner in whole or in part during the eligibility period, the new owner shall not acquire the capital investment of the seller and the seller shall forfeit all credits for the tax period in which the sale occurs and all subsequent tax periods, provided however, that any credits of the business shall remain unaffected.
 
	c.	If the headquarters fails to achieve an employment level of 30,000 new full-time jobs or a capital investment of at least $3,000,000,000 by the 20th year of the incentive agreement, then the business shall not receive any tax credits for an incomplete phase, and for a completed phase, if the total employment achieved is between:
 
	(1)	20,000 and 29,999 new full-time jobs, the amount of tax credits shall be reduced to $7,000 per employee per year;
 
	(2)	10,000 and 19,999 new full-time jobs, the amount of tax credits shall be reduced to $5,000 per employee per year; and
 
	(3)	5,000 and 9,999 new full-time jobs, the amount of tax credits shall be reduced to $3,000 per employee per year.
 
	The business shall repay any amount of tax credits allowed prior to the 20th year of the incentive agreement that is in excess of the amount calculated based on the reduced tax credit first by forfeiting any tax credit amounts carried over, pursuant to subsection b. of section 7 of P.L.2017, c.282 (C.34:1B-262), and then by payment of current funds.
 
	L.2017, c.282, s.8.

34:1B-264  Rules, regulations.
 	9. a. The chief executive officer of the authority, in consultation with the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, shall adopt rules and regulations pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) as are necessary to implement P.L.2017, c.282 (C.34:1B-256 et seq.), including but not limited to:
 
	(1)	examples of and the determination of capital investment at the headquarters;
 
	(2)	the determination of the limits, if any, on the expense or type of furnishings that may constitute capital improvements;
 
	(3)	the promulgation of procedures and forms necessary to apply for a tax credit, including the enumeration of the certification procedures and allocation of tax credits for different phases of a headquarters; and
 
	(4)	provisions for tax credit applicants to be charged an initial application fee and ongoing service fees to cover the administrative costs related to the tax credit.
 
	b.	Through regulation, the authority shall establish standards by which a headquarters shall be constructed or renovated in compliance with the minimum environmental and sustainability standards.
 
	L.2017, c.282, s.9.

34:1B-265  Employee rights to certain inventions.
	1. a.  (1) Any provision in an employment contract between an employee and employer, which provides that the employee shall assign or offer to assign any of the employee's rights to an invention to that employer, shall not apply to an invention that the employee develops entirely on the employee's own time, and without using the employer's equipment, supplies, facilities or information, including any trade secret information, except for those inventions that:
 
	(a)	relate to the employer's business or actual or demonstrably anticipated research or development; or
 
	(b)	result from any work performed by the employee on behalf of the employer.
 
	(2)	To the extent any provision in an employment contract applies, or intends to apply, to an employee invention subject to this subsection, the provision shall be deemed against the public policy of this State and shall be unenforceable.
 
	b.	No employer shall require a provision made void and unenforceable by this act as a condition of employment or continued employment.  Nothing in this act shall be construed to forbid or restrict the right of an employer to provide in contracts of employment for:
 
	(1)	disclosure, provided that any disclosure shall be received in confidence, of all of an employee's inventions made solely or jointly with others during the term of the employee's employment; 
 
	(2)	a review process by the employer to determine any issues that may arise; and
 
	(3)	full title to certain patents and inventions to be in the United States, as required by contracts between the employer and the United States or any of its agencies.
 
	c.	Nothing in this act shall be deemed to impede or otherwise diminish the rights of alienation of inventors or patent-owners.
 
	L.2017, c.346, s.1.

 34:1B-266.  Definitions relative to vineyards and wineries
	1.	As used in P.L.2019, c.34 (C.34:1B-266 et seq:
 
	"Authority" shall have the same meaning as provided in section 3 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-3).
 
	"Department" means the Department of Agriculture established pursuant to R.S.4:1-1.
 
	"Qualified capital expense" means all expenditures made by an eligible vineyard or winery for land acquisition or improvement, infrastructure acquisition or modernization, and the purchase or modernization of machinery and equipment, including:
 
	a.	barrels;
 
	b.	bins;
 
	c.	bottling equipment;
 
	d.	canopy management machines;
 
	e.	capsuling equipment;
 
	f.	chemicals;
 
	g.	corkers;
 
	h.	crushers;
 
	i.	deer control fencing;
 
	j.	destemmers;
 
	k.	fermenters or other recognized fermentation devices;
 
	l.	fertilizer and soil amendments;
 
	m.	filters;
 
	n.	fruit harvesters;
 
	o.	fruit plants;
 
	p.	hoses;
 
	q.	irrigation equipment;
 
	r.	labeling equipment;
 
	s.	lugs;
 
	t.	mowers;
 
	u.	poles;
 
	v.	posts;
 
	w.	presses;
 
	x.	pruning equipment;
 
	y.	pumps;
 
	z.	refractometers;
 
	aa.	refrigeration equipment;
 
	bb.	seeders;
 
	cc.	soil;
 
	dd.	small tools;
 
	ee.	tanks;
 
	ff.	tractors;
 
	gg.	vats;
 
	hh.	weeding and spraying equipment;
 
	ii.	wine tanks;
 
	jj.	wire; and
 
	kk.	any other items as approved by the authority in consultation with the department.
 
	"Vineyard" means agricultural lands located in the State consisting of at least one contiguous acre dedicated to the growing of grapes or other fruit that are used or are intended to be used in the production of wine by a winery as well as any other plants or other improvements located thereon.
 
	"Winery" means a commercial farm where the owner or operator of the commercial farm has been issued and is operating in compliance with a plenary winery license or farm winery license pursuant to R.S.33:1-10.
 
	L.2019, c.34, s.1.
 
34:1B-267.  Maintenance, administration of loan program and application process
	2. a. The New Jersey Economic Development Authority, in consultation with the Department of Agriculture, shall maintain and administer a loan program and application process for the purpose of providing loans to eligible vineyards or wineries to pay for qualified capital expenses.
 
	b.	A loan to an eligible vineyard or winery authorized under P.L.2019, c.34 (C.34:1B-266 et seq.) shall be made pursuant to a loan agreement with the authority and shall contain any terms and conditions considered appropriate by the authority that are consistent with the purposes of P.L.2019, c.34 (C.34:1B-266 et seq.).  The provisions of the loan agreement shall include, but not be limited to, a statement the proportional shares of ownership in eligible vineyard or winery, equipment usage and maintenance responsibilities, and loan repayment responsibilities for any loan proceeds received under the loan program.
 
	c.	The authority may, in its discretion, require an eligible vineyard or winery that receives a loan authorized pursuant to P.L.2019, c.34 (C.34:1B-266 et seq.) to submit an annual audited financial statement to the authority in order to ensure the continued viability of all vineyard or winery operations.
 
	d.	The authority may, either through the adoption of rules and regulations, or through the terms of the loan agreement made pursuant to subsection c. of this section, establish terms governing the incidence of default by an eligible vineyard or winery that receives a loan under the program administered pursuant to P.L.2019, c.34 (C.34:1B-266 et seq.).
 
	L.2019, c.34, s.2.
 
34:1B-268.  Rules, regulations
	3.	The authority, in consultation with the department, may adopt rules and regulations, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of P.L.2019, c.34 (C.34:1B-266 et seq.).
 
	L.2019, c.34, s.3.

34:1B-268.1  Definitions.
	1.	As used in this act:
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Employee with disabilities" means an individual with disabilities, as determined pursuant to State or federal law, who is employed by a qualified small to medium-sized business and who requires reasonable accommodation from the qualified business to perform the essential functions of a job at the qualified business.
 
	"Qualified small to medium-sized business" or "qualified business" means a business that:
 
	a.	is registered to do business in this State;
 
	b.	maintains a business location or otherwise derives a majority of its income from business activities or operations conducted within this State;
 
	c.	has no more than 100 employees in any calendar month during the taxable year in which the business is conducted or operated for a profit; and
 
	d.	has a net income of not more than $1,000,000 from all business activities or operations conducted within and outside of this State during the taxable year in which the business applies for a loan under loan program established pursuant to section 2 of this act.
 
	"Reasonable workplace accommodation" means any change to the application or hiring process for a job with a qualified small to medium-sized business, to the way in which the job is performed, or to the work environment that allows an employee with disabilities who is qualified for the job to perform the essential functions of that job and enjoy equal employment opportunities. "Reasonable workplace accommodation" shall not create an undue hardship to the qualified business.

	L.2021, c.424, s.1.

34:1B-268.2  Loan program established; funding workplace accomodations.
	2.	a.  The New Jersey Economic Development Authority shall establish and administer a loan program to assist qualified small to medium-sized businesses in funding the costs of providing reasonable workplace accommodations for employees with disabilities.
 
	b.	(1) A small to medium-sized business seeking a loan pursuant to this section shall apply to the authority, in a form and manner as determined by the authority, and shall include information concerning the proposed accessibility improvements that the loan funds will be used to make, along with any additional information that the authority determines is necessary for participation in the loan program established pursuant to the provisions of this act.
 
	(2)	The authority shall review completed applications and approve those applications that meet the requirements of this act. In order to receive a loan from the authority pursuant to this act, the small to medium-sized business shall be deemed by the authority to meet the criteria of a qualified small to medium-sized business and any other criteria established by the authority for that purpose pursuant to rules and regulations adopted by the authority pursuant to section 3 of this act.
 
	(3)	A qualified small to medium-sized business that applies for a loan under the loan program established pursuant to this act shall not be disqualified from qualifying for any other business assistance program administered by the authority or any other State agency by virtue of receiving a loan under the loan program established pursuant to this act.
 
	c.	A loan to a qualified small to medium-sized business shall:
 
	(1)	be made pursuant to a loan agreement with the authority;
 
	(2)	bear interest at lower rates and with more flexible repayment terms than are available to businesses from private lenders through conventional business loans, as deemed appropriate by the authority; and
 
	(3)	contain other terms and conditions considered appropriate by the authority that are consistent with the purposes of this act and with rules and regulations adopted by the authority pursuant to section 3 of this act.
 
	d.	The authority shall require a qualified small to medium-sized business that receives a loan pursuant to this act to submit an annual audited financial statement to the authority in order to ensure the continued viability of the qualified business. The financial statement shall be accompanied by a disclosure statement from the qualified business, on a form and in a manner determined by the authority under rules and regulations adopted pursuant to section 3 of this act, showing evidence that:
 
	(1)	the qualified business purchased and installed equipment that is used to provide a reasonable workplace accommodation to an employee with disabilities; and
 
	(2)	an employee with disabilities provided with an accommodation is employed by the qualified business on the date of submission of the disclosure statement to the authority.
 
	e.	The authority may, either through the adoption of rules and regulations, or through the terms of the loan agreement made pursuant to subsection c. of this section, establish terms governing the incidence of default by a qualified small to medium-sized business that receives a loan under the loan program established pursuant to this act.
 
	f.	The authority may participate in, cooperate with, and utilize any programs of any agency or instrumentality of the federal government, or of any loan or other program of the authority or any other State agency in the administration of the loan program established pursuant to this act.
 
	g.	The authority shall advertise to the public of the availability of the provision of loans to qualified small to medium-sized businesses and other provisions of the loan program established pursuant to this act in a manner determined by the authority.

	L.2021, c.424, s.2.

34:1B-268.3  Short title.
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Social Innovation Act."

	L.2021, c.434, s.1.

34:1B-268.4  Definitions.
	2.	As used in P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.3 et seq.):
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, established pursuant to P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.).
 
	"Eligible organization" means a nonprofit organization that is exempt from federal taxation pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 26 U.S.C. s.501 or a for-profit organization that has applied for participation in the social innovation loan pilot program established pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.5), and is selected by the study commission as qualified to receive a loan guarantee from the "social innovation loan fund" established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.7).
 
	"Pilot program" means the social innovation loan pilot program established pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.5).
 
	"Social innovation loan fund" or "fund" means the fund established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.7).
 
	"Study commission" means the "New Jersey Social Innovation Study Commission" established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.6).
 
	"Treatment and prevention services" means any early intervention health care, which shall include, but not limited to, treatment and prevention of opioid and other substance use disorders.

	L.2021, c.434, s.2.

34:1B-268.5  Social innovation loan pilot program established; effectiveness, scope determined.
	3.	a.  There is established a five-year social innovation loan pilot program within the New Jersey Economic Development Authority to administer and determine the effectiveness of a social innovation loan pilot program. The pilot program shall concern nonprofit health care services with the purpose of encouraging private investment in public health care services, including, but not limited to, treatment and prevention services, and to reduce federal, State, and municipal expenditures related to those services. The pilot program shall assess the feasibility of expanding a social innovation loan pilot program Statewide and expanding the scope of social impact loan guarantees, made pursuant to subsection b. of this section, beyond the health care sector.
 
	b.	Under the pilot program established pursuant to subsection a. of this section, the authority shall guarantee loans issued to eligible organizations for the provision of public health care services which generate positive social outcomes and public sector cost savings. Each loan shall be facilitated by the study commission established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.6) and shall consist of:
 
	(1)	a lending agreement between an eligible organization, a lender, and a public sector entity which shall include terms that provide:
 
	(a)	the eligible organization with direct funding from a lender in exchange for the provision of public health care services;
 
	(b)	the public sector entity with public health care services in exchange for defined payments to the lender in an amount proportional to the amount of public sector savings generated by the provision of those services; and
 
	(c)	the lender with loan repayments in exchange for the provision of funding to an eligible organization.
 
	(2)	a loan guarantee agreement between the authority and all parties to the lending agreement authorized pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection which shall require the terms of the lending agreement to conform to any loan requirements established pursuant to P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.3 et seq.) or by the authority; and
 
	(3)	an agreement between the authority, the public sector entity making performance payments, the eligible organization, and the lender which includes terms that require a method of measurement and verification of the public health care services to be performed, how the public sector savings are to be calculated, how the interest rate will be determined, and how funds shall flow between the parties according to each of the agreements made pursuant to this subsection.
 
	c.	Up to 100 percent of the value of a loan agreement entered into pursuant to subsection b. of this section may be guaranteed by the authority, provided that the total amount in the aggregate of all loans guaranteed under the social innovation loan pilot program established pursuant to P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.3 et seq.) shall not exceed $15,000,000.
 
	d.	The authority, in cooperation with the study commission and the Department of Human Services, shall offer to guarantee loans made pursuant to subsection b. of this section utilizing funds from the social innovation loan fund established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.7) to finance a project undertaken for the purposes of subsection b. of this section. The authority shall consider the following factors:
 
	(1)	The economic feasibility of the project;
 
	(2)	The degree to which the project will advance Statewide and regional strategies and objectives;
 
	(3)	The degree to which the project maximizes the leverage of other State funds; and
 
	(4)	The factors listed in paragraph (1) of subsection e. of section 4 of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.6).
 
	e.	A lender or nonprofit or for-profit organization seeking to participate in the social innovation loan pilot program shall submit an application in a form as the authority shall require. The application shall include any information the authority shall determine is necessary in consideration of the provisions of P.L.2011, c.123 (52:14B-21.1 et seq.).
 
	f.	A loan guarantee agreement entered into pursuant to subsection b. of this section shall provide that any loan guaranteed by the authority shall:
 
	(1)	be for a loan having a fair effective interest rate as determined by the authority; and
 
	(2)	contain other terms and conditions considered appropriate by the authority that are consistent with the purposes of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.3 et seq.) and with rules and regulations promulgated by the authority, pursuant to section 8 of P.L.2021, c.434, to implement P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.3 et seq.).
 
	g.	(1) Consistent with federal law, rule, or regulation, each eligible organization that receives a loan guarantee under P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.3 et seq.) shall undergo an audit, at the organization's own expense, at least once every two calendar years. The authority shall designate an independent auditor to conduct the audit.
 
	(2)	If an audit is performed under a requirement of federal law, rule, or regulation, the authority shall waive the audit required pursuant to this subsection with respect to all issues addressed by the federally required audit. However, the authority may require an audit of matters that are not, in the authority's judgment, addressed by the federally required audit, including, but not limited to, measurement and verification of health care intervention activities, and public sector savings.
 
	h.	A loan guarantee agreement made pursuant to subsection b. of this section shall provide that any loan guarantee issued by the authority shall be voided if the terms and conditions of the agreement are violated by any party to that loan securitization agreement.
 
	i.	The authority shall solicit grants from interested public or private sources for the establishment and administration of the pilot program and study commission as well as the capitalization of the "social innovation loan fund" established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.7).
 
	j.	The pilot program shall expire on the 30th day following the closing of all loans guaranteed pursuant to P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.3 et seq.).

	L.2021, c.434, s.3.

34:1B-268.6  "New Jersey Social Innovation Study Commission" established; duties; membership criteria.
	4.	a.  The authority shall oversee and staff a study commission, entitled the "New Jersey Social Innovation Study Commission," established for the duration of the pilot program.
 
	b.	The membership and size of the study commission shall be determined by the authority. The authority may consider a variety of professionals, including health care, lending, and social finance experts, for membership on the study commission. The study commission shall organize as soon as practicable after the appointment of the study commission members, shall select a chairperson from among its membership, and shall appoint a secretary who need not be a member of the commission. At least one member of the study commission shall be a representative of the Department of Human Services, one member shall be a representative of the Department of Health, and one member shall be the Executive Director of the Office of Faith-based Initiatives in the Department of State. All members of the study commission shall serve for term concurrent with the effective period of the pilot program.
 
	c.	Any vacancy in the membership of the study commission shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
 
	d.	The study commission may request the assistance and services of employees of any other State department, board, bureau, commission, task force, or agency as it may require and as may be available. Members of the study commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be entitled to employ stenographic and clerical assistance and incur traveling and other miscellaneous expenses as the study commission may deem necessary in order to perform its duties, within the limits of the funds made available to the study commission for its purposes. The study commission may meet at the call of its chairperson at the times and in the places the study commission may deem appropriate and necessary to fulfill its duties, and may conduct public hearings at a place or places as the study commission shall designate. The study commission shall conduct its meetings in accordance with the "Senator Byron M. Baer Open Public Meetings Act," P.L.1975, c.231 (C.10:4-6 et seq.).
 
	e.	It shall be the duty of the study commission to aid the authority in the administration of the social innovation loan pilot program and to issue annual reports detailing the progress of the pilot program. Specifically, the study commission, in cooperation with the authority and the Department of Human Services shall:
 
	(1)	identify the nonprofit and for-profit organizations that will be eligible to receive loan guarantees from the authority. The study commission shall make this determination taking several factors into consideration which shall include, but not be limited to, the size and identity of the target population that benefits from the nonprofit or for-profit organization service provider, the projected financial value of the improvements as a result of the social innovation loan investments, including projected public sector savings, the ability to repay the loan in full, the ease of the measurability of the outcomes, and an analysis of impacts beyond financial savings and returns, such as social outcomes;
 
	(2)	assist the authority in soliciting donations from philanthropic organizations and other private sources to capitalize the loan fund;
 
	(3)	negotiate contract terms and conditions between social innovation loan recipients and any public entity for whom the recipient is performing health care intervention services, including the development of metrics to project and measure both financial and social outcomes, and the identification of independent third parties to measure and evaluate outcomes;
 
	(4)	determine whether an independent intermediary with expertise in the areas of social finance and health care should be retained to:
 
	(a)	assist the study commission in the performance of its duties under this section; or
 
	(b)	perform the method of measurement and verification activities required in the agreements entered into pursuant to paragraph (3) of subsection b. of section 3 of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.5), and to identify appropriate independent intermediaries to recommend to the authority if the study commission determines that intermediary services should be retained; and
 
	(5)	any other purposes related to the pilot program for which the authority requests assistance.
 
	f.	Not later than one year following the effective date of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.3 et seq.), and annually for four years thereafter, the study commission shall submit to the Governor and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), to the Legislature, a report containing a study and evaluation of the pilot program. The report shall include, but not be limited to, a description of any eligible organizations funded by the social innovation loans, State, federal, and municipal financial savings related to the issuance of social innovation loans, including Medicaid savings, the expected loan performance and projected payment schedule, the number of people serviced by the eligible organization, a comparison of the population serviced by the eligible organization and a similarly situated control group, and any community impact related to the pilot program.
 
	g.	The study commission shall submit its fifth and final report to the Governor and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), to the Legislature, within 90 days of the expiration date of the pilot program, including any recommendations for legislation it deems appropriate. The study commission's final report shall include, but not be limited to, an analysis of the feasibility of implementing a permanent social innovation loan program Statewide, the sectors outside of non-profit health care in which social lending could be successfully applied, the estimated costs for the creation and administration of the permanent social innovation loan program, the projected State, federal, and municipal savings from administering the permanent program, a calculation of the loan performance realized from the pilot program, a calculation of the State, federal, and municipal savings accrued through the pilot program, and an analysis of non-financial outcomes, such as community impact and preventive results. The study commission shall expire on the 30th day after the date of the issuance of its final report, or upon the expiration of the pilot program, whichever occurs later.

	L.2021, c.434, s.4.

34:1B-268.7  "Social innovation loan fund" established; funds appropriated.
	5.	a.  To implement the social innovation loan pilot program, the authority shall establish and maintain a special non-lapsing, revolving fund called the "social innovation loan fund" which may be credited with:
 
	(1)	monies appropriated by the State for the purpose of the fund;
 
	(2)	monies received by the authority from any public or private donations to be used to guarantee a loan issued pursuant to subsection f. of section 3 of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.5);
 
	(3)	any monies as may be available to the authority from grants or other forms of assistance established to support health care intervention activities by the authority or by other State or federal agencies or authorities; and
 
	(4)	monies received from eligible organizations in the form of any applicable fees.
 
	b.	Loan funds may be used by the authority for the following purposes:
 
	(1)	guaranteeing loans issued pursuant to subsection b. of section 3 of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.5);
 
	(2)	reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the authority related to the administration of the pilot program and the study commission; and
 
	(3)  administrative expenses for the provision of loan guarantees issued pursuant to subsection b. of section 3 of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.5).
 
	c.	The amount of loans guaranteed by the authority pursuant to subsection b. of section 3 of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.5) shall not exceed $3,000,000 per year or $15,000,000 in the aggregate over five years, as determined by the authority.
 
	d.	The authority shall not issue a loan guarantee in an amount greater than the available and uncommitted monies in the loan fund.
 
	e.	The authority may charge fees in connection with applications for participation in the social innovation loan pilot program as it deems reasonable to cover authority expenses in administering the pilot program and issuing loan guarantees.
 
	f.	The activities required pursuant to P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.3 et seq.) shall only be paid from monies deposited into the "social innovation loan fund," established pursuant to subsection a. of this section.

	L.2021, c.434, s.5.

34:1B-268.8  Director to manage "social innovation loan fund."
	6.	a. The authority shall appoint a director to manage the activities associated with the "social innovation loan fund" established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.7). The director shall receive compensation as determined by the authority.
 
	b.	Except as provided in subsection a. of this section, the activities required pursuant to P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.3 et seq.) shall only be staffed from existing authority staff resources.

	L.2021, c.434, s.6.

34:1B-268.9  Report issued to Governor, Legislature; detailing financing, loan guarantee recipients.
	7.	The authority shall issue a report six months after the effective date of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.3 et seq.), and annually thereafter not later than September 15, to the Governor and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), to the Legislature concerning the financing of the pilot program as described in section 5 of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.7), undertaken with monies from the "social innovation loan fund." The initial report and each annual report required pursuant to this section shall include the number of eligible organizations receiving loan guarantees from the fund, the name of each eligible organization receiving loan guarantees from the fund, the amount of money each eligible organization receives from the fund, a description of each pilot program funded by loans issued to eligible organizations, and a detailed analysis of the consideration given to the factors set forth in subsection d. of section 3 of P.L.2021, c.434 (C.34:1B-268.5).

	L.2021, c.434, s.7.

34:1B-269  Short title.
  	1.	P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.) shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Economic Recovery Act of 2020."
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.1.

34:1B-270  Short title.
 	2.	Sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through C.34:1B-276) shall be known and may be cited as the "Historic Property Reinvestment Act."
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.2.

34:1B-271  Definitions.
	3.	As used in sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through C.34:1B-276):
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Board" means the Board of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Building services" means any cleaning or routine building maintenance work, including, but not limited to, sweeping, vacuuming, floor cleaning, cleaning of rest rooms, collecting refuse or trash, window cleaning, securing, patrolling, or other work in connection with the care or securing of an existing building, including services typically provided by a door-attendant or concierge.  "Building services" shall not include any skilled maintenance work, professional services, or other public work for which a contractor is required to pay the "prevailing wage" as defined in section 2 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.26).
 
	"Cost of rehabilitation" means the consideration given, valued in money, whether given in money or otherwise, for the materials and services which constitute the rehabilitation and includes all costs associated with the structural components within a qualified property or transformative property and any soft costs associated with a rehabilitation project, except not including any costs associated with an increase in total building volume.
 
	"Cost of facade rehabilitation" means the consideration given, valued in money, whether given in money or otherwise, for the materials and services which constitute the facade rehabilitation project, including all costs associated with necessary work to address structural components embedded within exterior walls, repair, reconstruction, or replacement of masonry units and mortar, exterior siding fabric, doors, windows, exterior lighting fixtures, and decorative components, such as metalwork, terracotta units, and cast stone, except not including any costs associated with demolition or interior construction.
 
	"Director" means the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.
 
	"Exterior building features" include, but shall not be limited to, structural components embedded within exterior walls, masonry units and mortar, exterior siding fabric, doors, windows, exterior lighting fixtures, and decorative components, such as metalwork, terracotta units, and cast stone.
 
	"Facade rehabilitation project" means a project consisting of the repair or reconstruction of exterior building features which constitute the facades of a qualified property or transformative property while preserving the portions or features of the property that have significant historical, architectural, and cultural values.
 
	"Government-restricted municipality" means a municipality in this State with a municipal revitalization index distress score of at least 75, that met the criteria for designation as an urban aid municipality in the 2019 State fiscal year, and that, on the effective date of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.), is subject to financial restrictions imposed pursuant to the "Municipal Stabilization and Recovery Act," P.L.2016, c.4 (C.52:27BBBB-1 et seq.), or is restricted in its ability to levy property taxes on property in that municipality as a result of the State of New Jersey owning or controlling property representing at least 25 percent of the total land area of the municipality or as a result of the federal government of the United States owning or controlling at least 50 acres of the total land area of the municipality, which is dedicated as a national natural landmark.
 
	"Income producing property" means a structure or site that is used in a trade or business or to produce rental income.
 
	"New Jersey S corporation" means the same as the term is defined in section 12 of P.L.1993, c.173 (C.54A:5-10).
 
	"Officer" means the State Historic Preservation Officer or the official within the State designated by the Governor or by statute in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3023 of Title 54, United States Code (54 U.S.C. s.302301 et seq.), to act as liaison for the purpose of administering historic preservation programs in the State.
 
	"Partnership" means an entity classified as a partnership for federal income tax purposes.
 
	"Project financing gap" means the part of the total cost of rehabilitation, including reasonable and appropriate return on investment, that remains to be financed after all other sources of capital have been accounted for, including, but not limited to, developer contributed capital, which shall not be less than 20 percent of the total cost of rehabilitation, and investor or financial entity capital or loans for which the developer, after making all good faith efforts to raise additional capital, certifies that additional capital cannot be raised from other sources; provided, however, that for a redevelopment project located in a government-restricted municipality, the developer contributed capital shall not be less than 10 percent of the cost of rehabilitation.  Developer contributed capital may consist of cash, deferred development fees, costs for project feasibility incurred within the 12 months prior to application, property value less any mortgages when the developer owns the project site, and any other investment by the developer in the project deemed acceptable by the authority, as provided by regulations promulgated by the authority.  Property value shall be valued at the lesser of either: a. the purchase price, provided the property was purchased pursuant to an arm's length transaction within 12 months of application; or b. the value as determined by a current appraisal.
 
	"Qualified incentive tract" means: a. a population census tract having a poverty rate of 20 percent or more; or b. a census tract in which the median family income for the census tract does not exceed 80 percent of the greater of the Statewide median family income or the median family income of the metropolitan statistical area in which the census tract is situated.
 
	"Qualified property" means a property, including structures, site improvements, and landscape features, assessed as real property that is used for a commercial purpose, a residential rental purpose, provided the structure contains at least four dwelling units, or any combination thereof; that is located in the State of New Jersey; that is income producing; and that is:
 
	a.	(1)  individually listed, or located in a district listed on the National Register of Historic Places in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3021 of Title 54, United States Code (54 U.S.C. s.302101 et seq.), or on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places pursuant to P.L.1970, c.268 (C.13:1B-15.128 et seq.), or individually designated, or located in a district designated, by the Pinelands Commission as a historic resource of significance to the Pinelands in accordance with the Pinelands comprehensive management plan adopted pursuant to the "Pinelands Protection Act," P.L.1979, c.111 (C.13:18A-1 et seq.), and
 
	(2)	if located within a district, certified by either the officer or the Pinelands Commission, as appropriate, as contributing to the historic significance of the district; 
 
	b. (1) individually identified or registered, or located in a district composed of properties identified or registered, for protection as significant historic resources in accordance with criteria established by a municipality in which the property or district is located if the criteria for identification or registration has been approved by the officer as suitable for substantially achieving the purpose of preserving and rehabilitating buildings of historic significance within the jurisdiction of the municipality, and
 
	(2)	if located within a district, certified by the officer as contributing to the historic significance of the district; or
 
	c. (1) preliminarily determined by the National Park Service to be of historic significance in accordance with the requirements of 36 C.F.R. s.67.3 and 36 C.F.R. s.67.4; and
 
	(2)	within one year of the issuance of the tax credits, listed on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places in accordance with the "New Jersey Register of Historic Places Act," P.L.1970, c.268 (C.13:1B-15.128 et seq.) and the New Jersey Register of Historic Places rules, N.J.A.C.7:4-1 et seq., as adopted by the Department of Environmental Protection and administered through the Historic Preservation Office.  Failure to be listed on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places within one year of issuance of the tax credit shall result in the recapture of the tax credit.
 
	"Rehabilitation" means the repair or reconstruction of the exterior or interior, including, but not limited to, structural or substrate components and electrical, plumbing, and heating components, of a qualified property or transformative project to make an efficient contemporary use possible while preserving the portions or features of the property that have significant historical, architectural, and cultural values.
 
	"Selected rehabilitation period" means a period of 36 months if the beginning of such period is chosen by the business entity during which, or parts of which, a rehabilitation is occurring, or a period of 60 months if a rehabilitation is reasonably expected to be completed in distinct phases set forth in written architectural plans and specifications completed before or during the physical work on the rehabilitation.
 
	"Structural components" means the same as that term is defined in 26 C.F.R. s.1.48-1.
 
	"Total cost of rehabilitation" means any costs incurred for, and in connection with, the rehabilitation project by the business entity and any affiliate of the business entity until the issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy, or upon such other event evidencing project completion as set forth in the rehabilitation agreement, and includes, but is not limited to, project costs, soft costs, and cost of acquisition of land and buildings.
 
	"Total cost of facade rehabilitation project" means any costs incurred for, and in connection with, the facade rehabilitation project by the business entity and any affiliate of the business entity until the issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy, or upon such other event evidencing project completion as set forth in the rehabilitation agreement, and includes, but is not limited to, project costs, soft costs, and cost of acquisition of land and buildings.
 
	"Transformative project" means a property that is:
 
	a.	an income producing property, not including a residential property, whose rehabilitation the authority determines will generate substantial increases in State revenues through the creation of increased business activity within the surrounding area;
 
	b.	individually listed on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places pursuant to P.L.1970, c.268 (C.13:1B-15.128 et seq.) and which, before the enactment of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.), received a Determination of Eligibility from the Keeper of the National Register of Historic Places in accordance with the provisions of Part 60 of Title 36 of the Code of Federal Regulations; and
 
	c. (1) located within a one-half mile radius of the center point of a transit village, as designated by the New Jersey Department of Transportation, and located within a city of the first class, as classified under N.J.S.40A:6-4; or (2) located within a government-restricted municipality.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.3; amended 2021, c.160, s.1; 2024, c.61, s.1.

34:1B-272  Tax credit.
	4. a. (1) A business entity, upon successful application to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, and commitment to the authority to pay each worker employed to perform construction work and building services work at the qualified property or transformative project a wage not less than the prevailing wage rate for the worker's craft or trade, as determined by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.), shall be allowed a credit against the tax otherwise due pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5, for a portion of the cost of rehabilitation paid by the business entity for the rehabilitation of a qualified property or transformative project, if the cost of rehabilitation during a business entity's selected rehabilitation period is not less than the greater of (a) the adjusted basis of the structure of the qualified property or transformative project used for federal income tax purposes as of the beginning of the business entity's selected rehabilitation period, or (b) $5,000.  The amount of the credit claimed in any accounting or privilege period shall not reduce the amount of the tax liability to less than the statutory minimum provided in subsection (e) of section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5).
 
	(2)	The amount of credit allowed to a business entity pursuant to this section shall be as follows:
 
	(a)	for the rehabilitation of a qualified property located in a qualified incentive tract or government-restricted municipality, 60 percent of the cost of rehabilitation paid by the business entity for the rehabilitation of the qualified property or $12 million, whichever is less;
 
	(b)	for the rehabilitation of a transformative project, 45 percent of the cost of rehabilitation paid by the business entity for the rehabilitation of the transformative project or $50 million, whichever is less; and
 
	(c)	for the rehabilitation of any other qualified property not subject to provisions of subparagraph (a) or (b) of this paragraph, 50 percent of the cost of rehabilitation paid by the business entity for the rehabilitation of the qualified property or $8 million, whichever is less.
 
	(3)	The prevailing wage requirement for construction work shall apply at a qualified property or transformative project during the selected rehabilitation period, and the prevailing wage requirement for building services work shall apply at a qualified property or transformative project for 10 years following completion of the rehabilitation work at the qualified property or transformative project.  In the event a qualified property or transformative project, or the aggregate of all qualified properties and transformative projects approved for awards under the program, constitute a lease of more than 35 percent of a facility, the prevailing wage requirements shall apply to the entire facility.
 
	(4)	Prior to approval of an application by the authority, the authority shall confirm with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of the Treasury whether the business entity is in substantial good standing with the respective department or has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan for the business entity.  The business entity shall certify that any contractors or subcontractors that perform work at the qualified property or transformative project: (a) are registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); (b) have not been debarred by Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in New Jersey; and (c) possess a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  The authority may also contract with an independent third party to perform a background check on the business entity.  Following approval of an application by the authority, but prior to the start of any construction or rehabilitation at the qualified property or transformative project, the authority shall enter into a rehabilitation agreement with the business entity.  The authority shall negotiate the terms and conditions of the rehabilitation agreement on behalf of the State.
 
	(5)	A rehabilitation project shall be eligible for a tax credit only if the business entity demonstrates to the authority at the time of application that:
 
	(a)	without the tax credit, the rehabilitation project is not economically feasible; and
 
	(b)	a project financing gap exists for a rehabilitation project that has a total rehabilitation cost or total facade rehabilitation cost equal to or greater than $5 million and is located outside of a government-restricted municipality.
 
	(6)	For the purposes of paragraph (4) of this subsection, the start of any construction or rehabilitation shall not be deemed to include:
 
	(a)	work approved by the New Jersey Historic Trust or the New Jersey State Historic Preservation Office as meeting the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation pursuant to section 67.7 of Title 36, Code of Federal Regulations (36 C.F.R. s.67.7);
 
	(b)	work ordered by a building code or other official with jurisdiction over the site of the qualified property or transformative project to correct a health, safety, or other hazard and completed in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation pursuant to section 67.7 of Title 36, Code of Federal Regulations (36 C.F.R. s.67.7);
 
	(c)	work completed more than two years prior to the date of application; or
 
	(d)	work completed within two years of application and in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation pursuant to section 67.7 of Title 36, Code of Federal Regulations (36 C.F.R. 67.7).
 
	(7) Any work completed before the start of construction or rehabilitation may be considered as part of the project, but shall not be a cost of rehabilitation or cost of facade rehabilitation.
 
	b.	A business entity may claim a credit under this section during the accounting or privilege period: (1) in which it makes the final payment for the cost of the rehabilitation if the business entity has chosen a selected rehabilitation period of 24 months; or (2) in which a distinct project phase of the rehabilitation is completed if the business entity has chosen a selected rehabilitation period of 60 months.  The credit may be claimed against any State tax, listed in paragraph (1) of subsection a. of this section, liability otherwise due after any other credits permitted pursuant to law have been applied.  The amount of credit claimed in an accounting or privilege period that cannot be applied for that accounting or privilege period due to limitations in this section may be transferred pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-273) or carried over, if necessary, to the nine accounting or privilege periods following the accounting or privilege period for which the credit was allowed.
 
	c.	A business entity shall submit to the authority satisfactory evidence of the actual cost of rehabilitation, as certified by a certified public accountant, evidence of completion of the rehabilitation or phase, and a certification that all information provided by the business entity to the authority is true, including information contained in the application, the rehabilitation agreement, any amendment to the rehabilitation agreement, and any other information submitted by the business entity to the authority pursuant to sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through C.34:1B-276).  The business entity, or an authorized agent of the business entity, shall certify under the penalty of perjury that the information provided pursuant to this subsection is true.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.4; amended 2021, c.160, s.2; 2024, c.61, s.2.

34:1B-273  Corporation business tax credit transfer certificate program, insurance premiums tax credit transfer certificate program.
  	5. a. The authority shall, in cooperation with the director, establish and administer a corporation business tax credit transfer certificate program and an insurance premiums tax credit transfer certificate program to enable business entities with unused, otherwise allowable amounts of tax credits issued pursuant to sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through C.34:1B-276) to exchange these credits, in whole or in part, for private financial assistance prior to the expiration of the tax credit.
 
	A certificate issued by the director and the authority shall include a statement waiving the rights of the business entity to which the tax credit has been granted to claim any amount of remaining credit against any tax liability.
 
	b.	A business entity holding an unused, otherwise allowable tax credit issued pursuant to sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through C.34:1B-276) may apply to the director and the authority for a tax credit transfer certificate pursuant to subsection a. of this section.  Upon receipt thereof, the business entity may sell or assign, in full or in part, the tax credit transfer certificate to another taxpayer in exchange for private financial assistance to be provided by the purchaser or assignee of the tax credit transfer certificate to the seller thereof.  The developer shall not sell a tax credit transfer certificate allowed under this section for consideration received by the developer of less than 85 percent of the transferred credit amount before considering any further discounting to present value which shall be permitted, except a developer of a residential project consisting of newly-constructed residential units that has received federal low income housing tax credits under 26 U.S.C. s.42(b)(1)(B)(i) may assign a tax credit transfer certificate for consideration of no less than 75 percent subject to the submission of a plan to the authority and the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency to use the proceeds derived from the assignment of tax credits to complete the residential project.  The purchaser or assignee of the tax credit transfer certificate may apply the face value of the tax credit transfer certificate acquired against the purchaser's or assignee's applicable tax liability by claiming the tax credit on the purchaser's or assignee's corporation business tax or insurance premiums tax return with the corresponding tax credit transfer certificate accompanying the tax return.  A purchaser or assignee of a tax credit transfer certificate pursuant to this section shall not make any subsequent transfers, assignments, or sales of the tax credit transfer certificate.
 
	c.	The authority shall publish on its Internet website the following information concerning each tax credit transfer certificate approved by the authority and the director pursuant to this section:
 
	(1)	the name of the transferor;
 
	(2)	the name of the transferee;
 
	(3)	the value of the tax credit transfer certificate; 
 
	(4)	the State tax against which the transferee may apply the tax credit; and
 
	(5)	the consideration received by the transferor.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.5; amended 2021, c.160, s.3.

34:1B-274  Rules, regulations.
	6. a. The authority shall, in consultation with the officer and the director, promulgate rules and regulations in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), as the officer deems necessary to administer the provisions of sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through C.34:1B-276), including but not limited to rules establishing administrative fees to implement the provisions of sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through C.34:1B-276), and setting of an annual application submission date, requiring annual reporting by each business entity that receives a tax credit pursuant to sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through C.34:1B-276).  As part of the authority's review of the annual reports required from each business entity that receives a tax credit, the authority shall confirm with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of the Treasury that: the business entity is in substantial good standing with the respective department, or has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan for the business entity, and the business entity shall certify that any contractors or subcontractors performing work at the qualified property or transformative project: (1) are registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); (2) have not been debarred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in the State; and (3) possess a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  The rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall also include a provision to require that business entities forfeit all tax credits awarded in any year in which the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, or the Department of the Treasury advises the authority that the business entity is not in substantial good standing nor has the business entity entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan, and to allow the authority to extend, in individual cases, the deadline for any annual reporting or certification requirement established pursuant to this section.
 
	b.	For every tax credit allowed pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-272), the authority, in consultation with the officer, shall certify to the director: the total cost of rehabilitation or total cost of facade rehabilitation project; that the property meets the definition of qualified property or transformative project, as applicable; and that the rehabilitation or facade rehabilitation project has been completed in substantial compliance with the requirements of the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation pursuant to section 67.7 of Title 36, Code of Federal Regulations.  The business entity shall attach the certification to the tax return on which the business entity claims the credit.
 
	c. (1) The total amount of credits approved by the authority pursuant to sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through C.34:1B-276) shall not exceed the limitations set forth in section 98 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-362).  For the purpose of determining the aggregate value of tax credits approved in a fiscal year, a tax credit shall be deemed to have been approved at the time the authority approves an application for an award of a tax credit.  If the authority approves less than the total amount of tax credits authorized pursuant to this subsection in a fiscal year, the remaining amount, plus any amounts remaining from previous fiscal years, shall be added to the limit of subsequent fiscal years until that amount of tax credits are claimed or allowed.  Any unapproved, uncertified, or recaptured portion of tax credits during any fiscal year may be carried over and reallocated in succeeding years.
 
	(2)	Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection and section 98 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-362) to the contrary, the authority may approve tax credits, pursuant to sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through C.34:1B-276), for the rehabilitation of a transformative project in an amount that causes the total amount of credits approved during the fiscal year to exceed the limitations set forth in section 98 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-362), provided that the amount of the excess shall be subtracted from the total amount of credits that may be approved by the authority in the subsequent fiscal year, and the amount of the excess shall not exceed 50 percent of the total tax credits otherwise authorized for the fiscal year.
 
	(3)	The authority, in consultation with the officer, shall devise criteria for allocating tax credit amounts if the approved amounts combined exceed the total amount in each fiscal year, including rules that allocate over multiple fiscal years a single credit amount granted in excess of $2,000,000.  The criteria shall include a project's historic importance, positive impact on the surrounding neighborhood, economic sustainability, geographic diversity, and consistency with Statewide growth and development policies and plans.
 
	(4)	At the authority's discretion, up to 50 percent of the tax credits available for distribution in any given year may be allocated to facade rehabilitation projects.  The amount of credit allowed to a business entity pursuant to this paragraph shall be 50 percent of the cost of facade rehabilitation for a project or $4 million, whichever is less.  The tax credits allocated pursuant to this paragraph shall be awarded through a competitive application process whereby the authority shall evaluate all applications submitted by a date certain, as if all received applications were submitted on that date.  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 4 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-272), a project financing gap analysis shall not be required for the submission or approval of these applications.  When scoring applications, the authority shall consider factors including, but not limited to: the retention of existing historic fabric versus demolition; building location, with preference given to buildings that contribute to the historic significance of a historic district; and the amount of community support for the project.
 
	d.	Notwithstanding any provision of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), to the contrary, the chief executive officer of the authority may adopt, immediately upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, rules and regulations necessary to implement the provisions of P.L.2024, c.61.  The rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall be effective for a period not to exceed 365 days following the date of filing and may thereafter be amended, adopted, or readopted by the director in accordance with the requirements of P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.6; amended 2021, c.160, s.4; 2024, c.61, s.3.

34:1B-275 Rules for recapture of tax credit amount.
	7. a. The authority, in collaboration with the director, shall adopt rules for the recapture of an entire or partial tax credit amount allowed under sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through C.34:1B-276).  The rules shall require the authority to notify the director of the recapture of an entire or partial tax credit amount.  Recaptured funds shall be deposited in the General Fund of the State.
 
	b.	If, before the end of five full years after the completion of the rehabilitation of the qualified property or transformative project, a developer that has received a tax credit pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-272) modifies the qualified property or transformative project so that it ceases to meet the requirements for the rehabilitation of a qualified property or transformative project as defined under the program or ceases to meet the requirement of the rehabilitation agreement then the tax credit allowed under the program shall be recaptured in accordance with the rules adopted pursuant to subsection a. of this section.
 
	c.	In the case of a business entity that has chosen a selected rehabilitation period of 60 months, if the architectural plans change in the course of the phased rehabilitation project so that the rehabilitation of the qualified property or transformative project would, upon the rehabilitation's completion, no longer qualify for a tax credit pursuant to the requirements of sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through C.34:1B-276), then the tax credits issued shall be subject to recapture.  Any portion of the tax credit that the business entity has not yet used at the time of the disallowance by the officer shall be deemed void.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.7; amended 2024, c.61, s.4.

34:1B-276  Written report.
	8.	On or before December 31 of the fourth year following the effective date of sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through C.34:1B-276), the authority, in consultation with the officer and the director, shall prepare and submit a written report regarding the number and total monetary amount of tax credits granted for the rehabilitation of qualified properties or transformative projects pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-272), the geographical distribution of the credits granted, a summary of the tax credit transfer program established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-273), an evaluation of the effectiveness of the tax credits provided pursuant to sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through C.34:1B-276) in promoting the rehabilitation of historic properties, recommendations for administrative or legislative changes to increase the effectiveness of the program, and any other information that the authority, the officer, or the director may deem useful or appropriate.  This report shall be submitted to the Governor and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), to the Legislature.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.8.

34:1B-277  Short title.
 	9.	Sections 9 through 19 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-277 through C.34:1B-287) shall be known and may be cited as the "Brownfields Redevelopment Incentive Program Act."
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.9.

34:1B-278  Definitions.
	10.	As used in sections 9 through 19 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-277 through C.34:1B-287):
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Board" means the Board of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Brownfield site" means any real property in this State that is currently vacant or underutilized and on which there has been, or there is suspected to have been, a discharge of a contaminant or on which there is contaminated building material.
 
	"Building services" means any cleaning or routine building maintenance work, including, but not limited to, sweeping, vacuuming, floor cleaning, cleaning of rest rooms, collecting refuse or trash, window cleaning, securing, patrolling, or other work in connection with the care or securing of an existing building, including services typically provided by a door-attendant or concierge.  "Building services" shall not include any skilled maintenance work, professional services, or other public work for which a contractor is required to pay the "prevailing wage" as defined in section 2 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.26).
 
	"Contaminated building material" means components of a structure where abatement or removal of asbestos, or remediation of materials containing hazardous substances defined pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1976, c.141 (C.58:10-23.11b), is required by applicable federal, state, or local rules or regulations.
 
	"Contamination" or "contaminant" means any discharged hazardous substance as defined pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1976, c.141 (C.58:10-23.11b), hazardous waste as defined pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1976, c.99 (C.13:1E-38), pollutant as defined pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1977, c.74 (C.58:10A-3), or contaminated building material.
 
	"Department" means the Department of Environmental Protection.
 
	"Developer" means any person that enters or proposes to enter into a redevelopment agreement with the authority pursuant to the provisions of section 13 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-281).
 
	"Director" means the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.
 
	"Equity" means developer-contributed capital that may consist of cash, costs for project feasibility incurred within the 12 months prior to application, property value less any mortgages when the developer owns the project site, and any other investment by the developer in the project that the authority deems acceptable.  Property value shall be an amount equal to the lesser of:  (1) the purchase price, provided the property was purchased pursuant to an arm's length transaction within 12 months of application; or (2) the value as determined by a current appraisal acceptable to the authority.  "Equity" includes federal or local grants and proceeds from the sale of federal or local tax credits, including, but not limited to, any federal tax credits that the redevelopment receives pursuant to section 42 of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. s.42) and section 45D of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. s.45D).  "Equity" shall not include State grants or tax credits or proceeds from redevelopment area bonds.  For a residential project utilizing low income tax credits awarded by the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Financing Agency pursuant to section 19 of P.L.2008, c.46 (C.52:27D-321.1), "equity" includes the portion of the developer's fee that is deferred for a minimum of five years.
 
	"Government-restricted municipality" means a municipality in this State with a municipal revitalization index distress score of at least 75, that met the criteria for designation as an urban aid municipality in the 2019 State fiscal year, and that, on the effective date of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.), is subject to financial restrictions imposed pursuant to the "Municipal Stabilization and Recovery Act," P.L.2016, c.4 (C.52:27BBBB-1 et seq.), or is restricted in its ability to levy property taxes on property in that municipality as a result of the State of New Jersey owning or controlling property representing at least 25 percent of the total land area of the municipality or as a result of the federal government of the United States owning or controlling at least 50 acres of the total land area of the municipality, which is dedicated as a national natural landmark.
 
	"Labor harmony agreement" means an agreement between a business that serves as the owner or operator of a retail establishment or distribution center and one or more labor organizations, which requires, for the duration of the agreement:  that any participating labor organization and its members agree to refrain from picketing, work stoppages, boycotts, or other economic interference against the business and that the business agrees to maintain a neutral posture with respect to efforts of any participating labor organization to represent employees at an establishment or other unit in the retail establishment or distribution center, agrees to permit the labor organization to have access to the employees, and agrees to guarantee to the labor organization the right to obtain recognition as the exclusive collective bargaining representatives of the employees in an establishment or unit at the retail establishment or distribution center by demonstrating to the New Jersey State Board of Mediation, Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement, or a mutually agreed-upon, neutral third party that a majority of workers in the unit have shown their preference for the labor organization to be their representative by signing authorization cards indicating that preference.  The labor organization or organizations shall be from a list of labor organizations that have requested to be on the list and that the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development has determined represent substantial numbers of retail or distribution center employees in the State.
 
	"Licensed site remediation professional" means an individual who is licensed by the Site Remediation Professional Licensing Board pursuant to section 7 of P.L.2009, c.60 (C.58:10C-7) or the department pursuant to section 12 of P.L.2009, c.60 (C.58:10C-12).
 
	"Program" means the Brownfields Redevelopment Incentive Program established by section 11 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-279).
 
	"Project financing gap" means the part of the total remediation cost, including reasonable and appropriate return on investment, that remains to be financed after all other sources of capital have been accounted for, including, but not limited to, developer contributed capital, which shall not be less than 20 percent of the total remediation cost, and investor or financial entity capital or loans for which the developer, after making all good faith efforts to raise additional capital, certifies that additional capital cannot be raised from other sources; provided, however, that for a redevelopment project located in a government-restricted municipality, the developer contributed capital shall not be less than 10 percent of the cost of rehabilitation.  When an applicant is proposing a new project, the project financing gap shall consider the cost of the full project, but the award size shall be based on remediation costs.  Developer contributed capital may consist of cash, deferred development fees, costs for project feasibility incurred within the 12 months prior to application, property value less any mortgages when the developer owns the project site, and any other investment by the developer in the project deemed acceptable by the authority, as provided by regulations promulgated by the authority.  Property value shall be valued at the lesser of either: a. the purchase price, provided the property was purchased pursuant to an arm's length transaction within 12 months of application; or b. the value as determined by a current appraisal.
 
	"Qualified incentive tract" means: a. a population census tract having a poverty rate of 20 percent or more; or b. a census tract in which the median family income for the census tract does not exceed 80 percent of the greater of the Statewide median family income or the median family income of the metropolitan statistical area in which the census tract is situated.
 
	"Redevelopment agreement" means an agreement between the authority and a developer under which the developer agrees to perform any work or undertaking necessary for the remediation of a brownfield site located at the site of the redevelopment project.
 
	"Redevelopment project" means a specific remediation project undertaken, pursuant to the terms of a redevelopment agreement, by a developer within an area of land whereon a brownfield site is located.
 
	"Remediation" or "remediate" means all necessary actions to investigate and clean up or respond to any known, suspected, or threatened discharge of contaminants, including, as necessary, the preliminary assessment, site investigation, remedial investigation, and remedial action, or any portion thereof, as those terms are defined in section 23 of P.L.1993, c.139 (C.58:10B-1); and hazardous materials abatement; hazardous materials or waste disposal; building and structural remedial activities, including, but not limited to, demolition, asbestos abatement, polychlorinated biphenyl removal, improvement and capping of landfills, contaminated wood or paint removal, or other infrastructure remedial activities, provided, however, "remediation" or "remediate" shall not include the payment of compensation for damage to, or loss of, natural resources.
 
	"Remediation costs" means all reasonable costs associated with the remediation of a contaminated site, except any costs incurred in financing the remediation.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.10; amended 2021, c.160, s.5; 2024, c.61, s.5.

34:1B-279  Brownfields Redevelopment Incentive Program.
  	11.	The Brownfields Redevelopment Incentive Program is established as a program under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.  The purpose of the program is to compensate developers of redevelopment projects located on brownfield sites for remediation costs.  To implement this purpose, the authority shall issue tax credits.  The total value of tax credits approved by the authority shall not exceed the limitations set forth in section 98 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-362).  For the purpose of determining the aggregate value of tax credits approved in a fiscal year, a tax credit shall be deemed to have been approved at the time the authority approves an application for an award of a tax credit.  If the authority approves less than the total amount of tax credits authorized pursuant to this section in a fiscal year, the remaining amount, plus any amounts remaining from previous fiscal years, shall be added to the limit of subsequent fiscal years until that amount of tax credits are claimed or allowed.  Any unapproved, uncertified, or recaptured portion of tax credits during any fiscal year may be carried over and reallocated in succeeding years.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.11.

34:1B-280  Application for tax credit.
	12. a. A developer seeking a tax credit for a redevelopment project shall submit an application to the authority and the department in a form and manner prescribed in regulations adopted by the authority, in consultation with the department, pursuant to the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	b.	A redevelopment project shall be eligible for a tax credit only if the developer demonstrates to the authority and the department at the time of application that:
 
	(1)	except as ordered by a government official with jurisdiction over the brownfield site or certified by a licensed site remediation professional to correct or prevent the spread of a health, safety, or other hazard, and as provided in subsection j. of this section, the developer has not commenced any remediation or clean up at the site of the redevelopment project, except for preliminary assessments and investigations, prior to applying for a tax credit pursuant to this section, but intends to remediate the site immediately upon approval of the tax credit;
 
	(2)	the redevelopment project is located on a brownfield site;
 
	(3)	without the tax credit, the redevelopment project is not economically feasible; 
 
	(4)	a project financing gap exists for projects located outside of a government-restricted municipality that have a total remediation cost of $5,000,000 or greater;
 
	(5)	the developer shall obtain and submit to the authority, before approval by the board, a letter evidencing support for the redevelopment project from the governing body of the municipality in which the redevelopment project is located; and
 
	(6)	each worker employed to perform remediation, construction, or building services work at the redevelopment project shall be paid not less than the prevailing wage rate for the worker's craft or trade, as determined by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.).  The prevailing wage requirements shall apply for remediation or construction work through the completion of the redevelopment project, and the prevailing wage requirements shall apply for building services work at the site of the redevelopment project for 10 years following completion of the redevelopment project.  In the event a redevelopment project, or the aggregate of all redevelopment projects approved for an award under the program, constitute a lease of more than 35 percent of a facility, the prevailing wage requirements shall apply to the entire facility. 
 
	c.	A redevelopment project that received a reimbursement pursuant to sections 34 through 39 of P.L.1997, c.278 (C.58:10B-26 through 58:10B-31) shall not be eligible to apply for a tax credit under the program.  If the authority receives an application and supporting documentation for approval of a reimbursement pursuant to sections 34 through 39 of P.L.1997, c.278 (C.58:10B-26 through 58:10B-31) prior to the effective date of sections 9 through 19 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-277 through C.34:1B-287), then the authority may consider the application and award a tax credit to a developer, provided that the authority shall take final action on all applications for approval of a reimbursement pursuant to sections 34 through 39 of P.L.1997, c.278 (C.58:10B-26 through 58:10B-31) no later than July 1, 2019.  No applications shall be submitted pursuant to sections 34 through 39 of P.L.1997, c.278 (C.58:10B-26 through 58:10B-31) after the effective date of sections 9 through 19 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-277 through C.34:1B-287).
 
	d. (1) Prior to approval of an application, the authority shall confirm with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of the Treasury whether the developer is in substantial good standing with the respective department, or has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan for the developer.  The authority may also contract with an independent third party to perform a background check on the developer.  The developer shall certify that any contractors or subcontractors that perform work at the redevelopment project: (a) are registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); (b) have not been debarred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in New Jersey, and (c) possess a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  Provided that the developer is in substantial good standing with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of the Treasury, or has entered into such an agreement, and following approval of an application by the board, the authority shall enter into a redevelopment agreement with the developer, as provided for in section 13 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-281).  
 
	(2)	The authority, in consultation with the department, may impose additional requirements upon an applicant through rule or regulation adopted pursuant to the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), if the authority or the department determines the additional requirements to be necessary and appropriate to effectuate the purposes of sections 9 through 19 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-277 through C.34:1B-287).
 
	e.	The authority, in consultation with the department, shall conduct a review of the applications on a rolling basis, unless the authority determines that demand is likely to exceed available tax credits, and then through a competitive application process whereby the authority and the department shall evaluate all applications submitted by a date certain, as if all received applications were submitted on that date.  To receive a tax credit award, a developer's application shall meet a minimum score, as determined by the authority.  In addition to the eligibility criteria set forth in subsection b. of this section, the authority, in consultation with the department, may consider additional factors that may include, but shall not be limited to: the economic feasibility of the redevelopment project; the benefit of the redevelopment project to the community in which the remediation project is located; the degree to which the redevelopment project enhances and promotes economic development and reduces environmental or public health stressors in an overburdened community, as those terms are defined by section 2 of P.L.2020, c.92 (C.13:1D-158), and attendant department regulations; and, if the developer has a board of directors, the extent to which that board of directors is diverse and representative of the community in which the redevelopment project is located.  The authority, in consultation with the department, shall submit applications that comply with the eligibility criteria set forth in this section, fulfill the additional factors considered by the authority pursuant to this subsection, satisfy the submission requirements, and provide adequate information for the subject application, to the board for final approval.
 
	f.	The authority shall award tax credits to redevelopment projects until either the available tax credits are exhausted or all redevelopment projects that are eligible for a tax credit pursuant to the provisions of sections 9 through 19 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-277 through C.34:1B-287) receive a tax credit, whichever occurs first.  If insufficient funding exists to allow a tax credit to a developer in accordance with the provisions of subsection a. of section 16 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-284), the authority may offer the developer a value of the tax credit below the amount provided for in subsection a. of section 16 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-284).
 
	g.	A developer shall pay to the authority or to the department, as appropriate, the full amount of the direct costs of an analysis concerning the developer's application for a tax credit, which a third party retained by the authority or department performs, if the authority or department deems such retention to be necessary.
 
	h.	If the authority determines that a developer made a material misrepresentation on the developer's application, the developer shall forfeit all tax credits awarded under the program.
 
	i.	If circumstances require a developer to amend its application to the authority, then the developer, or an authorized agent of the developer, shall certify to the authority that the information provided in its amended application is true, under the penalty of perjury.
 
	j.	A developer who has commenced remediation or clean up at the site and who could not reasonably have known the full extent of the site contamination prior to commencing the remediation may still apply for a tax credit under the program, if the developer certifies to the authority, under the penalty of perjury, that the developer cannot reasonably finish the remediation and commence the redevelopment project absent the tax credit.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.12; amended 2021, c.160, s.6; 2024, c.61, s.6.

34:1B-281  Redevelopment agreement.
	13. a. Following approval of an application by the board, but prior to the start of any remediation or clean up at the site of the redevelopment project, except activities disclosed at the time of approval or those in accordance with section 12 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-280), the authority shall enter into a redevelopment agreement with the developer.  The chief executive officer of the authority shall negotiate the terms and conditions of the redevelopment agreement on behalf of the State.
 
	b.	The redevelopment agreement shall specify the amount of the tax credit to be awarded to the developer, the date on which the developer shall complete the remediation, and the projected project remediation cost.  The redevelopment agreement shall require the developer to submit progress reports to the authority and to the department every six months pursuant to section 15 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-283).  
 
	c.	The authority shall not enter into a redevelopment agreement with a developer unless:
 
	(1)	the redevelopment project complies with standards established by the authority in accordance with the green building manual prepared by the Commissioner of Community Affairs pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2007, c.132 (C.52:27D-130.6), regarding the use of renewable energy, energy-efficient technology, and non-renewable resources to reduce environmental degradation and encourage long-term cost reduction;
 
	(2)	the redevelopment project complies with the authority's affirmative action requirements, adopted pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1979, c.303 (C.34:1B-5.4); and
 
	(3)	the developer pays each worker employed to perform remediation work, construction work, or building services work at the redevelopment project not less than the prevailing wage rate in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (6) of subsection b. of section 12 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-280) for the worker's craft or trade, as determined by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.).
 
	d.	The authority shall not enter into a redevelopment agreement unless the developer demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Department of Environmental Protection, that the developer did not discharge a hazardous substance at the brownfield site proposed to be in the redevelopment agreement and is not a corporate successor to the discharger, to any person in any way responsible for the hazardous substance, or to anyone liable for cleanup and removal costs pursuant to section 8 of P.L.1976, c.141 (C.58:10-23.11g).
 
	e. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the authority shall not enter into a redevelopment agreement for a redevelopment project that includes at least one retail establishment that will have more than 10 employees or at least one distribution center that will have more than 20 employees, unless the redevelopment agreement includes a precondition that any business that serves as the owner or operator of the retail establishment or distribution center enters into a labor harmony agreement with a labor organization or cooperating labor organizations which represent retail or distribution center employees in the State.
 
	(2)	A labor harmony agreement shall be required only if the State has a proprietary interest in the redevelopment project and shall remain in effect for as long as the State acts as a market participant in the redevelopment project.  The authority may enter into a redevelopment agreement with a developer without the labor harmony agreement required under paragraph (1) of this subsection only if the authority determines that the redevelopment project would not be feasible if a labor harmony agreement is required.  The authority shall support the determination by a written finding, which provides the specific basis for the determination.
 
	(3)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2024, c.61)
 
	f.	The redevelopment agreement shall provide that issuance of a tax credit under the program shall be conditioned upon the subrogation to the department of all rights of the developer to recover remediation costs from any other person who discharges a hazardous substance or is in any way responsible, pursuant to section 8 of P.L.1976, c.141 (C.58:10-23.11g), for a hazardous substance that was discharged at the brownfield site.
 
	g.	A developer may seek a revision to the redevelopment agreement if the developer cannot complete the remediation on or before the date set forth in the redevelopment agreement.  A developer's ability to change the date on which the developer shall complete the remediation shall be subject to the availability of tax credits in the year of the revised date of completion. 
 
	h.	A developer shall submit to the authority satisfactory evidence of the actual remediation costs, as certified by a certified public accountant, and a licensed site remediation professional for costs under the jurisdiction of the "Site Remediation Reform Act," sections 1 through 29 of P.L.2009, c.60 (C.58:10C-1 et seq.), and as applicable, other appropriate licensed or certified professional for costs that are not under the jurisdiction of the "Site Remediation Reform Act," evidence of completion of the remediation as demonstrated by a Response Action Outcome where the remediation is subject to the "Site Remediation Reform Act," a certification from the appropriate licensed or certified professional for other remedial activities, and a certification that all information provided by the developer to the authority is true, including information contained in the application, the redevelopment agreement, any amendment to the redevelopment agreement, and any other information submitted by the developer to the authority pursuant to sections 9 through 19 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-277 through C.34:1B-287).  The developer, or an authorized agent of the developer, shall certify under the penalty of perjury that the information provided pursuant to this subsection is true.
 
	i.	The redevelopment agreement shall include a provision allowing the authority to recapture the tax credits for any year in which the Department of Environmental Protection, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, or the Department of the Treasury that advises the authority that the developer is not in substantial good standing with the respective department, nor has the developer entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan for the developer.  The redevelopment agreement shall also include a provision allowing the authority to recapture the tax credits for any year in which the developer fails to confirm that each contractor or subcontractor performing work at the redevelopment project: (1) is registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); (2) has not been debarred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in New Jersey; and (3) possesses a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.

 	L.2020, c.156, s.13; amended 2021, c.160, s.7; 2024, c.61, s.7.

34:1B-282  Qualification for tax credit.
	14.	In addition to the submission of any additional evidence that the authority may request to verify that activities comply with local, state, and federal regulations, to qualify for a tax credit under the program, a developer shall, as applicable:
 
	a.	enter into an administrative consent order or other oversight document with the Commissioner of Environmental Protection in accordance with the provisions of section 37 of P.L.1997, c.278 (C.58:10B-29); 
 
	b.	comply with the requirements set forth in subsection b. of section 30 of P.L.2009, c.60 (C.58:10B-1.3) for the remediation of the site of the redevelopment project; or
 
	c.	comply with the rules, regulations, and guidelines by the federal government, the New Jersey Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the New Jersey Department of Health, and the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs regarding requirements for remediation of asbestos, contaminated paint, polychlorinated biphenyls, and other environmental hazards.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.14; amended 2024, c.61, s.8.

34:1B-283  Update of status of redevelopment project.
 	15.	Commencing with the date six months following the date the authority and a developer execute a redevelopment agreement and every six months thereafter until completion of the project, the developer shall submit an update of the status of the redevelopment project to the authority and to the department, including the remediation costs incurred by the developer for the remediation of the contaminated property located at the site of the redevelopment project.  Unless the authority determines that extenuating circumstances exist, the authority's approval of a tax credit shall expire if the authority, the department, or both, do not timely receive the status update required under this section.  The authority may rescind an award of tax credits under the program if a redevelopment project fails to advance in accordance with the redevelopment agreement.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.15.

34:1B-284  Certification upon completion of redevelopment project.
	16. a. Upon completion of the remediation, the developer shall seek certification from the authority, in consultation with the department, that:
 
	(1)	the remediation is complete;
 
	(2)	the developer complied with the requirements of section 14 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-282), as applicable, and section 15 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-283); and
 
	(3)	the remediation costs were actually and reasonably incurred.
 
	Upon receipt of certification, and confirmation by the authority that the developer's obligations under the redevelopment agreement have been met, a developer shall be awarded a credit against the tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5 as follows: (a) for project located in a qualified incentive tract or government-restricted municipality, in an amount not to exceed 80 percent of the actual remediation costs, 80 percent of the projected remediation costs as set forth in the redevelopment agreement, or $12,000,000, whichever is least; (b) for a project erecting a solar panel array on the site of a closed sanitary landfill, in an amount not to exceed 100 percent of the costs of remediation and capping of the landfill, $12,000,000 if the project is located in a qualified incentive tract or government-restricted municipality, or $8,000,000 if the project is located anywhere else in the State, whichever is least; and (c) for all other projects, in an amount not to exceed 60 percent of the actual remediation costs, 60 percent of the projected remediation costs as set forth in the redevelopment agreement, or $8,000,000, whichever is least.  The developer, or an authorized agent of the developer, shall certify that the information provided to the department and the authority pursuant to this subsection is true under the penalty of perjury.
 
	b.	When filing an application for certification pursuant to subsection a. of this section, the developer shall submit to the department and the authority: (1) the total remediation costs incurred by the developer for the remediation of the subject property located at the site of the redevelopment project, as provided in the redevelopment agreement and certified by a certified public accountant, a licensed site remediation professional for costs under the jurisdiction of the "Site Remediation Reform Act," sections 1 through 29 of P.L.2009, c.60 (C.58:10C-1 et seq.), and, as applicable, other appropriate licensed or certified professional for costs that are not under the jurisdiction of the "Site Remediation Reform Act"; (2) evidence of completion of the remediation, as demonstrated by a Response Action Outcome where the remediation is subject to the "Site Remediation Reform Act"; (3) a certification from the appropriate licensed or certified professional for other remedial activities; (4) as applicable, information concerning the occupancy rate of any buildings or other work areas located on the property subject to the redevelopment agreement; and (5) such other information as the department deems necessary in order to make the certifications and findings pursuant to this section.
 
	c.	A developer shall apply the credit awarded against the developer's liability for the tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5 for the privilege period during which the director awards the developer a tax credit pursuant to subsection a. of this section.  A developer shall not carry forward any unused credit.
 
	d.	The director shall prescribe the order of priority of the application of the credit awarded under this section and any other credits allowed by law against the tax imposed under section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5).  The amount of the credit applied under this section against the tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5) for a privilege period, together with any other credits allowed by law, shall not reduce the tax liability to an amount less than the statutory minimum provided in subsection (e) of section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5).
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.16; amended 2021, c.160, s.8; 2024, c.61, s.9.

34:1B-285  Application for tax credit transfer certificate.
  	17. a. A developer may apply to the director and the chief executive officer of the authority for a tax credit transfer certificate, during the privilege period in which the director awards the developer a tax credit pursuant to section 16 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-284), in lieu of the developer being allowed to apply any amount of the tax credit against the developer's State tax liability.  The tax credit transfer certificate, upon receipt thereof by the developer from the director and the chief executive officer of the authority, may be sold or assigned, in the privilege period during which the developer receives the tax credit transfer certificate from the director, to another person, who may apply the credit against a tax liability pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5.  The tax credit transfer certificate provided to the developer shall include a statement waiving the developer's right to claim the credit that the developer has elected to sell or assign.  
 
	b.	The developer shall not sell or assign a tax credit transfer certificate allowed under this section for consideration received by the developer of less than 85 percent of the transferred credit amount before considering any further discounting to present value which shall be permitted, except a developer of a residential project consisting of newly-constructed residential units that has received federal low income housing tax credits under 26 U.S.C. s.42(b)(1)(B)(i) may assign a tax credit transfer certificate for consideration of no less than 75 percent subject to the submission of a plan to the authority and the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency to use the proceeds derived from the assignment of tax credits to complete the residential project.  The tax credit transfer certificate issued to a developer by the director shall be subject to any limitations and conditions imposed on the application of State tax credits pursuant to section 16 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-284) and any other terms and conditions that the director may prescribe.
 
	c.	A purchaser or assignee of a tax credit transfer certificate pursuant to this section shall not make any subsequent transfers, assignments, or sales of the tax credit transfer certificate.
 
	d.	The authority shall publish on its Internet website the following information concerning each tax credit transfer certificate approved by the authority and the director pursuant to this section:
 
	(1)	the name of the transferor;
 
	(2)	the name of the transferee;
 
	(3)	the value of the tax credit transfer certificate; 
 
	(4)	the State tax against which the transferee may apply the tax credit; and
 
	(5)	the consideration received by the transferor.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.17; amended 2021, c.160, s.9.

34:1B-286  Report by State colleges, universities.
  	18.	Beginning the year next following the year in which sections 9 through 19 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-277 through C.34:1B-287) take effect and every two years thereafter, a State college or university established pursuant to chapter 64 of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes shall, pursuant to an agreement executed between the State college or university and the authority, prepare a report on the implementation of the program, and submit the report to the authority, the Governor, and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), to the Legislature.  Each biennial report required under this section shall include a description of each redevelopment project receiving a tax credit under the program, a detailed analysis of the consideration given in each project to the factors set forth in sections 12 and 13 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-280 and C.34:1B-281), the return on investment for incentives awarded, the redevelopment project's impact on the State's economy, and any other metrics the State college or university determines are relevant based upon national best practices.  The authority shall prepare a written response to the report, which the authority shall submit to the Governor and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), to the Legislature.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.18.

34:1B-287  Regulations.
	19. a. Notwithstanding the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), to the contrary, the chief executive officer of the authority, in consultation with the Commissioner of Environmental Protection, may adopt, immediately upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, regulations that the chief executive officer and commissioner deem necessary to implement the provisions of sections 9 through 19 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-277 through C.34:1B-287), which regulations shall be effective for a period not to exceed 360 days from the date of the filing.  The chief executive officer, in consultation with the Commissioner of Environmental Protection, shall thereafter amend, adopt, or readopt the regulations in accordance with the requirements of P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).  The rules shall require annual reporting by developers that receive tax credits pursuant to the program, in addition to the regular progress updates.  As part of the authority's review of the annual reports required from a developer, the authority shall confirm with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of the Treasury that the developer is in substantial good standing with the respective department, or has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan, and the developer shall certify that any contractors or subcontractors performing work at the redevelopment project: (1) are registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); (2) have not been debarred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in New Jersey; and (3) possess a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  The rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall also include a provision to require that, in any year in which the developer is not in substantial good standing with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, or the Department of the Treasury, the developer may forfeit all tax credits awarded in that year, and to allow the authority to extend, in individual cases, the deadline for any annual reporting requirement established pursuant to this section.
 
	b.	Notwithstanding any provision of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), to the contrary, the chief executive officer of the authority may adopt, immediately upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, rules and regulations necessary to implement the provisions of P.L.2024, c.61.  The rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall be effective for a period not to exceed 365 days following the date of filing and may thereafter be amended, adopted, or readopted by the director in accordance with the requirements of P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.19; amended 2021, c.160, s.10; 2024, c.61, s.10.

34:1B-288 Short title.
 	20.	Sections 20 through 34 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-288 through C.34:1B-302) shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Innovation Evergreen Act."
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.20.

34:1B-289  Definitions.
	21.	As used in sections 20 through 34 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-288 through 34:1B-302):
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Director" means the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.
 
	"Follow-on investment" means a subsequent investment made by an investor who has a previous investment in a New Jersey high-growth business.
 
	"Fund" means the "New Jersey Innovation Evergreen Fund" established by section 23 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-291).
 
	"Headquarters" means the single location in which the chief executive officer, chief operating officer, or other high level officers of a business directs, controls, and coordinates the activities of the business.
 
	"High-growth business" means a business that is growing significantly faster than the average growth rate of the economy or is a start-up company that is investing in developing a product or new business model that will allow it to grow significantly faster than the average growth rate of the economy within the next three to five years.
 
	"Incentive area" means an area in this State: (1) designated pursuant to the "State Planning Act," P.L.1985, c.398 (C.52:18A-196 et seq.), as Planning Area 1 (Metropolitan); or (2) that has been designated as a qualified opportunity zone pursuant to 26 U.S.C. s.1400Z-1.
 
	"Innovation ecosystem" means funding, programs, and events that support the establishment and expansion of high-growth companies in targeted sectors.  Examples of such funding, programs, and events include: mentoring programs for start-ups, meet-up or networking events, funding for locating a business in a collaborative workspace, programs that provide business services, and entrepreneurial education to companies.
 
	"Opportunity zone" means a federal population census tract in this State that was eligible to be designated as a qualified opportunity zone pursuant to 26 U.S.C. s.1400Z-1 as may be amended.
 
	"Principal business operations" means any of the following: (1) at least 50 percent of the business's employees not primarily engaged in retail sales reside in the State; (2) at least 50 percent of the business's payroll for employees not primarily engaged in retail sales is paid to individuals living in the State; (3) at least 50 percent of the business's full-time employees not primarily engaged in retail sales are filling a position in the State; (4) at least 50 percent of the business's payroll for employees not primarily engaged in retail sales is paid to full-time employees filling a position in the State; or (5) the business's headquarters is located in the State, and of all states, the largest percentage of the business's full-time employees, who are based in the United States and are not primarily engaged in retail sales, is located in New Jersey.
 
	"Program" means the New Jersey Innovation Evergreen Program established by section 22 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-290).
 
	"Purchaser" means an entity registered to do business in this State with the Director of the Division of Revenue and Enterprise Services in the Department of the Treasury that purchases an allocation of tax credits under the program.
 
	"Qualified business" means a business that, at the time of the first qualified investment in the business and throughout the period of the qualified investment under the program, is registered to do business in this State with the Director of the Division of Revenue and Enterprise Services in the Department of the Treasury; has its principal business operations located in the State and intends to maintain its principal business operations in the State after receiving a qualified investment under the program; is engaged in a targeted industry; and employs fewer than 250 persons at the time of the qualified investment.
 
	"Qualified investment" means the direct investment of money by the fund in a qualified business for the purchase of shares of stock, with an option to make an additional investment in an option or warrant or a follow-on investment, in the discretion of the authority, all of which is matched by an investment by a qualified venture firm.
 
	"Qualified venture firm" means a venture firm that is approved by the authority as a qualified venture firm pursuant to section 29 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-297).
 
	"Special purpose vehicle" means an entity controlled by or under common control with a venture firm that is formed solely for the purpose of investing in a New Jersey high-growth business alongside the venture firm.
 
	"Targeted industry" means any industry identified from time to time by the authority which shall initially include advanced transportation and logistics, advanced manufacturing, aviation, autonomous vehicle and zero-emission vehicle research or development, clean energy, life sciences, hemp processing, information and high technology, finance and insurance, professional services, film and digital media, non-retail food and beverage businesses including food innovation, and other innovative industries that disrupt current technologies or business models.
 
	"Venture firm" means a partnership, corporation, trust, or limited liability company that invests cash in a business during the early or expansion stages of a business in exchange for an equity stake in the business in which the investment is made.  Venture firm may include a venture capital fund, a family office fund, or a corporate investor fund, provided that a professional manager administers the venture firm.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.21; amended 2023, c.118, s.1; 2025, c.80, s.1.

34:1B-290  New Jersey Innovation Evergreen Program.
	22.	The New Jersey Innovation Evergreen Program is established as a program under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.  The purpose of the program is to invest in innovation as a catalyst for economic growth and to advance the competitiveness of the State's businesses in the global economy.  Beginning on the effective date of sections 20 through 34 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-288 through C.34:1B-302), the authority shall auction up to $300,000,000 in tax credits in annual amounts not to exceed the limitations set forth in section 98 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-362).  The authority shall not undertake an auction if, exclusive of reserves, including the reserve set aside for follow-on investments pursuant to subsection d. of section 23 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-291), more than $50,000,000 is available to the authority, from moneys received from any prior auction of tax credits pursuant to the program, to allocate to qualified venture firms.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.22; amended 2025, c.80, s.2.

34:1B-291  "New Jersey Innovation Evergreen Fund."
  	23. a. The authority shall establish and maintain a dedicated fund to be known as the "New Jersey Innovation Evergreen Fund."  The authority shall use the money in the fund to carry out the purposes enumerated in subsections b. and c. of this section.  The authority shall credit the fund with money paid by purchasers; distributions from payments or repayments made to the authority in accordance with subsection c. of section 31 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-299); earnings received, if any, from the investment or reinvestment of money credited to the fund; and any money which, from time to time, may otherwise become available for the purposes of the fund.
 
	b.	The authority shall allocate the money in the fund to qualified venture firms to make qualified investments of capital in qualified businesses through a special purpose vehicle in accordance with section 30 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-298) and to pay the administrative, legal, and auditing expenses of the authority incurred in the administration of the program.  In addition, the authority shall use 75 basis points of the total amounts deposited in the fund, calculated on an annual basis, for programs administered by the authority that create an innovation ecosystem that supports and promotes high-growth businesses in the State.
 
	c.	The authority shall deposit into the fund dividends and returns on investments paid to the authority by or on behalf of a qualified business.  Upon the fund holding total deposits of $500,000,000 and thereafter upon a qualified investment in a qualified business achieving a return on investment of twice the original and follow-on investment, 50 percent of any return on investment in excess of twice the original and follow-on investment shall be paid to the General Fund of the State.
 
	d.	The authority shall account for and calculate reserves for follow-on investments, programs that support the State's innovation ecosystem, and administrative, legal, and auditing expenses of the authority in administering the program. The authority shall not include these reserves when calculating the amount in the fund available for new qualified investments.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.23.

34:1B-292  Sale, tax credits.
	24. a. The authority shall sell the tax credits authorized pursuant to section 22 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-290) to purchasers through a competitive auction process.
 
	b.	The authority shall determine the form and manner in which potential purchasers may bid for tax credits available under the program.  To be awarded a tax credit under the program, a potential purchaser shall:
 
	(1) specify the requested amount of tax credits, which shall not be less than $500,000;
 
	(2) specify the amount the potential purchaser will pay in exchange for the requested amount of tax credits, which shall be set by the authority at an amount not less than 75 percent of the requested dollar amount of tax credits;
 
	(3) commit to serve on the New Jersey Innovation Evergreen Advisory Board, established pursuant to section 32 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-300), and to otherwise provide mentorship, networking, and collaboration opportunities to qualified businesses that receive funding under the program; and
 
	(4) provide any other information that the chief executive officer of the authority determines is necessary.
 
	c.	Prior to an auction, the authority shall establish and disclose to bidders the weighted criteria the authority will utilize, which the authority shall base on the price offered to purchase the tax credits and the quality of the mentorship and networking opportunities and other support of the State's innovation ecosystem offered by a purchaser in its bid.  The authority may pro rate the amount of tax credits allocated to each purchaser.  A potential purchaser that submits a bid for tax credits under this section shall receive a written notice from the authority indicating whether the authority has approved it as a purchaser of tax credits and, if so, the amount of tax credits approved.
 
	d.	Except as provided in section 22 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-290), the authority shall hold one competitive auction per calendar year.
 
	e.	The authority may contract with an independent third party to conduct the competitive bidding process through which State tax credits issued by the authority may be sold.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.24; amended 2021, c.160, s.11; 2023, c.118, s.2.

34:1B-293  Contract between purchaser and authority.
 	25. a. A purchaser that submits a successful bid for the purchase of tax credits pursuant to section 24 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-292) shall enter into a contract with the authority that includes payment information and the commitments made by the purchaser in its auction bid.  A purchaser that submits a successful bid for the purchase of tax credits pursuant to section 24 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-292) shall pay by wire transfer the amount specified in its auction bid to the authority for deposit into the fund.  Upon receipt thereof, the chief executive officer shall notify the director to issue tax credits in the amount approved.  Failure by the purchaser to pay the amount agreed upon on time may disqualify the purchaser from purchasing the tax credits and the authority may reassign the right to purchase the credits to another bidder.  Failure by the purchaser to adhere to the commitments made in its auction bid may disqualify the purchaser from participating in future auctions and may result in the recapture of a portion of the tax credits.
 
	b.	The authority shall credit to the fund any money paid to the authority by a purchaser for an allocation of tax credits under the program.
 
	c.	The authority shall ensure that no undue financial advantage shall inure to a purchaser that also is: managing a qualified venture firm; beneficially owning, through rights, options, convertible interests, or otherwise, more than 15 percent of the voting securities or other voting ownership interests of a qualified venture firm; or controlling the direction of investments for a qualified venture firm.  The chief executive officer of the authority shall certify that the authority is monitoring the activities of such purchasers and has taken appropriate steps to ensure no undue financial advantage inures to the purchasers.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.25.

34:1B-294  Application, credit, State tax liability.
	26. a. A purchaser shall apply a credit awarded pursuant to sections 20 through 34 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-288 through 34:1B-302) against the purchaser's State tax liability due pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and 54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5 for the current privilege period as of the date of the credit's approval.  A purchaser may carry forward an unused credit resulting from the limitations of subsection b. of this section, if necessary, for use in the seven privilege periods next following the privilege period for which the credit is awarded.
 
	b.	The director shall prescribe the order of priority of the application of the credits awarded under sections 20 through 34 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-288 through 34:1B-302) and any other credits allowed by law.  The amount of a credit applied under sections 20 through 34 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-288 through 34:1B-302) against the tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5) for a privilege period, together with any other credits allowed by law, shall not reduce the tax liability of the purchaser to an amount less than the statutory minimum provided in subsection (e) of section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5).
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.26; amended 2023, c.118, s.3.

34:1B-295  Application, tax credit transfer certificate.
	27. a. A purchaser may apply to the authority and the director for a tax credit transfer certificate in lieu of the purchaser being allowed to apply any amount of the tax credit against the purchaser's State tax liability.  A tax credit may be sold or assigned, in full or in part, to another person that may have a tax liability pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and 54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5.  The tax credit transfer certificate provided to the purchaser shall include a statement waiving the purchaser's right to claim the credit that the purchaser has elected to sell or assign.
 
	b.	The purchaser shall not sell or assign a tax credit transfer certificate allowed under this section for consideration received by the purchaser of less than 85 percent of the transferred credit amount before considering any further discounting to present value which shall be permitted.  The tax credit transfer certificate issued to a purchaser by the director shall be subject to any limitations and conditions imposed on the application of State tax credits pursuant to section 26 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-294) and any other terms and conditions that the director may prescribe.
 
	c.	A buyer or assignee of a tax credit transfer certificate pursuant to this section shall not make any subsequent transfers, assignments, or sales of the tax credit transfer certificate.
 
	d.	Ten percent of the consideration received by a purchaser from the sale or assignment of a tax credit transfer certificate pursuant to this section shall be remitted to the director and deposited in the General Fund of the State.
 
	e.	The authority shall publish on its Internet website the following information concerning each tax credit transfer certificate approved by the authority and the director pursuant to this section:
 
	(1) the name of the transferor;
 
	(2) the name of the transferee;
 
	(3) the value of the tax credit transfer certificate;
 
	(4) the State tax against which the transferee may apply the tax credit; and
 
	(5) the consideration received by the transferor.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.27; amended 2023, c.118, s.4.

34:1B-296  Application process.
  	28. a. The authority shall establish an application process and determine the form and manner through which a venture firm may make and file an application for certification as a qualified venture firm.  The authority may accept applications on a rolling basis or on a date set by the authority.
 
	b.	In evaluating applicants for certification as a qualified venture firm, the authority shall establish weighted criteria by which the authority will evaluate all venture firms applying in the same calendar year and shall establish a minimum acceptable score.  The criteria shall include, but not be limited to:
 
	(1)	the management structure of the applicant, including:
 
	(a)	quality of the leadership, including willingness to work with the authority to support targeted industries and the innovation ecosystem in the State, and to locate in the State;
 
	(b)	the investment experience of the principals with qualified businesses;
 
	(c)	the knowledge, experience, and capabilities of the applicant in subject areas relevant to high-growth businesses in the State;
 
	(d)	the tenure and turnover history of principals and senior investment professionals of the applicant;
 
	(e)	whether the State's investment with the applicant under this program would exceed 15 percent of the total invested in the applicant by all investors, including investments in any special purpose vehicles;
 
	(f)	the applicant's stage of fundraising; and
 
	(g)	whether fees, expenses, and the remuneration of the general partner or manager are similar to those of peer investors; 
 
	(2)	the applicant's investment strategy, including:
 
	(a)	the applicant's track record of investing in high-growth businesses;
 
	(b)	whether the investment strategy of the applicant is focused on high-growth businesses, including the percentage of the investment identified to be invested in New Jersey or surrounding geographic areas; and 
 
	(c)	the performance history of the general partner or fund manager based on a review of investment returns on individual funds on an absolute basis and relative to peers; and
 
	(3)	The location of the applicant's venture firm and the proposed structure of the applicant venture firm's investments in qualified businesses, with preference given to applicant venture firms that are located in incentive areas and to applicant venture firms that agree to dedicate a greater portion of qualified investments into qualified businesses located within incentive areas.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.28.

34:1B-297  Criteria for qualified venture firm.
 	29. a. The authority shall certify or refuse to certify a venture firm as a qualified venture firm based on the criteria for certification set forth in section 28 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-296), and subsections b. and c. of this section.  
 
	b.	The authority shall not certify a venture firm as a qualified venture firm if the venture firm has: (1) an equity capitalization, net assets, or written commitments of less than $10,000,000 in the form of cash or cash equivalents on the date the determination for certification is made; or (2) fewer than two principals or persons employed to direct the qualified investment of capital with at least five years of money management experience in the venture capital or private equity sectors on the date the determination for certification is made.  The authority may adopt, pursuant to the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), rules setting forth additional disqualifying criteria and adjusting the minimum equity capitalization, net assets, or written commitments of a qualified venture firm.
 
	c.	Prior to certifying a venture firm as a qualified venture firm, the authority shall confirm with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of the Treasury whether the venture firm is in substantial good standing with the respective department, or has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan for the venture firm.  The authority may also contract with an independent third party to perform a background check on the venture firm.
 
	d.	The authority shall provide written notification to each venture firm that is certified as a qualified venture firm by the authority and shall provide written notification to each venture firm that the authority refuses to certify as a qualified venture firm, communicating in detail the grounds for the authority's refusal.  The authority shall review each qualified venture firm annually for the disqualifying criteria set forth in subsection b. of this section or other reasonable industry-accepted standards as determined by the authority.  The authority may decertify a qualified venture firm at any time pursuant to the disqualifying criteria set forth in subsection b. of this section.  Decertification shall not affect any previously made qualified investment or the fund's commitment to make a follow-on investment in a qualified business.

 	L.2020, c.156, s.29; amended 2021, c.160, s.12.

34:1B-298  Allocation of money to venture firms.
	30. a. (1) The authority is authorized to allocate money credited to the fund to one or more qualified venture firms for qualified investments at the times, in the amounts, and subject to the terms and conditions that the authority shall determine to be necessary and appropriate to effectuate the purposes of sections 20 through 34 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-288 through C.34:1B-302); provided that no more than two qualified investments shall be made with each qualified venture firm in a calendar year. 
 
	(2)	Each qualified investment shall not exceed  $10,000,000 in initial investment, exclusive of follow-on investments; provided, however, if a qualified investment is in a business: (a) which utilizes intellectual property that is core to the its business model and was developed at a New Jersey-based college or university; (b) is considered a university spin-off business as determined by the authority; or (c) is certified by the State as a "minority business" or a "women's business" pursuant to P.L.1986, c.195 (C.52:27H-21.17 et seq.), then the qualified investment shall not exceed  $12,500,000 in initial investment, exclusive of follow-on investments.  A qualified investment shall either:  (a) match a qualified venture firm's initial investment in a qualified business for the purchase of shares of stock; or (b) in instances where the venture firm has a prior investment in the qualified business, occur at a higher valuation compared to the venture firm's prior investments into the qualified business, as established by an independent third-party valuation or through participation by a third-party investor at the same valuation as the qualified venture firm.
 
	(3)	The fund shall not invest in a qualified venture firm if the authority determines that an undue financial advantage would inure to a purchaser if the investment occurs or if the investment would be inconsistent with the investment policies and goals of the State.
 
	(4)	The authority shall have a goal for 25 percent of the fund money that is allocated to qualified venture firms to be reserved for investment in businesses located in opportunity zones. 
 
	(5)	Within one year of the effective date of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.), the authority shall undertake a disparity study of investment by venture firms in women- and minority-owned business enterprises in this State.  Based on the finding of the disparity study, the authority, following board approval, may institute a set-aside plan to ensure that fund money allocated to qualified venture firms is reserved for investment in women- and minority-owned business enterprises in this State.
 
	b.	The authority shall make and enter into an agreement with each qualified venture firm to which the authority allocates money under the program.  The agreement shall include provisions that require the qualified venture firm to:
 
	(1)	make investments in qualified businesses that equal or exceed the amount of capital received by the qualified venture firm from the fund under the program; 
 
	(2)	cause an audit of the qualified venture firm's books and accounts, which a certified public accountant, who is licensed in accordance with the "Accountancy Act of 1997," P.L.1997, c.259 (C.45:2B-42 et seq.), or licensed in accordance with the laws of another state, shall conduct at least once in each year in which the qualified venture firm is in receipt of fund money or in which the qualified venture firm is responsible for the management of fund money allocated to the qualified venture firm by the authority; 
 
	(3)	enter into an agreement with each qualified business that receives a qualified investment, which agreement shall, at a minimum, require the qualified business to use the qualified investment of capital to support its business operations in this State and to provide the information required under section 31 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-299);
 
	(4)	upon the identification of a qualified investment, create a special purpose vehicle for the qualified investment of the fund;
 
	(5)	upon the identification of a qualified investment, indicate the amount of follow-on investment the authority should reserve, and periodically provide updates concerning this amount;
 
	(6)	agree that the qualified venture firm will publicize its participation in the "New Jersey Innovation Evergreen Fund;" 
 
	(7)	consent to the authority publicly disclosing the qualified venture firm on the list of qualified investment firms participating in the program; and
 
	(8)	consent to the disclosure of tax expenditure information as described in paragraph (8) of subsection b. of section 1 of P.L.2009, c.189 (C.52:27B-20a).
 
	c.	A qualified venture firm that has made and entered into an agreement with the authority in accordance with subsection b. of this section is authorized to make qualified investments of capital in one or more qualified businesses from fund money allocated to the qualified venture firm by the authority at the times, in the amounts, and subject to the terms and conditions that the qualified venture firm determines to be necessary and appropriate.  The authority may limit the amount of allocated fund money that a qualified venture firm invests in a qualified business based upon the size of investments the qualified business has received, the source of the investments, and the industry in which the qualified business is engaged.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.30; amended 2025, c.80, s.3.

34:1B-299  Report by venture firm.
	31. a. A qualified venture firm shall annually report to the authority:
 
	(1)	the amount of the qualified investment, if any, uninvested at the end of the preceding calendar year;
 
	(2)	all qualified investments made during the preceding calendar year, including the number and wages of employees of each qualified business at the time the venture firm made the qualified investment and as of December 31 of that year;
 
	(3)	for any qualified investment in which the qualified venture firm no longer has a position as of the end of the calendar year, the number of employees of the business as of the date the investment was terminated; 
 
	(4)	financials, audited by a certified public accountant, who is licensed in accordance with the "Accountancy Act of 1997," P.L.1997, c.259 (C.45:2B-42 et seq.), or licensed in accordance with the laws of another state, of the qualified venture firm and the special purpose vehicle that include a consolidated summary of the performance of the qualified venture firm. Any information about the performance of an individual business, including the qualified business, shall be considered confidential and not subject to the requirements of P.L.1963, c.73 (C.47:1A-1 et seq.); and
 
	(5)	any other information the authority requires to ascertain the impact of the program on the economy of the State.
 
	b.	With respect to the information required under paragraph (4) of subsection a. of this section, the report shall include a statement prepared by a certified public accountant, who is licensed in accordance with the "Accountancy Act of 1997," P.L.1997, c.259 (C.45:2B-42 et seq.), or licensed in accordance with the laws of another state, certifying that the accountant has reviewed the report and that the information and representations contained in the report are accurate.
 
	c.	Not later than 60 days after the sale or other disposition of a qualified investment, the qualified venture firm shall provide to the authority a report on the amount of the stock sold or disposed of and the consideration received for the sale or disposition.  The report shall detail the cumulative effect of sequentially introduced positive or negative values and include the gross income and details of any offsetting fees that reduce the net distribution.  Any dividend or proceeds received by the authority for the sale or other disposition of a qualified investment shall be deposited into the fund and used in accordance with section 23 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-291).
 
	d.	A qualified venture firm shall, as required at the discretion of the authority, submit to the authority satisfactory evidence supporting the information detailed in the annual report and certifying that all information provided by the qualified venture firm to the authority is true, including information contained in the application for certification, the agreement between the qualified venture firm and authority, any amendment to that agreement, and any other information submitted by the qualified venture firm to the authority pursuant to sections 20 through 34 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-288 through C.34:1B-302).  The qualified venture firm, or an authorized agent of the qualified venture firm, shall certify under the penalty of perjury that the information provided pursuant to this section is true.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.31; amended 2025, c.80, s.4.

34:1B-300  New Jersey Innovation Evergreen Advisory Board.
  	32.	The New Jersey Innovation Evergreen Advisory Board is established in but not of the authority for the purposes of providing guidance and networking opportunities to qualified businesses.  The members of the board shall serve in a voluntary capacity, to be appointed through a process to be determined by the chief executive officer of the authority from among purchasers and other strategic partners identified by the chief executive officer, to support the State's innovation ecosystem.  The terms of the voluntary members so appointed, after the initial appointments, shall be one year, and each member may be reappointed.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.32.

34:1B-301  Report on implementation of program.
  	33.	Beginning the year next following the year in which sections 20 through 34 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-288 through C.34:1B-302) take effect and every two years thereafter, the authority shall prepare a report on the implementation of the program, and submit the report to the Governor, and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), to the Legislature.  Each biennial report required under this section shall include the names and locations of qualified businesses receiving capital; the amount of each qualified investment; a report by a certified public accountant, who is licensed in accordance with the "Accountancy Act of 1997," P.L.1997, c.259 (C.45:2B-42 et seq.), or licensed in accordance with the laws of another state, of the consolidated performance of the fund; the cumulative amount of capital committed by purchasers; the rate and amount of fees charged by each qualified venture firm, including performance-based earnings and carried interest; the classification of each qualified business, according to the industrial sector and the size of the qualified business; the State's return on investment; the total number of jobs created in the State by the qualified business after the qualified investment; the average wages paid for the jobs; and any other metrics the authority determines are relevant based upon national best practices.  
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.33.

34:1B-302  Regulations.
	34.	a. Notwithstanding the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), to the contrary, the chief executive officer of the authority may adopt, immediately, upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, regulations that the chief executive officer deems necessary to implement the provisions of sections 20 through 34 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-288 through C.34:1B-302), which regulations shall be effective for a period not to exceed 180 days from the date of the filing.  The chief executive officer shall thereafter amend, adopt, or readopt the regulations in accordance with the requirements of P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	b.	Notwithstanding the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), to the contrary, the chief executive officer of the authority may adopt, immediately, upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, such regulations as the chief executive officer deems necessary to implement the provisions of P.L.2025, c.80, which regulations shall be effective for a period not to exceed 365 days from the date of the filing. The chief executive officer shall thereafter amend, adopt, or readopt the regulations in accordance with the requirements of P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.34; amended 2025, c.80, s.5.

34:1B-303  Short title.
 	35.	Sections 35 through 42 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-303 through C.34:1B-310) shall be known and may be cited as the "Food Desert Relief Act."
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.35.

34:1B-304  Findings, declarations.
	36. a. The Legislature finds and declares that: (1) there are certain areas of the State, known as "food desert" communities, in which residents are unable to obtain reasonable and adequate access to nutritious foods and, in particular, to fresh fruits and vegetables; (2) the inaccessibility of nutritious food in food desert communities has been attributed, in large part, to the absence of supermarkets and grocery stores in those communities; (3) low-income families are more likely than others to live in food desert communities and to lack the transportation or financial resources necessary to reach distant wholesome markets; and (4) the establishment of financial incentives to supermarkets, grocery stores, mid-sized food retailers, and small food retailers is a reasonable means by which to ensure that residents of food desert communities in the State are provided with reasonable access to nutritious, fresh, and delicious produce, and are afforded the opportunity thereby to make healthier eating choices for themselves and for their families.
 
	b.	The Legislature therefore determines that it is both reasonable and necessary to authorize the New Jersey Economic Development Authority to establish a program that provides financial assistance to supermarkets, grocery stores, mid-sized food retailers, and small food retailers to establish and retain locations in food desert communities in order to provide a consistent, and easily accessible, source of fresh produce to residents in those communities.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.36.

34:1B-305  Definitions.
	37.	As used in sections 35 through 42 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-303 through C.34:1B-310) and sections 3 and 4 of P.L.2022, c.47 (C.34:1B-308.1 and C.34:1B-308.2):
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Department" means the Department of Agriculture.
 
	"Director" means the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.
 
	"Eligible equipment costs" means expenditures for the procurement of such equipment as is needed to allow a supermarket, grocery store, mid-sized food retailer, small food retailer, or other eligible entity to store, refrigerate, transport, or otherwise maintain nutritious foods, including fresh fruits and vegetables, for retail purposes, but within a standard range based upon industry standards, as determined by the authority.
 
	"Eligible technology costs" means expenditures for the procurement or upgrade of technology systems to support online ordering and e-commerce, including but not limited to computer hardware, software, internet connectivity, and database systems.
 
	"First or second new supermarket or grocery store" means the first and second new supermarket or grocery store within each food desert community to be approved for tax credits under the program by the authority, except that a supermarket or grocery store may lose the designation of first or second new supermarket or grocery store if the project does not meet milestones designated by the authority in a timely manner, as determined by the authority.
 
	"Food desert community" means a physically contiguous area in the State in which residents have limited access to nutritious foods, such as fresh fruits and vegetables, and which has been designated as a food desert community pursuant to subsection b. of section 38 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-306).
 
	"Initial operating costs" means expenditures for the operation of a supermarket or grocery store within the first three years after opening to the public, but within a standard range based upon industry standards, as determined by the authority.
 
	"Mid-sized food retailer" means a medium-sized retail outlet with at least 2,500 but less than 16,000 square feet, of which at least 75 percent is occupied by food and related products, which products shall be based on industry standards, as determined by the authority, except that the food and related products shall not include alcoholic beverages and products related to the consumption of such beverages.
 
	"New supermarket or grocery store" means a supermarket or grocery store that commenced construction, or commenced rehabilitation of at least 75 percent of its square footage, after the effective date of the "Food Desert Relief Act," as established by sections 35 through 42 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-303 through C.34:1B-310).
 
	"Program" means the Food Desert Relief Program established in section 38 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-306).
 
	"Project cost" means the costs incurred in connection with the establishment of a supermarket or grocery store within a food desert community by the developer until the opening of the supermarket or grocery store to the public, including the costs relating to lands, buildings, improvements, real or personal property, or any interest therein, including leases discounted to present value, including lands under water, riparian rights, space rights and air rights acquired, owned, developed or redeveloped, constructed, reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved, any environmental remediation costs, plus costs not directly related to construction, including capitalized interest paid to third parties, of an amount not to exceed 20 percent of the total costs, and the cost of infrastructure improvements, including ancillary infrastructure projects.
 
	"Project financing gap" means the part of the total project cost, including return on investment, that remains to be financed after all other sources of capital have been accounted for, including, but not limited to, developer-contributed capital, which shall not be less than 20 percent of the total project cost, which may include the value of any existing land and improvements in the project area owned or controlled by the developer, and the cost of infrastructure improvements in the public right-of-way, and investor or financial entity capital or loans for which the developer, after making all good faith efforts to raise additional capital, certifies that additional capital cannot be raised from other sources on a non-recourse basis.
 
	"Small food retailer" means a small retail outlet, with less than 2,500 square feet, that sells a limited selection of foods and other products, such as a bodega, convenience store, corner store, neighborhood store, small grocery, mobile food vendor, farmers' market, food co-op, or small-scale store.
 
	"Supermarket or grocery store" means a retail outlet with at least 16,000 square feet, of which at least 80 percent is occupied by food and related products, which products shall be based on industry standards, as determined by the authority, except that the food and related products shall not include alcoholic beverages and products related to the consumption of such beverages.
 
	"Tax credit" means credit against a tax liability pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), N.J.S.17B:23-5, section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), and sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3).
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.37; amended 2021, c.160, s.13; 2022, c.47, s.1.

34:1B-306  Food Desert Relief Program.
	38. a. (1) There is established the Food Desert Relief Program to be administered by the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.  The program shall include tax credit components, as provided in sections 39 and 40 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-307 and 34:1B-308), in order to incentivize businesses to establish and retain new supermarkets and grocery stores in food desert communities.
 
	(2) The total value of tax credits approved by the authority pursuant to sections 39 and 40 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-307 and 34:1B-308) shall not exceed the limitations set forth in section 98 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-362).
 
	b.	The authority, in consultation with the Department of Agriculture and the Department of Community Affairs, shall initially designate not more than 50 separate geographic areas that have limited access to nutritious foods as food desert communities in this State.  The authority, in consultation with the Department of Agriculture and the Department of Community Affairs, shall develop criteria for the designation of food desert communities, but each separate food desert community shall consist of a distinct geographic area with a single defined border.  The criteria shall, at a minimum, incorporate analysis of municipal or census tract poverty statistics, food desert information from the Economic Research Service of the United States Department of Agriculture, healthier food retail tract information from the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and residents' access to nutritious foods, such as fresh fruits and vegetables, through supermarkets and grocery stores.  The authority, in consultation with the departments, may also consider in making food desert community designations pursuant to this subsection, data related to municipal or census tract population size and population density, the number of residents who receive Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) benefits within a municipality, the extent to which a municipality's residents have access to a personal vehicle, and a municipality's Municipal Revitalization Index distress score, obesity rate, and unemployment rate.  The authority, in consultation with the departments, shall continuously evaluate areas previously designated as food desert communities and assess whether they still meet the criteria for designation as a food desert community and may designate additional food desert communities once every three years following the effective date of sections 35 through 42 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-303 through 34:1B-310).
 
	c.	To receive a tax credit under section 39 or 40 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-307 or 34:1B-308), a taxpayer shall submit an application to the authority in the form and manner prescribed by the authority and in accordance with criteria established by the authority, which at minimum will include a commitment to accept benefits from federal nutrition assistance programs, such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) and the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC).  Following the approval of an application, the authority may, pursuant to an award agreement, award tax credits to an eligible taxpayer that:
 
	(1) develops and opens for business to the public the first or second supermarket or grocery store in a designated food desert community; or
 
	(2) owns, leases, or subleases, and operates the first or second new supermarket or grocery store in a designated food desert community.
 
	d. (1) The authority may sell all or a portion of the tax credits made available in a fiscal year pursuant to subsection a. of this section through a competitive auction process or a publicly advertised solicitation for offers and dedicate the proceeds from such sale to provide grants and loans to qualifying supermarkets, grocery stores, mid-sized food retailers, small food retailers, and any other eligible entity.  The amount of any grant or loan provided pursuant to this subsection shall be in accordance with the need of the supermarket, grocery store, mid-sized food retailer, small food retailer, or any other eligible entity, as determined by the authority.  The authority shall sell tax credits pursuant to this section in the manner determined by the authority; provided, however, the authority shall not sell tax credits for less than 85 percent of the tax credit amount.  Any credit sold shall be valid in the privilege period in which the sale is approved, and any unused portion thereof may be carried forward into the next seven privilege periods or until exhausted, whichever is earlier.  Grants and loans made available pursuant to this subsection shall be awarded to entities that:
 
	(a) operate a supermarket or grocery store that meets criteria established by the authority, which criteria shall, at minimum, include a commitment to accept benefits from federal nutrition assistance programs, including, but not limited to, the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) and the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC), in a designated food desert community;
 
	(b) own, lease, or sublease, and operate a mid-sized food retailer or small food retailer that commits to selling nutritious foods, including fresh fruits and vegetables, in a designated food desert community; or
 
	(c) at the discretion of the authority, support initiatives to strengthen food security of residents in food desert communities.
 
	(2) A supermarket, grocery store, mid-sized food retailer, small food retailer, or other eligible entity shall submit an application to the authority to receive a grant or loan pursuant to this subsection.  The application shall be submitted in the form and manner prescribed by the authority and in accordance with criteria established by the authority.  An entity eligible for a grant or loan under subparagraph (a) of paragraph (1) of this subsection shall not be required to submit a separate application to the authority for the grant or loan, provided that the entity has submitted an application to the authority pursuant to subsection c. of this section.
 
	(3) Prior to awarding a grant or loan to an applicant supermarket, grocery store, mid-sized food retailer, small food retailer, or other eligible entity pursuant to this subsection, the authority shall confirm with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of the Treasury whether the applicant is in substantial good standing with the respective department, or has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan for the applicant.  The applicant shall certify that any contractors or subcontractors that perform work at the qualifying supermarket or grocery store: (a) are registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); (b) have not been debarred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in the State; and (c) possess a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  The authority may also contract with an independent third party to perform a background check on the entity.
 
	(4) An applicant supermarket, grocery store, mid-sized food retailer, small food retailer, or other eligible entity shall, as required at the discretion of the authority, submit to the authority satisfactory information pertaining to the eligible equipment costs and eligible technology costs, as certified by a certified public accountant, certifications that all information provided by the applicant to the authority is true, including information contained in the application, any agreement pertaining to the award of grants or loans under the program, any amendment to such an agreement, and any other information submitted by the applicant to the authority pursuant to sections 35 through 42 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-303 through 34:1B-310), and evidence of the eligible equipment costs and eligible technology costs of the applicant.  The applicant, or an authorized agent of the applicant, shall certify under the penalty of perjury that the information provided pursuant to this subsection is true.
 
	e.	The authority may establish a technical assistance fund to assist any entity that is eligible for a tax credit, grant, or loan under this section.  The authority, through the technical assistance fund, may make grants to entities to assist qualifying supermarkets, grocery stores, mid-sized food retailers, small food retailers, or other eligible entities in implementation of best practices for increasing the accessibility of nutritious foods in food desert communities.  Technical assistance shall be provided either directly by the authority or through a not-for-profit or for-profit entity and made available in English as well as the two most commonly spoken languages in New Jersey other than English.  At the discretion of the authority, funds to support technical assistance may be provided in addition to, or in lieu of, any tax credit, grant, or loan awarded under sections 35 through 42 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-303 through 34:1B-310).
 
	f. (1) The authority shall require that any tax credits, grants, or loans awarded by the authority under the program be utilized by the recipient for one or more of the following purposes, which shall be set forth in the award agreement:
 
	(a) to mitigate a project financing gap;
 
	(b) to mitigate the initial operating costs of the supermarket or grocery store;
 
	(c) to mitigate the eligible equipment costs or eligible technology costs of the supermarket, grocery store, mid-sized food retailer, small food retailer, or other eligible entity in order to make nutritious foods more accessible and affordable to residents within food desert communities; or
 
	(d) to support initiatives to ensure the food security of residents in food desert communities.
 
	(2) The value of tax credits, grants, or loans awarded to individual entities under the program shall not exceed:
 
	(a) in the case of an entity eligible under paragraph (1) of subsection c. of this section, 40 percent of the total project cost for the first supermarket or grocery store in a designated food desert community, and 20 percent of the total project cost for the second supermarket or grocery store in the food desert community; and
 
	(b) in the case of an entity eligible under paragraph (2) of subsection c. of this section, the initial operating costs of the first supermarket or grocery store in a designated food desert community, and one-half of the initial operating costs of the second supermarket or grocery store in the food desert community;
 
	(c) in the case of an entity eligible for a grant or loan under subparagraph (b) of paragraph (1) of subsection d. of this section, the eligible equipment costs and eligible technology costs of the supermarket, grocery store, mid-sized food retailer, small food retailer, or other eligible entity; and
 
	(d) in the case of an entity eligible for a grant or loan under subparagraph (c) of paragraph (1) of subsection d. of this section, the costs of initiatives to ensure the food security of residents in food desert communities.
 
	g.	An entity that develops and opens the first or second new supermarket or grocery store in a designated food desert community shall be eligible for a tax credit only if the entity demonstrates to the authority at the time of application that: (1) each worker employed to perform construction at the project shall be paid not less than the prevailing wage rate for the worker's craft or trade, as determined by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) and P.L.2005, c.379 (C.34:11-56.58 et seq.); (2) without the tax credit award, the project is not economically feasible; (3) a project financing gap exists; and (4) except for demolition and site remediation activities, the entity has not commenced any construction at the site of the project before submitting an application, unless the authority determines that the project would not be completed otherwise.
 
	h. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, a labor harmony agreement shall be required if the State has a proprietary interest in a supermarket or grocery store and the agreement shall remain in effect for as long as the State acts as a market participant in the project.  The provisions of this paragraph shall apply to a supermarket or grocery store that will have more than 10 employees.
 
	(2) A labor harmony agreement under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall not be required if the authority determines that the supermarket or grocery store would not be feasible if a labor harmony agreement is required.  The authority shall support the determination by a written finding, which provides the specific basis for the determination.
 
	(3) As used in this subsection, "labor harmony agreement" means an agreement between a business that serves as the owner or operator of a supermarket or grocery store and one or more labor organizations, which requires, for the duration of the agreement: that any participating labor organization and its members agree to refrain from picketing, work stoppages, boycotts, or other economic interference against the business; and that the business agrees to maintain a neutral posture with respect to efforts of any participating labor organization to represent employees at a supermarket or grocery store, agrees to permit the labor organization to have access to the employees, and agrees to guarantee to the labor organization the right to obtain recognition as the exclusive collective bargaining representatives of the employees at a supermarket or grocery store by demonstrating to the New Jersey State Board of Mediation, Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement, or a mutually agreed-upon, neutral, third-party, that a majority of workers in the unit have shown their preference for the labor organization to be their representative by signing authorization cards indicating that preference.  The labor organization or organizations shall be from a list of labor organizations that have requested to be on the list and that the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development has determined represent substantial numbers of supermarket or grocery store employees in the State.
 
	i.	A recipient shall certify that all factual representations made by the recipient in the application or award agreement are true under the penalty of perjury.  A material misrepresentation of fact in either the application or award agreement may result in recession and recapture of any grants or tax credits awarded, or acceleration of any loans made, under sections 35 through 42 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-303 through 34:1B-310).
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.38; amended 2021, c.160, s.14; 2022, c.47, s.2; 2023, c.118, s.5.

34:1B-307  Award of credit against tax due.
 	39. a. For privilege periods beginning on or after January 1 next following the effective date of sections 35 through 42 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-303 through C.34:1B-310), a taxpayer eligible under subsection c. of section 38 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-306) shall be awarded a credit against the tax due pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5.  A taxpayer that qualifies for the award of a tax credit under this section may claim 25 percent of the total amount awarded in the privilege period in which the taxpayer establishes and opens the supermarket or grocery store for business, and an additional 25 percent of the total amount awarded in each of the three privilege periods next following the initial opening, provided that the supermarket or grocery store remains in business and open to the public.  For a taxpayer to be allowed a tax credit pursuant to this section, the taxpayer shall meet the requirements of this section, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to section 41 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-309).  
 
	b.	The order of priority of the application of the credit allowed pursuant to this section and any other credits allowed against the tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5) for a privilege period shall be as prescribed by the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  The amount of the credit applied pursuant to this section against the tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), shall not reduce a taxpayer's tax liability for a privilege period to an amount less than the statutory minimum provided in subsection (e) of section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5).  Any credit shall be valid in the privilege period in which the certification is approved and any unused portion thereof may be carried forward into the next 10 privilege periods or until exhausted, whichever is earlier.
 
	c.	The authority shall award tax credits to taxpayers until either the available tax credits are exhausted or all projects that are eligible for a tax credit pursuant to the provisions of sections 35 through 42 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-303 through C.34:1B-310) receive a tax credit, whichever occurs first.  If insufficient funding exists to allow a tax credit to a taxpayer in accordance with the provisions of subsection a. of section 38 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-306), the authority may offer the taxpayer a tax credit in an amount less than that provided in subsection a. of this section.
 
	d.	Prior to awarding a tax credit to a supermarket or grocery store, the authority shall confirm with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of the Treasury that the qualifying supermarket or grocery store is in substantial good standing with the respective department, or has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan for the supermarket or grocery store, and the qualifying supermarket or grocery store shall certify that any contractors or subcontractors performing work at the qualifying supermarket or grocery store: (1) are registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); (2) have not been debarred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in the State; and (3) possess a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  The authority may also contract with an independent third party to perform a background check on the developer.
 
	e.	A supermarket or grocery store shall, as required at the discretion of the authority, submit to the authority satisfactory information pertaining to the project cost, project financing gap, and the initial operating costs, as certified by a certified public accountant, certifications that all information provided by the supermarket or grocery store to the authority is true, including information contained in the application, any agreement pertaining to the award of tax credits under the program, any amendment to such an agreement, and any other information submitted by the supermarket or grocery store to the authority pursuant to sections 35 through 42 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-303 through C.34:1B-310), and evidence of the initial opening and continued operation of the supermarket or grocery store.  The supermarket or grocery store, or an authorized agent of the supermarket or grocery store, shall certify under the penalty of perjury that the information provided pursuant to this subsection is true. 
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.39; amended 2021, c.160, s.15.

34:1B-308.1  Tax credit transfer certificate, application.
	3. a. A taxpayer may apply to the director and the chief executive officer of the authority for a tax credit transfer certificate, covering one or more years, in lieu of the taxpayer being allowed any amount of the credit against the tax liability of the taxpayer.  The tax credit transfer certificate, upon receipt thereof by the taxpayer from the director and the chief executive officer of the authority, may be sold or assigned, in full or in part in an amount not less than $25,000, in the privilege period during which the taxpayer receives the tax credit transfer certificate from the director, to another person, who may apply the credit against a tax liability pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), N.J.S.17B:23-5, section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), and sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3).  The certificate provided to the taxpayer shall include a statement waiving the taxpayer's right to claim the amount of the credit that the taxpayer has elected to sell or assign against the taxpayer's tax liability.
 
	b.	The taxpayer shall not sell or assign, including a collateral assignment, a tax credit transfer certificate allowed under this section for consideration received by the taxpayer of less than 85 percent of the transferred credit amount before considering any further discounting to the present value which shall be permitted.  The tax credit transfer certificate issued to a taxpayer by the director shall be subject to any limitations and conditions imposed on the application of the original State tax credits issued pursuant to the "Food Desert Relief Act," sections 35 through 41 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-303 through C.34:1B-309), and any other terms and conditions that the director may prescribe.
 
	c.	A purchaser or assignee of a tax credit transfer certificate pursuant to this section shall not make any subsequent transfers, assignments, or sales of the tax credit transfer certificate.
 
	d.	The authority shall publish on its Internet website the following information concerning each tax credit transfer certificate approved by the authority and the director pursuant to this section:
 
	(1) the name of the transferor;
 
	(2) the name of the transferee;
 
	(3) the value of the tax credit transfer certificate; and
 
	(4) the consideration received by the transferor.

	L.2022, c.47, s.3.

34:1B-308.2  Tax credit award agreement; taxpayer ability to pledge, assign, transfer, sell right, title, interest.
	4. a. A taxpayer who has entered into a tax credit award agreement may, upon notice to and written consent of the authority and State Treasurer, pledge, assign, transfer, or sell any or all of its right, title, and interest in and to the tax credit award agreement and in the tax credit awards payable under the tax credit award agreement, and the right to receive the tax credit awards, along with the rights and remedies provided to the taxpayer under the taxpayer award agreement.  Any assignment shall be an absolute assignment for all purposes, including the federal bankruptcy code.
 
	b.	Any pledge of a tax credit award made by the taxpayer shall be valid and binding from the time the pledge is made and filed in the records of the authority.  The tax credit award pledged and thereafter received by the taxpayer shall immediately be subject to the lien of the pledge without any physical delivery thereof or further act, and the lien of any pledge shall be valid and binding against all parties having claims of any kind in tort, contract, or otherwise against the taxpayer irrespective of whether the parties have notice thereof.  As a condition of any tax credit grant, the grantee, assignee, pledgee, or subsequent holder of the tax credit grant shall immediately file notice of the same with the clerk of the county in which the project is located.
 
	c.	The authority shall publish on its Internet website the following information concerning each pledge, assignment, transfer, or sale approved by the authority pursuant to this section:
 
	(1) the name of the person or entity offering the pledge, assignment, transfer, or sale of a right, title, or interest in a tax credit award agreement;
 
	(2) the name of the person or entity receiving the pledge, assignment, transfer, or sale of a right, title, or interest in the tax credit award agreement;
 
	(3) the value of the right, title, or interest in the tax credit award agreement; and
 
	(4) the consideration received by the person or entity offering the pledge, assignment, transfer, or sale of the right, title, or interest in the tax credit award agreement.

	L.2022, c.47, s.4.

34:1B-309  Rules, regulations.
  	41.	Notwithstanding the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), to the contrary, the chief executive officer of the authority, in consultation with the department and the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, may adopt, immediately upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, rules and regulations necessary to carry out the provisions of sections 35 through 42 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-303 through C.34:1B-310), which rules and regulations shall be effective for a period not to exceed 360 days from the date of the filing.  The chief executive officer shall thereafter amend, adopt, or readopt the rules and regulations in accordance with the requirements of P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).  
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.41; amended 2021, c.160, s.17.

34:1B-310  Annual report.
 	42.	Within one year of the effective date of sections 35 through 42 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-303 through C.34:1B-310), the authority shall annually submit a report to the Governor, the State Treasurer, and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), the Legislature, on the effectiveness of the program in establishing supermarkets and grocery stores in food desert communities.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.42.

34:1B-322  Short title.
  	54.	Sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335) shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act."
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.54.

34:1B-323  Definitions.
	55.	As used in sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through 34:1B-335): 
 
	"Agency" means the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency established pursuant to P.L.1983, c.530 (C.55:14K-1 et seq.).
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Aviation district" means all areas within the boundaries of the Atlantic City International Airport, established pursuant to section 24 of P.L.1991, c.252 (C.27:25A-24), and the Federal Aviation Administration William J. Hughes Technical Center and the area within a one-mile radius of the outermost boundary of the Atlantic City International Airport and the Federal Aviation Administration William J. Hughes Technical Center, and the Trenton-Mercer Airport, established pursuant to R.S.40:8-2, and the area within a one-mile radius of the outermost boundary of the Trenton-Mercer Airport.
 
	"Board" means the Board of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Building services" means any cleaning or routine building maintenance work, including but not limited to, sweeping, vacuuming, floor cleaning, cleaning of rest rooms, collecting refuse or trash, window cleaning, securing, patrolling, or other work in connection with the care or securing of an existing building, including services typically provided by a door-attendant or concierge.  "Building services" shall not include any skilled maintenance work, professional services, or other public work for which a contractor is required to pay the "prevailing wage" as defined in section 2 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.26).
 
	"Cash flow" means the profit or loss that an investment property earns from rent, deposits, and other fees after financial obligations, such as debt, maintenance, government payments, and other expenses, have been paid.
 
	"Collaborative workspace" means coworking, accelerator, incubator, or other shared working environments that promote collaboration, interaction, socialization, and coordination among tenants through the clustering of multiple businesses or individuals.  For this purpose, the collaborative workspace shall be the greater of: 2,500 of dedicated square feet or 10 percent of the total property on which the redevelopment project is situated.  The collaborative workspace shall include a community manager, be focused on collaboration among the community members, and include regularly scheduled education events for the community members.  The collaborative workspace shall also include a physical open space that supports the engagement of its community members.
 
	"Commercial project" means a redevelopment project, other than an institutional project, which is predominantly commercial and, if located in a government-restricted municipality, contains 25,000 or more square feet, or if located in any other municipality, contains 50,000 or more square feet of office and retail space, industrial space, or film studios, professional stages, television studios, recording studios, screening rooms, or other infrastructure for film production, and may include a parking component.  The term "commercial project" includes a redevelopment project comprised solely of a health care or health services center, which contains not less than 10,000 square feet devoted to health care or health services, and which may include a parking component.  The term "commercial project" also includes an industrial space that is predominantly used for warehouse distribution or fulfillment centers if the eligible project cost includes at least $10,000,000 in environmental remediation costs.
 
	"Developer" means a person who enters or proposes to enter into an incentive award agreement pursuant to the provisions of section 60 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-328), including, but not limited to, a lender that completes a redevelopment project, operates a redevelopment project, or completes and operates a redevelopment project.
 
	"Director" means the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.
 
	"Distressed municipality" means a municipality that is qualified to receive assistance under P.L.1978, c.14 (C.52:27D-178 et seq.), a municipality under the supervision of the Local Finance Board pursuant to the provisions of the "Local Government Supervision Act (1947)," P.L.1947, c.151 (C.52:27BB-1 et seq.), a municipality identified by the Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs to be facing serious fiscal distress, a SDA municipality, or a municipality in which a major rail station is located.
 
	"Economic development incentive" means a financial incentive, awarded by the authority, or agreed to between the authority and a business or person, for the purpose of stimulating economic development or redevelopment in New Jersey, including, but not limited to, a bond, grant, loan, loan guarantee, matching fund, tax credit, or other tax expenditure.
 
	"Eligibility period" means the period not to exceed 10 years, as specified in an incentive award agreement during which a developer may claim a tax credit under the program, as such period shall be determined by the authority pursuant to subsection b. of section 60 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-328), provided that a developer may elect a period not to exceed five years for a project located in a government-restricted municipality or for a special mission non-profit project, and further provided that a developer of an institutional project may elect a period not to exceed five years in combination with an additional period of continued compliance for five years.
 
	"Enhanced area" means (1) a municipality that contains an urban transit hub, as defined in section 2 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-208); (2) the five municipalities with the highest poverty rates according to the 2017 Municipal Revitalization Index; and (3) the three municipalities with the highest percentage of SNAP recipients according to the 2017 Municipal Revitalization Index.
 
	"Environmental remediation costs" means any costs incurred by a developer in the completion of any actions necessary to investigate, clean up, or respond to a known, suspected, or threatened discharge of contaminants, including, as necessary, the preliminary assessment, site investigation, remedial investigation, and remedial action, pursuant to sections 23 through 43 and section 45 of P.L.1993, c.139 (C.58:10B-1 et seq.).
 
	"Food delivery source" means access to nutritious foods, such as fresh fruits and vegetables, through grocery operators, including, but not limited to, a full-service supermarket or grocery store, and other healthy food retailers of at least 16,000 square feet, including, but not limited to, a prepared food establishment selling primarily nutritious ready-to-serve meals.
 
	"Food desert community" means a physically contiguous area in the State in which residents have limited access to nutritious foods, such as fresh fruits and vegetables, and that has been designated as a food desert community pursuant to subsection b. of section 38 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-306).
 
	"Government-restricted municipality" means a municipality in this State with a municipal revitalization index distress score of at least 75, that met the criteria for designation as an urban aid municipality in the 2019 State fiscal year, and that, on the effective date of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.), is subject to financial restrictions imposed pursuant to the "Municipal Stabilization and Recovery Act," P.L.2016, c.4 (C.52:27BBBB-1 et seq.), or is restricted in its ability to levy property taxes on property in that municipality as a result of the State of New Jersey owning or controlling property representing at least 25 percent of the total land area of the municipality or as a result of the federal government of the United States owning or controlling at least 50 acres of the total land area of the municipality, which is dedicated as a national natural landmark.  The term "government-restricted municipality" also includes any municipality that: has a population greater than 50,000 and less than 60,000 according to the latest federal decennial census, is designated as the county seat of a county of the second class with a population greater than 800,000 according to the latest federal decennial census, and has an MRI distress score of 62.1; has a population greater than 70,000 and less than 100,000 according to the latest federal decennial census, is designated as the county seat of a county of the second class with a population greater than 515,000 and less than 525,000 according to the latest federal decennial census, and has an MRI distress score of 100; or contains the intersection of Interstate 280 and the Garden State Parkway, and corresponding land areas occupied by such highways under the ownership or control of the federal government of the United States or of this State within its municipal boundary, and has an MRI distress score of 55.5.
 
	"Health care or health services center" means an establishment that consists of not less than 10,000 square feet devoted to health care or health services, where patients are admitted for or seek examination and treatment by one or more physicians, dentists, psychologists, or other medical practitioners and which is located in a municipality with an MRI distress score of at least 50, a distressed municipality, or a qualified incentive tract or is located on land owned by the federal government of the United States on or before December 31, 2005.
 
	"Hospitality establishment" means a hotel, motel, or any business, however organized, that sells food, beverages, or both for consumption by patrons on the premises.
 
	"Incentive area" means an aviation district; a port district; an area designated pursuant to the "State Planning Act," P.L.1985, c.398 (C.52:18A-196 et seq.), as Planning Area 1 (Metropolitan), Planning Area 2 (Suburban), or a Designated Center under the State Development and Redevelopment Plan; an area designated as a brownfield site pursuant to the "Brownfield and Contaminated Site Remediation Act," sections 23 through 43 and section 45 of P.L.1993, c.139 (C.58:10B-1 et seq.); and an area of not less than 100 acres for which a licensed site remediation professional has certified environmental remediation costs, as defined in this section and in accordance with the "Site Remediation Reform Act," sections 1 through 29 of P.L.2009, c.60 (C.58:10C-1 et seq.), in an amount not less than $10,000,000, provided that any portion of such area is located in an area that otherwise qualifies as an incentive area.
 
	"Incentive award" means an award of tax credits to reimburse a developer for all or a portion of the project financing gap of a redevelopment project pursuant to the provisions of sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through 34:1B-335).
 
	"Incentive award agreement" means the contract executed between a developer and the authority pursuant to section 60 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-328), which sets forth the terms and conditions under which the developer may receive the incentive awards authorized pursuant to the provisions of sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through 34:1B-335).
 
	"Incubator facility" means a commercial property which contains 5,000 or more square feet of office, laboratory, or industrial space, which is located near, and presents opportunities for collaboration with, a research institution, teaching hospital, college, or university, and within which at least 75 percent of the gross leasable area is restricted for use by one or more technology startup companies.
 
	"Individuals with special needs" means individuals with mental illness, individuals with physical or developmental disabilities, and individuals in other emerging special needs groups identified by the authority, based on guidelines established for the administration of the Special Needs Housing Trust Fund established pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2005, c.163 (C.34:1B-21.25a) or developed in consultation with other State agencies.
 
	"Institutional project" means a redevelopment project that is developed by, or in affiliation with, an institution of higher education with a research activity designation of Research 1 (R1) or Research 2 (R2) from the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education, provided that: no more than five percent of the square footage of the project shall be leased or subleased to any entity other than the institution of higher education occupying the redevelopment project; and 51 percent of the square footage of the project is dedicated for the use of qualified research and development.
 
	"Labor harmony agreement" means an agreement between a business that serves as the owner or operator of a retail establishment, hospitality establishment, or distribution center and one or more labor organizations, which requires, for the duration of the agreement: that any participating labor organization and its members agree to refrain from picketing, work stoppages, boycotts, or other economic interference against the business; and that the business agrees to maintain a neutral posture with respect to efforts of any participating labor organization to represent employees at an establishment or other unit in the retail establishment, hospitality establishment, or distribution center, agrees to permit the labor organization to have access to the employees, and agrees to guarantee to the labor organization the right to obtain recognition as the exclusive collective bargaining representatives of the employees in an establishment or unit at the retail establishment, hospitality establishment, or distribution center by demonstrating to the New Jersey State Board of Mediation, Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement, or a mutually agreed-upon, neutral third party that a majority of workers in the unit have shown their preference for the labor organization to be their representative by signing authorization cards indicating that preference.  The labor organization or organizations shall be from a list of labor organizations which have requested to be on the list and which the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development has determined represent substantial numbers of retail establishment, hospitality establishment, or distribution center employees in the State.
 
	"Low-income housing" means housing affordable according to federal Department of Housing and Urban Development, or other recognized standards for home ownership and rental costs, and occupied or reserved for occupancy by households with a gross household income equal to 50 percent or less of the median gross household income for households of the same size within the housing region in which the housing is located.
 
	"Major cultural institution" means a public or nonprofit institution, not including an institution of higher education, within this State that engages in the cultural, intellectual, scientific, environmental, educational, or artistic enrichment of the people of this State, and which institution is designated by the board as a major cultural institution.
 
	"Major rail station" means a railroad station that is located within a qualified incentive area and that provides to the public access to a minimum of six rail passenger service lines operated by the New Jersey Transit Corporation.
 
	"Minimum environmental and sustainability standards" means standards established by the authority in accordance with the green building manual prepared by the Commissioner of Community Affairs pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2007, c.132 (C.52:27D-130.6), regarding the use of renewable energy, energy-efficient technology, and non-renewable resources to reduce environmental degradation and encourage long-term cost reduction.
 
	"Moderate-income housing" means housing affordable according to federal Department of Housing and Urban Development, or other recognized standards for home ownership and rental costs, and occupied or reserved for occupancy by households with a gross household income equal to more than 50 percent, but less than 80 percent, of the median gross household income for households of the same size within the housing region in which the housing is located.
 
	"MRI distress score" means a municipal revitalization index distress score, as documented in the 2023 Municipal Revitalization Index developed by the Department of Community Affairs.
 
	"Municipal Revitalization Index" means the index by the Department of Community Affairs ranking New Jersey's municipalities according to eight separate indicators that measure diverse aspects of social, economic, physical, and fiscal conditions in each locality.
 
	"Port district" means the portions of a qualified incentive area that are located within:
 
	the "Port of New York District" of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, as defined in Article II of the Compact Between the States of New York and New Jersey of 1921; or
 
	a 15-mile radius of the outermost boundary of each marine terminal facility established, acquired, constructed, rehabilitated, or improved by the South Jersey Port District established pursuant to "The South Jersey Port Corporation Act," P.L.1968, c.60 (C.12:11A-1 et seq.).
 
	"Program" means the New Jersey Aspire Program established by section 56 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-324).
 
	"Project cost" or "eligible project cost" means the costs incurred in connection with a redevelopment project by a developer until the issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy, or until such other time specified by the authority, for a specific investment or improvement, including the costs relating to lands, except the cost of acquiring such lands, buildings, improvements, real or personal property, or any interest therein, including leases discounted to present value, including lands under water, riparian rights, space rights, and air rights acquired, owned, developed or redeveloped, constructed, reconstructed, rehabilitated, or improved, any environmental remediation costs, plus costs not directly related to construction, including capitalized interest paid to third parties, of an amount not to exceed 20 percent of the total costs and the cost of infrastructure improvements, including ancillary infrastructure projects.  When 100 percent of the residential units constructed in a residential project are reserved for occupancy by low- and moderate-income households, the term "project cost" shall also include the developer fees paid before acquiring permanent financing, as well as the deferred developer fees approved pursuant to the rules established by the agency.  In addition to the foregoing, the term "project cost" shall include, for a redevelopment project located in a government-restricted municipality, land costs in an amount not to exceed 20 percent of the eligible project cost.  The fees associated with the application or administration of a grant under sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through 34:1B-335) shall not constitute a project cost.  For an institutional project, the term “project cost” shall also include the construction and completion of: research workspaces; meeting, classroom, dining, and dormitory spaces; and common areas, including, but not limited to, hallways, utility rooms, storage areas, and parking components.
 
	"Project financing gap" means the part of the total project cost, including reasonable and appropriate return on investment, that remains to be financed after all other sources of capital have been accounted for, including, but not limited to, developer-contributed capital, which shall not be less than 20 percent of the total project cost, and investor or financial entity capital or loans for which the developer, after making all good faith efforts to raise additional capital, certifies that additional capital cannot be raised from other sources on a non-recourse basis, provided, however, that for a redevelopment project located in a government-restricted municipality, the developer contributed capital shall not be less than 10 percent of the total project cost.  Developer-contributed capital may consist of cash, deferred development fees, costs for project feasibility incurred within the 12 months prior to application, property value less any mortgages when the developer owns the project site, and any other investment by the developer in the project deemed acceptable by the authority, as provided by regulations promulgated by the authority.  Property value shall be valued at the lesser of: (1) the purchase price, provided the property was purchased pursuant to an arm's-length transaction within 12 months of application; or (2) the value as determined by a current appraisal.
 
	"Project labor agreement" means a form of pre-hire collective bargaining agreement covering terms and conditions of a specific project that satisfies the requirements set forth in section 5 of P.L.2002, c.44 (C.52:38-5).
 
	"Qualified incentive tract" means a population census tract having a poverty rate of 20 percent or more or a census tract in which the median family income for the census tract does not exceed 80 percent of the greater of the Statewide median family income or the median family income of the metropolitan statistical area in which the census tract is situated.
 
	“Qualified research and development” means research and development activities undertaken within a priority industry, including, but not limited to, technology, artificial intelligence, software development, financial services, financial services technology, film and digital media, advanced manufacturing, gaming, pharmaceuticals, biotechnology, transportation, logistics, and renewable energy.
 
	"Quality childcare facility" is a child care center licensed by the Department of Children and Families or a registered family child care home with the Department of Human Services, operating continuously, which has not been subject to an enforcement action and which has and maintains a licensed capacity for children age 13 years or younger who attend for less than 24 hours a day.
 
	"Reasonable and appropriate return on investment" means the discount rate at which the present value of the future cash flows of an investment equals the cost of the investment.  In determining the "reasonable and appropriate return on investment," an investment shall not include any federal, State, or local tax credits.  For a residential project that utilizes federal low-income housing tax credits awarded by the agency, the "reasonable and appropriate return on investment" shall be based on the approval of deferred developer fees pursuant to the rules established by the agency.  In the event that a residential project which utilizes federal low-income housing tax credits awarded by the agency generates returns on equity other than federal or local grants or proceeds from the sale of federal or local tax credits, the "reasonable and appropriate return on investment" shall be based on both the discount rate at which the present value of the future cash flows of an investment equal the cost of the investment for the entire project, and when evaluating only the units financed with federal low-income housing tax credits awarded by the agency, the approval of deferred developer fees pursuant to the rules established by the agency.
 
	"Redevelopment project" means a specific construction project or improvement or phase of a project or improvement undertaken by a developer, owner or tenant, or both, and any ancillary infrastructure project.  A redevelopment project may involve construction or improvement upon lands, buildings, improvements, or real and personal property, or any interest therein, including lands under water, riparian rights, space rights, and air rights, acquired, owned, developed or redeveloped, constructed, reconstructed, rehabilitated, or improved.
 
	"Residential project" means a redevelopment project, other than an institutional project, that is predominantly residential, intended for multi-family residency, and may include a parking component.
 
	"SDA district" means an SDA district as defined in section 3 of P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-3).
 
	"SDA municipality" means a municipality in which an SDA district is situated.
 
	"Special mission non-profit project" means a project located in a government-restricted municipality or in an enhanced area that: serves a special mission, as determined by the authority, to accomplish the public purpose of a non-profit that is a developer of or is affiliated with the project and includes no more than 100 units of 100 percent supportive housing units for tenants requiring special needs or social services, which social services may include licensed social workers, and no more than 25,000 square feet of commercial space for the provision of on-site social service programs that require a license from the Department of Children and Families as a licensed child care center.  Special mission non-profit projects shall be exempt from the net benefit test requirement, affordable housing requirements, and the requirement to provide a market study as part of its application to the authority.
 
	"Technology startup company" means a for-profit business that has been in operation fewer than seven years at the time that it initially occupies or expands in a qualified business facility and is developing or possesses a proprietary technology or business method of a high technology or life science-related product, process, or service, which proprietary technology or business method the business intends to move to commercialization.  The business shall be deemed to have begun operation on the date that the business first hired at least one employee in a full-time position.
 
	"Total project cost" means the costs incurred in connection with the redevelopment project by the developer until the issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy, or upon such other event evidencing project completion as set forth in the incentive grant agreement, for a specific investment or improvement.
 
	"Tourism destination project" means a non-gaming business facility that will be among the most visited privately owned or operated tourism or recreation sites in the State, and which has been determined by the authority to be in an area appropriate for development and in need of economic development incentive assistance, including a non-gaming business within an established Tourism District with a significant impact on the economic viability of that district.
 
	"Transit hub" means an urban transit hub, as defined in section 2 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-208), that is located within an eligible municipality, as defined in section 2 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-208), and is located within a qualified incentive area.
 
	"Transit hub municipality" means a Transit Village or a municipality: which qualifies for State aid pursuant to P.L.1978, c.14 (C.52:27D-178 et seq.), or which has continued to be a qualified municipality thereunder pursuant to P.L.2007, c.111, and in which 30 percent or more of the value of real property was exempt from local property taxation during tax year 2006.  The percentage of exempt property shall be calculated by dividing the total exempt value by the sum of the net valuation which is taxable and that which is tax exempt.
 
	"Transit Village" means a municipality that has been designated as a transit village by the Commissioner of Transportation and the Transit Village Task Force.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.55; amended 2021, c.160, s.22; 2023, c.98, s.1; 2025, c.2, s.1; 2025, c.127, s.13; 2025, c.313, s.1.

34:1B-324  New Jersey Aspire Program; rules, regulations.
	56.	a. (1) The New Jersey Aspire Program is hereby established as a program under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.  The authority shall administer the program to encourage redevelopment projects through the provision of incentive awards to reimburse developers for certain project financing gap costs.  The board may approve the award of an incentive award to a developer upon application to the authority pursuant to sections 58 and 59 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-326 and C.34:1B-327).  The value of all tax credits approved by the authority pursuant to sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through 34:1B-335) shall be subject to the limitations set forth in section 98 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-362).
 
	(2)	The authority, in consultation with the agency, shall adopt rules and regulations, pursuant to subsection b. of section 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-335), concerning the establishment and administration of the affordability controls that shall apply to the residential units constructed for occupancy by low- and moderate-income households under the program, including, but not limited to, residential units within residential projects that utilize federal low-income housing tax credits awarded by the agency.  Notwithstanding any provision of law or regulation to the contrary, the affordability controls shall, at a minimum, be consistent with the affordability controls established in the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to the "Fair Housing Act," P.L.1985, c.222 (C.52:27D-301 et al.), as in effect immediately prior to the effective date of P.L.2023, c.98 (C.34:1B-335.1 et al.), including, but not limited to, any requirements concerning the bedroom distributions, affordability averages, affirmative marketing, and long-term deed restrictions of residential units constructed for occupancy by low- and moderate-income households.
 
	b.	The chief executive officer of the authority shall designate one staff member per government-restricted municipality in order to keep the municipality informed on activities within the municipality and to coordinate economic development initiatives.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.56; amended 2023, c.98, s.2; 2025, c.2, s.2.

34:1B-325  Eligibility, incentive award, redevelopment project.
	57.	a. Prior to March 1, 2029, a developer shall be eligible to receive an incentive award for a redevelopment project only if the developer demonstrates to the authority at the time of application that:
 
	(1)	without the incentive award, the redevelopment project is not economically feasible;
 
	(2)	a project financing gap exists, or the authority determines that the redevelopment project will generate a below market rate of return;
 
	(3)	the redevelopment project, except a film studio, professional stage, television studio, recording studio, screening room, or other infrastructure used for film production or a special mission nonprofit project, is located in the incentive area;
 
	(4)	 except for demolition and site remediation activities, the developer has not commenced any construction at the site of the redevelopment project prior to submitting an application, unless the authority determines that the redevelopment project would not be completed otherwise or, in the event the redevelopment project is to be undertaken in phases, the requested incentive award is limited to only phases for which construction has not yet commenced;
 
	(5)	the redevelopment project shall comply with minimum environmental and sustainability standards;
 
	(6)	the redevelopment project shall comply with the authority's affirmative action requirements, adopted pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1979, c.303 (C.34:1B-5.4);
 
	(7)	(a) during the eligibility period, each worker employed to perform construction work at the redevelopment project shall be paid not less than the prevailing wage rate for the worker's craft or trade, as determined by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) and P.L.2005, c.379 (C.34:11-56.58 et seq.);
 
	(b)	during the eligibility period, each worker employed to perform building services work at the redevelopment project, whether pursuant to contract by the developer or a commercial tenant, commercial subtenant, or other commercial occupant, shall be paid not less than the prevailing wage rate for the worker's craft or trade, as determined by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) and P.L.2005, c.379 (C.34:11-56.58 et seq.), except that this requirement shall not apply to workers employed to perform building services work by a commercial tenant, commercial subtenant, or other commercial occupant that has a leasehold interest or other occupancy right in a redevelopment project, which leasehold interest or other occupancy right encompasses less than 5,000 square feet of space within the project.  The developer shall include in all commercial leases or other commercial occupancy agreements, and shall require that all subleases or other commercial occupancy agreements applicable to the redevelopment project include, a provision setting forth the requirements of this subparagraph, which provision shall be in a form acceptable to the authority.  Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, if a commercial tenant, commercial subtenant, or other commercial occupant violates this provision due to the underpayment of the required prevailing wage rate, then the issuance of tax credits to the developer and any co-applicant shall be delayed until such time as documentation demonstrating compliance has been provided to the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, subsequently reviewed and approved by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, and verified by the authority, which reviews and verification shall be completed.  If a violation is not cured, or is not capable of being cured, within one year of receipt of notice of the violation, then the developer and any co-applicant shall forfeit 50 percent of the tax credits otherwise authorized for the tax period in which the notice of violation was issued.  If the violation is not cured on or before the conclusion of that tax period, the developer and any co-applicant shall forfeit up to 100 percent of the tax credits otherwise authorized, as determined by the authority, in each subsequent tax period until the first tax period for which documentation demonstrating compliance has been provided to the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, subsequently reviewed and approved by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, and verified by the authority, which reviews and verifications shall be completed.  In this event, the developer and any co-applicant shall be allowed the full tax credit amount beginning in the tax period in which documentation of compliance was reviewed and approved by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development and verified by the authority, including each subsequent tax period in which the tax credits are otherwise authorized.  The requirement of this subparagraph shall not apply to the residential tenants or residential subtenants of a redevelopment project;
 
	(c)	in the event a redevelopment project, or any portion thereof, is undertaken by a tenant pursuant to a contract and the tenant has a leasehold of more than 55 percent of space in the building owned or controlled by the developer, the requirement that each worker employed to perform building service work at the building be paid not less than the prevailing wage shall apply to the entire building, except as otherwise provided in subparagraph (b) of this paragraph for commercial tenants, commercial subtenants, or other commercial occupants with a leasehold interest or other occupancy right encompassing less than 5,000 square feet.  The requirement of this subparagraph shall not apply to the residential tenants or residential subtenants of a redevelopment project;
 
	(8)	(a) the redevelopment project shall be completed, and the developer shall be issued a certificate of occupancy for the redevelopment project facilities by the applicable enforcing agency, within four years of executing the incentive award agreement, or in the case of a redevelopment project with a project cost in excess of $50,000,000, the incentive phase agreement corresponding to the redevelopment project; or
 
	(b)	in the discretion of the authority, a redevelopment project with a project cost in excess of $50,000,000, and that is authorized to be completed in phases, may be allowed no more than six years from the date on which the incentive award agreement is executed to be issued a certificate of occupancy by the applicable enforcement agency;
 
	(9)	the developer has complied with all requirements for filing tax and information returns and for paying or remitting required State taxes and fees by submitting, as a part of the application, a tax clearance certificate, as described in section 1 of P.L.2007, c.101 (C.54:50-39); and
 
	(10)  the developer is not more than 24 months in arrears at the time of application.
 
	b.	In addition to the requirements set forth in subsection a. of this section, for a commercial project to qualify for an incentive award, the developer shall demonstrate that the developer shall contribute capital of at least 20 percent of the total project cost, or at least $30,000,000 for an institutional project, whichever is greater, except that if a redevelopment project is located in a government-restricted municipality, the developer shall contribute capital of at least 10 percent of the total project cost.
 
	c.	In addition to the requirements set forth in subsection a. of this section, for a residential project or a commercial project comprised solely of a health care or health service center to qualify for an incentive award, the residential project or health care or health service center shall:
 
	(1) have a total project cost of at least $17,500,000 if the project is located in a municipality with a population greater than 200,000 according to the latest federal decennial census;
 
	(2) have a total project cost of at least $10,000,000 if the project is located in a municipality with a population less than 200,000 according to the latest federal decennial census; or
 
	(3) have a total project cost of at least $5,000,000 if the project is in a qualified incentive tract or government-restricted municipality.
 
	d.	In addition to the requirements set forth in subsections a. and c. of this section, for a residential project consisting of newly constructed residential units to qualify for an incentive award, the developer shall reserve at least 20 percent of the residential units constructed for occupancy by low- and moderate-income households with affordability controls as adopted by the authority, in consultation with the agency, in accordance with paragraph (2) of subsection a. of section 56 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-324), except that a residential project receiving a federal historic rehabilitation tax credit pursuant to section 47 of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 26 U.S.C. s.47, or a tax credit pursuant to the "Historic Property Reinvestment Act," sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through 34:1B-276), shall be exempt from the affordability controls related to bedroom distribution.
 
	e.	Prior to the board considering an application submitted by a developer, the authority shall confirm with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of the Treasury whether the developer is in substantial good standing with the respective department or has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan for the developer.  The developer shall certify that any contractors or subcontractors that will perform work at the redevelopment project: (1) are registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); (2) have not been debarred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in the State; and (3) possess a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  The authority may also contract with an independent third party to perform a background check on the developer.
 
	f.	Beginning on the fourth year of the eligibility period for a commercial project, and through the conclusion of the eligibility period, if the average occupancy rate of the commercial project is less than 60 percent during any applicable tax period, the developer and co-applicant shall forfeit all credits otherwise allowed for the tax period and for each subsequent tax period until the authority verifies documentation, submitted by the developer or co-applicant, demonstrating that the average occupancy rate has reached or surpassed 60 percent for the tax period.  The full amount of credit shall be allowed to a developer and any co-applicant for the tax period in which the average occupancy rate reaches or surpasses 60 percent.  Occupancy for the tax period shall be determined by the average of the monthly occupancy for the applicable tax period.  The occupancy requirement in this subsection shall not apply to residential projects.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.57; amended 2021, c.160, s.23; 2023, c.98, s.3; 2025, c.2, s.3; 2025, c.313, s.2.

34:1B-326  Application, incentive award.
	58. a. Prior to March 1, 2029, for redevelopment projects eligible pursuant to section 57 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-325) for which a developer is seeking an incentive award for the redevelopment project, the developer shall submit an application to the authority and, in the case of a residential project, shall submit an application to the authority and the agency, in a form and manner prescribed in regulations adopted by the authority pursuant to section 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-335).  The authority shall accept applications for incentive awards during the grant periods established pursuant to section 59 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-327), except that the developer of an institutional project shall submit an application for an incentive award, in a form and manner prescribed by the authority, no sooner than April 1, 2026 and no later than April 1, 2027.
 
	b.	The authority shall not consider an application for a commercial project unless the developer submits a letter evidencing support for the commercial project from the governing body of the municipality in which the commercial project is located with the application.
 
	c.	The authority shall review the project cost, evaluate and validate the project financing gap estimated by the developer, and conduct a State fiscal impact analysis to ensure that the overall public assistance provided to the project will result in a net positive benefit to the State, provided that the net benefit analysis shall not apply to capital investment for a food delivery source, a health care or health services center, an institutional project, or a residential project.  In determining whether a project will result in a net positive benefit to the State, the authority shall not consider the value of any taxes exempted, abated, rebated, or retained under the "Five-Year Exemption and Abatement Law," P.L.1991, c.441 (C.40A:21-1 et seq.), the "Long Term Tax Exemption Law," P.L.1991, c.431 (C.40A:20-1 et al.), the "New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act," P.L.1983, c.303 (C.52:27H-60 et al.), or any other law that has the effect of lowering or eliminating the developer's State or local tax liability.  The determination made pursuant to this subsection shall be based on the potential tax liability of the developer without regard for potential tax losses if the developer were to locate in another state.  The authority shall assess the cost of these reviews to the applicant.  A developer shall pay to the authority the full amount of the direct costs of an analysis concerning the developer's application for a tax credit that a third party retained by the authority performs, if the authority deems such retention to be necessary.  The authority shall evaluate the net economic benefits on a present value basis under which the requested tax credit allocation amount is discounted to present value at the same discount rate as the projected benefits from the implementation of the proposed redevelopment project for which an award of tax credits is being sought.
 
	d.	(1) For a redevelopment project subject to the requirement of subsection c. of this section to be eligible for any tax credits under the program, a developer shall demonstrate to the authority that the award of tax credits will yield a net positive benefit to the State equaling an amount determined by the authority through regulation that exceeds the requested tax credit amount.  The developer shall certify, under the penalty of perjury, that all documents submitted, and factual assertions made, to the authority to demonstrate that the award of tax credits will yield a net positive benefit to the State in accordance with this subsection are true and accurate at the time of submission.
 
	(2)	A redevelopment project located in a government-restricted municipality shall yield a net positive benefit to the State that exceeds the requested tax credit amount, but the net benefit requirement set by the authority for such redevelopment projects may be up to 35 percentage points lower than the net benefit requirement set by the authority for all other eligible redevelopment projects.
 
	(3)	A commercial project that contains 50,000 or more square feet of space devoted to research or technology-focused incubator and conferencing facilities for one or more institutions of higher education or nonprofit organizations, and which has a total project cost of not less than $50 million, shall yield a net positive benefit to the State that exceeds the requested tax credit amount, but the net benefit requirement set by the authority for such redevelopment projects may be up to 35 percentage points lower than the net benefit requirement set by the authority for all other eligible redevelopment projects.
 
	(4)	A redevelopment project that is predominantly commercial and that receives a federal historic rehabilitation tax credit pursuant to section 47 of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 26 U.S.C. s.47, or a tax credit pursuant to the "Historic Property Reinvestment Act," sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through 34:1B-276), shall yield a net positive benefit to the State that exceeds the requested tax credit amount, but the net benefit requirement set by the authority for such redevelopment projects may be up to 35 percentage points lower than the net benefit requirement set by the authority for all other eligible redevelopment projects.
 
	(5)	A commercial project that is located on land owned by the federal government on or before December 31, 2005 shall yield a net positive benefit to the State that exceeds the requested tax credit amount, but the net benefit requirement set by the authority for such redevelopment projects may be up to 35 percentage points lower than the net benefit requirement set by the authority for all other eligible redevelopment projects.
 
	(6)	A redevelopment project that is undertaken by a major cultural institution to renovate existing space or expand services into additional space, and in which the major cultural institution realizes all returns from the redevelopment project, shall yield a net positive benefit to the State that exceeds the requested tax credit amount, but the net benefit requirement set by the authority for such redevelopment projects may be lower than the net benefit requirement set by the authority for all other eligible redevelopment projects.
 
	e.	If at any time during the eligibility period the authority determines that the developer made a material misrepresentation on the developer's application, the developer shall forfeit the incentive award.
 
	f.	If circumstances require a developer to amend its application to the authority, then the developer, or an authorized agent of the developer, shall certify to the authority that the information provided in its amended application is true under the penalty of perjury.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.58; amended 2021, c.160, s.24; 2023, c.98, s.4; 2025, c.313, s.3.

34:1B-327  Awarding of incentive awards.
	59. a. Prior to March 1, 2029, for redevelopment projects eligible pursuant to section 57 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-325), the authority shall award incentive awards based on the order in which complete, qualifying applications were received by the authority.  If a developer intends to apply to both the authority and the agency for subsidies, the developer shall notify the agency simultaneously with any application made to the authority.  The authority shall transmit its grant determination for such residential projects to the agency along with any information developed by the authority and confirmation of the authority's intent to provide an incentive award or award to the project.  Approval of an application by the agency shall be the final determination required for an incentive award for a residential project under this section.
 
	b.	Prior to allocating an incentive award to a redevelopment project, the authority shall confirm with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of the Treasury that the developer is in substantial good standing with the respective department, or a developer not in substantial good standing with each department has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan for the developer, and that the developer shall confirm that each contractor or subcontractor performing work at the redevelopment project: (1) is registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); (2) has not been debarred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in the State; and (3) possesses a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  The authority may also contract with an independent third party to perform a background check on the developer.  Provided that the developer, and all contractors and subcontractors, are in compliance with this subsection, the authority shall allocate incentive awards to redevelopment projects according to the redevelopment project's score and until either the available incentive awards are exhausted or all redevelopment projects obtaining the minimum score receive an incentive award, whichever occurs first.  If insufficient funding exists to fully fund all eligible projects, a project may be offered partial funding.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.59; amended 2021, c.160, s.25; 2023, c.98, s.5.

34:1B-328  Incentive award agreement.
	60.	a.  (1)  Following approval and selection of an application pursuant to sections 58 and 59 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-326 and C.34:1B-327), the authority shall enter into an incentive award agreement with the developer.  The chief executive officer of the authority shall negotiate the terms and conditions of the incentive award agreement on behalf of the State.
 
	(2)	For a phased project, the incentive phase agreement shall set forth, for each phase of the project and for the total project, the capital investment requirements and the time periods in which each phase of the project shall be commenced and completed.  The awarding of tax credits shall be conditioned on the developer's compliance with the requirements of the agreement.  A redevelopment project may be completed in phases in accordance with rules adopted by the authority if the redevelopment project has an eligible project cost in excess of $50,000,000.
 
	b.	An incentive award agreement shall specify the amount of the incentive award the authority shall award to the developer and the duration of the eligibility period.  The duration of the eligibility period shall not exceed 10 years for a commercial project, mixed-use project, or residential project, except that to reduce the total value of tax credits needed to reimburse a developer for all or part of the project financing gap of a redevelopment project, the authority may, in its discretion, approve a duration for the eligibility period that is shorter than the applicable maximum periods.  The incentive award agreement shall provide an estimated date of completion and include a requirement for periodic progress reports, including the submittal of executed financing commitments and documents that evidence site control, provided, however, that the developer may sell one or more buildings during the eligibility period, subject to such rules and regulations as may be adopted by the authority.  If the authority does not receive periodic progress reports, or if the progress reports demonstrate unsatisfactory progress, then the authority may rescind the incentive award.  If the authority rescinds an incentive award in the same calendar year in which the authority approved the incentive award, then the authority may assign the incentive award to another applicant.  The incentive award agreement may also provide for a verification of the financing gap at the time the developer provides executed financing commitments to the authority and a verification of the developer's projected cash flow at the time of certification that the project is completed, provided that the authority shall not resize or reduce the tax credit based on the executed financing commitments or the updated projected cash flow, but that the authority shall use the commitments and cash flow to calculate the return on investment required pursuant to subsection c. of this section.
 
	c.	To ensure the protection of taxpayer money, at project certification and at the end of the seventh year of the eligibility period, the authority shall evaluate the developer's rate of return on investment and compare that rate of return on investment to the reasonable and appropriate rate of return at the time of board approval.  If the actual rate of return on investment exceeds the reasonable and appropriate rate of return on investment at the time of board approval by more than 15 percent, the authority shall require the developer to pay up to 20 percent of the amount in excess of the reasonable and appropriate rate of return on investment.  For any year during the eligibility period in which the director purchases a tax credit certificate or tax credit transfer certificate issued for a redevelopment project pursuant to section 89 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.52:18A-263), if the actual rate of return on investment exceeds the reasonable and appropriate rate of return on investment at the time of board approval by more than 10 percent, the authority shall require the developer to pay up to 20 percent of the amount in excess of the reasonable and appropriate rate of return on investment, except as otherwise provided in paragraph (2) of subsection a. of section 89 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.52:18A-263).  The authority shall require an escrow account to be held by the authority for any payment received pursuant to this subsection until the end of the eligibility period.  For any payment amount calculated at project certification, the developer shall make equal annual payments, which in aggregate shall equal the calculated payment amount, with each annual report for the first seven years of the eligibility period.  At the end of the seventh year of the eligibility period, the developer shall pay the authority any additional amount required.  For projects that have an eligibility period of fewer than 10 years, the authority may adjust the year of the eligibility period in which the evaluation of the rate of return and contribution to the escrow account, as may be appropriate, are required.  The authority shall not reduce or recapture any tax credits at project certification or at the end of the seventh year of the eligibility period solely due to an increase to the return on investment.  Following the final year of the eligibility period, the authority shall determine if the developer's rate of return exceeded the reasonable and appropriate rate of return determined at board approval.  If the final rate of return does not exceed the reasonable and appropriate rate of return determined at board approval, the authority shall release to the developer the escrowed funds.  If the project final rate of return exceeds the reasonable and appropriate rate of return determined at board approval, the authority shall require the developer to pay up to 20 percent of the amount of the excess, which shall include the funds held in escrow, and such funds shall be deposited in the State General Fund.
 
	d.	The incentive award agreement shall include a requirement that the authority confirm with the Department of Environmental Protection, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, and the Department of the Treasury that the developer is in substantial good standing with the respective department, or the developer has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action for the developer, and the developer shall confirm that each contractor or subcontractor performing work at the redevelopment project: (1) is registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); (2) has not been debarred, suspended, or disqualified by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in the State, or been debarred, suspended, or disqualified by a federal agency from engaging in federally funded construction projects or bidding on federal contracting opportunities; and (3) possesses a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  The incentive award agreement shall also include a provision that the developer shall forfeit the incentive award in any year in which the developer is neither in substantial good standing with each department nor has entered into a practical corrective action.  The incentive award agreement shall also require a developer to engage in on-site consultations with the Division of Workplace Safety and Health in the Department of Health.
 
	e.	(1)  Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the authority shall not enter into an incentive award agreement for a redevelopment project that includes at least one retail establishment which will have more than 10 employees, at least one distribution center which will have more than 20 employees, or at least one hospitality establishment which will have more than 10 employees, unless the incentive award agreement includes a precondition that any business that serves as the owner or operator of the retail establishment, distribution center, or hospitality establishment enters into a labor harmony agreement with a labor organization or cooperating labor organizations which represent retail establishment, hospitality establishment, or distribution center employees in the State.
 
	(2)	A labor harmony agreement shall be required only if the State has a proprietary interest in the redevelopment project and shall remain in effect for as long as the State acts as a market participant in the redevelopment project.  The authority may enter into an incentive award agreement with a developer without the labor harmony agreement required under paragraph (1) of this subsection if the authority determines that the redevelopment project would not be able to go forward if a labor harmony agreement is required.  The authority shall support the determination by a written finding, which provides the specific basis for the determination.
 
	(3)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2023, c.98)
 
	f.	(1)  Except for a special mission nonprofit project in any location, or a residential project that is located in a government-restricted municipality and in which 100 percent of the residential units constructed in the residential project are reserved for occupancy by low- and moderate-income households, for a redevelopment project whose total project cost equals or exceeds $10 million, in addition to the incentive award agreement, a developer shall enter into a community benefits agreement with the authority and the county or municipality in which the redevelopment project is located.  The agreement may include, but shall not be limited to, requirements for training, employment, and youth development and free services to underserved communities in and around the community in which the redevelopment project is located.  Prior to entering a community benefits agreement, the county or municipality in which the redevelopment project is located shall hold at least one previously advertised public hearing at which testimony from residents, community groups, and other stakeholders shall have an opportunity to be heard on the needs of the community that the agreement should address, and the minutes of the meeting shall be included in the resolution of the governing body of the municipality or county adopting the community benefits agreement.
 
	(2)	The community benefits agreement shall provide for the creation of a community advisory committee to oversee the implementation of the agreement, monitor successes, ensure compliance with the terms of the agreement, and produce an annual public report.  The community advisory committee created pursuant to this paragraph shall be comprised of representatives of diverse community groups and residents of the county or municipality in which the redevelopment project is located.
 
	(3)	At the time the developer submits the annual report required pursuant to section 62 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-330) to the authority, the developer shall certify, under the penalty of perjury, that it is in compliance with the terms of the community benefits agreement.  If the developer fails to provide the certification required pursuant to this paragraph or the authority determines that the developer is not in compliance with the terms of the community benefits agreement based on the reports submitted by the community advisory committee pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection, then the authority may rescind an award or recapture all or part of any tax credits awarded.
 
	(4)	Notwithstanding any requirement of this subsection to the contrary, a developer shall be considered to have met the requirements of a community benefits agreement pursuant to this subsection if the developer submits to the authority:
 
	(a)	a copy of either the developer's approval letter from the authority or a redevelopment agreement applicable to the qualified business facility, provided that the approval letter or redevelopment agreement is certified by the municipality in which the redevelopment project is located and includes provisions that meet or exceed the standards required for a community benefits agreement in this subsection, as determined by the chief executive officer pursuant to rules adopted by the authority; or
 
	(b)	a resolution adopted by the governing body of the municipality in which the redevelopment project is located, which resolution shall be adopted after at least one public hearing at which the governing body provides an opportunity for residents, community groups, and other stakeholders to testify, and which resolution shall state that the governing body has determined that the redevelopment project will provide economic and social benefits to the community that fulfill the purposes of this subsection, which benefits render a separate community benefit agreement unnecessary, and explain the reasons supporting the governing body's determination.
 
	(c)	The developer and the municipality or county shall submit the executed community benefits agreement, redevelopment agreement, or approved resolution to the authority within the same time as all other conditions subsequent required in the approval letter.
 
	(5)	Notwithstanding any provision of paragraph (1) of this subsection to the contrary, the developer of a redevelopment project shall be required to enter into a community benefits agreement, subject to the requirements of this section, if the redevelopment project is located in a government-restricted municipality, which municipality is also designated as the county seat of a county of the second class, and is located in close proximity, as determined by the authority, to a multi-modal transportation hub, a public or private institution of higher education, and a health care facility licensed pursuant to P.L.1971, c.136 (C.26:2H-1 et seq.) that serves underrepresented populations.
 
	g.	A developer shall submit, prior to the first disbursement of tax credits under the incentive award agreement, but no later than six months following project completion, satisfactory evidence of actual project costs, as certified by a certified public accountant, evidence of a temporary certificate of occupancy, or other event evidencing project completion that begins the eligibility period indicated in the incentive award agreement.  The developer, or an authorized agent of the developer, shall certify that the information provided pursuant to this subsection is true under the penalty of perjury.  Claims, records, or statements submitted by a developer to the authority in order to receive tax credits shall not be considered claims, records, or statements made in connection with State tax laws.
 
	h.	The incentive award agreement shall include a provision allowing the authority to extend, in individual cases, the deadline for any annual reporting or certification requirement.
 
	i.	The incentive award agreement shall include one or more provisions, as determined by the authority, concerning the terms and conditions for default and the remedies for the developer of a redevelopment project in the event of default.  The incentive award agreement shall not allow the authority to declare a cross-default when the developer of a redevelopment project, including any business affiliate of the developer or any other entity with common principals as the developer, is in default with any other assistance program administered by the authority.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.60; amended 2021, c.160, s.26; 2023, c.98, s.6; 2025, c.2, s.4; 2025, c.313, s.4; 2025, c.398, s.1.

34:1B-329  Total tax credit.
	61.	a. Up to the limits established in subsection b. of this section and in accordance with an incentive award agreement, beginning upon the receipt of occupancy permits for any portion of the redevelopment project, or upon any other event evidencing project completion as set forth in the incentive award agreement, a developer shall be allowed a total tax credit that shall not exceed:
 
	(1) (a) 85 percent of the eligible project cost for: a redevelopment project that is located in a government-restricted municipality, which municipality qualified as a government-restricted municipality prior to the effective date of P.L.2025, c.2 (C.34:1B-335.3 et al.); or a special mission non-profit project; or
 
	(b)	80 percent of the eligible project cost for: a redevelopment project that is located in a government-restricted municipality, which municipality did not qualify as a government-restricted municipality prior to the effective date of P.L.2025, c.2 (C.34:1B-335.3 et al.); or an institutional project;
 
	(2) 60 percent of the eligible project cost for a residential project that receives a four-percent allocation from the federal Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program administered by the agency or a redevelopment project that is located in a qualified incentive tract, enhanced area, or a municipality with a Municipal Revitalization Index score of at least 50; or
 
	(3)	50 percent of the eligible project cost for any other redevelopment project.
 
	b.	The value of all tax credits approved by the authority under the program for a redevelopment project phase shall not exceed:
 
	(1)	$120,000,000 per redevelopment project or phase for a redevelopment project that is located in a government-restricted municipality or is a special mission nonprofit project;
 
	(2)	$90,000,000 per redevelopment project or phase for a redevelopment project that is allowed a tax credit under paragraph (2) of subsection a. of this section or that is an institutional project; and
 
	(3)	$60,000,000 for any other redevelopment project or phase.
 
	c.	Notwithstanding any law, rule, or regulation to the contrary, the authority shall not approve a total amount of tax credits greater than $90,000,000 for all institutional projects approved under the program.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.61; amended 2021, c.160, s.27; 2023, c.98, s.7; 2025, c.2, s.5; 2025, c.313, s.5.

34:1B-330  Report by developer.
	62. a. A developer approved for an incentive award pursuant to sections 58 and 59 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-326 and C.34:1B-327) and that enters an incentive award agreement pursuant to section 60 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-328) shall submit annually, commencing in the year in which the incentive award is issued and for the remainder of the eligibility period, a report indicating whether the developer is aware of any condition, event, or act that would cause the developer not to be in compliance with the incentive award agreement or the provisions of sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335) and any additional reporting requirements contained in the incentive award agreement or tax credit certificate.  The developer, or an authorized agent of the developer, shall certify that the information provided pursuant to this subsection is true under the penalty of perjury.
 
	b. (1) Upon receipt and review of each report submitted during the eligibility period, the authority shall provide to the developer and the director a certificate of compliance indicating the amount of tax credits that the developer may apply against the developer's tax liability.  Notwithstanding any provision of law or regulation to the contrary, the authority shall not require the developer to include a permanent certificate of occupancy in the first annual report, but the developer shall include the permanent certificate of occupancy in the next annual report after the developer receives the permanent certificate of occupancy.  Subject to forfeiture, reduction, or other action for failure to comply with a program requirement, within 120 days after the authority preliminarily determines that an annual report is complete, the authority shall either: (a) approve the annual report and notify the director that the authority has approved the report and that the director is to issue the tax credit certificate; or (b) request more information from the developer to finalize the approval. If the authority fails to act within 120 days from its preliminary determination that the annual report is complete, the annual report shall be deemed approved by the authority, and the developer shall be entitled to receive its tax credit certificate.
 
	(2)	Upon receipt by the director of the certificate of compliance, the director shall allow the developer a credit against the tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5).  A developer shall apply the credit awarded against the developer's liability under section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5 in the tax period for which it was issued, in the tax period in which it was issued, or in any tax period during the eligibility period without the need to amend the tax return for the tax period for which the credit was issued, subject to the carry-forward provision in this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no more than the amount of tax credits equal to the total credit amount divided by the duration of the tax credit term, in years, may be taken in any tax period.  A developer may carry forward an unused credit resulting from the limitations of paragraph (3) of this subsection, if necessary, for use in the seven privilege periods next following the privilege period for which the credits are applied.  Credits granted to a partnership shall be passed through to the partners, members, or owners, respectively, pro-rata, or pursuant to an executed agreement among the partners, members, or owners documenting an alternate distribution method provided to the director accompanied by any additional information as the director may prescribe.
 
	(3)  The director shall prescribe the order of priority of the application of the credit allowed under this section and any other credits allowed by law against the tax imposed under section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5).  The amount of the credit applied under this section against the tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5) for a privilege period, together with any other credits allowed by law, shall not reduce the tax liability to an amount less than the statutory minimum provided in subsection (e) of section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5).
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.62; amended 2022, c.46; 2025, c.2, s.6.

34:1B-331  Tax credit transfer certificate.
	63. a. (1)A developer may apply to the director and the chief executive officer of the authority for a tax credit transfer certificate, covering one or more years, in lieu of the developer being allowed any amount of the credit against the tax liability of the developer.  Subject to the forfeiture, reduction, or other action for failure to comply with a program requirement, within 120 days after the authority preliminarily determines that an application is complete, the authority shall either: (a) approve the application and notify the director that the authority has approved the application and that the director is to issue the tax credit transfer certificate; or (b) request more information from the developer to finalize the approval.  If the authority fails to act within 120 days from its preliminary determination that the application is complete, the application shall be deemed approved by the authority, and the developer shall be entitled to receive its tax credit transfer certificate.  
 
	(2) The tax credit transfer certificate, upon receipt thereof by the developer from the director and the chief executive officer of the authority, may be sold or assigned, in full or in part in an amount not less than $25,000, in the privilege period during which the developer receives the tax credit transfer certificate from the director, to another person, who may apply the credit against a tax liability pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5.  The certificate provided to the developer shall include a statement waiving the developer's right to claim the amount of the credit that the developer has elected to sell or assign against the developer's tax liability.
 
	b.	The developer shall not sell or assign, including a collateral assignment, a tax credit transfer certificate allowed under this section for consideration received by the developer of less than 85 percent of the transferred credit amount before considering any further discounting to present value which shall be permitted, except a developer of a residential project consisting of newly-constructed residential units may assign a tax credit transfer certificate for consideration of less than 85 percent subject to the submission of a plan to the authority and the agency to use the proceeds derived from the assignment of tax credits to complete the residential project, except a developer of a residential project consisting of newly-constructed residential units that has received federal low income housing tax credits under 26 U.S.C. s.42(b)(1)(B)(i) may assign a tax credit transfer certificate for consideration of no less than 65 percent subject to the submission of a plan to the authority and the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency to use the proceeds derived from the assignment of tax credits to complete the residential project.  The tax credit transfer certificate issued to a developer by the director shall be subject to any limitations and conditions imposed on the application of State tax credits pursuant to sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through 34:1B-335) and any other terms and conditions that the director may prescribe, provided, however, that the holder of a tax credit certificate may transfer all or part of the tax credit amount, on or after the date of issuance of the tax credit transfer certificate, for use by the transferee in the tax period for which it was issued, in the tax period in which it was issued, or in any of the next three successive tax periods.  The tax certificate holder or transferee may first use the credit against tax liabilities in the tax period in which it was issued or in a succeeding tax period, as authorized in this subsection, without the need to amend the tax return for the tax period for which the credit was issued, subject to the provisions of this section.  A transferee may carry forward an unused credit for use in any of the next five successive tax periods, and the unused credit shall expire thereafter.  Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the amount of tax credits that may be claimed by the transferee in any tax period shall not exceed the total tax credit amount divided by the duration of the eligibility period in years.
 
	c.	A purchaser or assignee of a tax credit transfer certificate pursuant to this section shall not make any subsequent transfers, assignments, or sales of the tax credit transfer certificate.
 
	d.	The authority shall publish on its Internet website the following information concerning each tax credit transfer certificate approved by the authority and the director pursuant to this section:
 
	(1)  the name of the transferor;
 
	(2)  the name of the transferee;
 
	(3)  the value of the tax credit transfer certificate; and
 
	(4)  the consideration received by the transferor.

 	L.2020, c.156, s.63; amended 2021, c.160, s.28; 2023, c.98, s.8; 2025, c.2, s.7.

34:1B-332  Assignment of rights of incentive award agreement.
 	64. a. A developer who has entered into an incentive award agreement pursuant to section 60 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-328) may, upon notice to and written consent of the authority and State Treasurer, pledge, assign, transfer, or sell any or all of its right, title, and interest in and to the incentive award agreement and in the incentive awards payable under the incentive award agreement, and the right to receive the incentive awards, along with the rights and remedies provided to the developer under the incentive award agreement.  Any assignment shall be an absolute assignment for all purposes, including the federal bankruptcy code.
 
	b.	Any pledge of an incentive award made by the developer shall be valid and binding from the time the pledge is made and filed in the records of the authority.  The incentive award pledged and thereafter received by the developer shall immediately be subject to the lien of the pledge without any physical delivery thereof or further act, and the lien of any pledge shall be valid and binding against all parties having claims of any kind in tort, contract, or otherwise against the developer irrespective of whether the parties have notice thereof.  As a condition of any incentive grant, the grantee, assignee, pledgee or subsequent holder of the incentive grant shall immediately file notice of the same with the clerk of the county in which the project is located.
 
	c.	The authority shall publish on its Internet website the following information concerning each pledge, assignment, transfer, or sale approved by the authority pursuant to this section:
 
	(1)	the name of the person or entity offering the pledge, assignment, transfer, or sale of a right, title, or interest in an incentive grant agreement or tax credit agreement;
 
	(2)	the name of the person or entity receiving the pledge, assignment, transfer, or sale of a right, title, or interest in the incentive grant agreement or tax credit agreement;
 
	(3)	the value of the right, title, or interest in the incentive grant agreement or tax credit agreement; and
 
	(4)	the consideration received by the person or entity offering the pledge, assignment, transfer, or sale of the right, title, or interest in the incentive grant agreement or tax credit agreement.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.64.

34:1B-333  "Transformative project."
	65.	a. As used in this section, "transformative project" means a redevelopment project: that has a project financing gap; that has a total project cost of at least $150,000,000; that includes 200,000 or more square feet of new or substantially renovated industrial, commercial, or residential space for a project located in a government-restricted municipality, that includes 250,000 or more square feet of film studios, professional stages, television studios, recording studios, screening rooms, or other infrastructure for film production, that includes 300,000 or more square feet of new or substantially renovated industrial, commercial, or residential space for a project located in an enhanced area, or that includes 500,000 or more square feet of new or substantially renovated industrial, commercial, or residential space for any other project; and, for a commercial project, that is of special economic importance as measured by the level of new jobs, new capital investment, opportunities to leverage leadership in a high-priority targeted industry, or other State priorities as determined by the authority pursuant to rules and regulations promulgated to implement this section.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection b. of section 14 of P.L.2023, c.98 (C.34:1B-335.1) to the contrary, for applications submitted on and after the effective date of P.L.2023, c.98 (C.34:1B-335.1 et al.), if the redevelopment project is located entirely on land designated by the Department of Environmental Protection as a brownfield development area pursuant to section 7 of P.L.2005, c.223 (C.58:10B-25.1), and the eligible project cost of the redevelopment project includes at least $15,000,000 in environmental remediation costs, the redevelopment project shall constitute a project of special economic importance.  For applications submitted on or after the effective date of P.L.2025, c.127, the redevelopment project shall constitute a project of special economic importance if the redevelopment project is a health care or health services center that:  is associated with, and located on, the same complex as a new or existing university, academic, or medical research center, institution, or facility; is an establishment that is associated with a National Cancer Institute Designated Comprehensive Cancer Center that is engaged in cancer research; is a transformative expansion of healthcare services by an academic medical and research center located in a distressed municipality that is adjacent to existing clinical facilities; or is a project located at a State-designated trauma center.   For applications submitted on or after the effective date of P.L.2025, c.398, the redevelopment project shall constitute a project of special economic importance if the redevelopment project is located in a government-restricted municipality, which municipality is also designated as the county seat of a county of the second class, and is located in close proximity, as determined by the authority, to a multi-modal transportation hub, a public or private institution of higher education, and a health care facility licensed pursuant to P.L.1971, c.136 (C.26:2H-1 et seq.) that serves underrepresented populations.  A transformative project may be completed in phases, which phases may be determined by the authority based on factors such as written architectural plans and specifications completed before or during the physical work, certificates of occupancy, or financial and operational plans.  The criteria developed by the authority shall include, but shall not be limited to:
 
	(1)	the extent to which the proposed transformative project would create modern facilities that enhance the State's competitiveness in attracting targeted industries;
 
	(2)	(a) for a residential project, the construction of 700 or more new residential units; 
 
	(b)	for a mixed-use residential project containing fewer than 700 new residential units:
 
	(i)	the construction of 200 or more new residential units if the project is located in a government-restricted municipality, 300 or more new residential units if the project is located in an enhanced area, or 400 or more new residential units for all other mixed-use projects; and
 
	(ii)	the construction of 30,000 square feet or more of commercial space, which commercial space may include retail space; and
 
	(c)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2025, c.2)
 
	(d)	for a residential project, 20 percent of the new residential units shall be constructed for occupancy by low- and moderate-income households with affordability controls as adopted by the authority, in consultation with the agency, in accordance with paragraph (2) of subsection a. of section 56 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-324), except that a residential project receiving a federal historic rehabilitation tax credit pursuant to section 47 of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 26 U.S.C. s.47, or a tax credit pursuant to the "Historic Property Reinvestment Act," sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through C.34:1B-276), shall be exempt from the affordability controls related to bedroom distribution; and 
 
	(3)	the extent to which the proposed project would leverage the competitive economic development advantages of the State's mass transit assets, higher education assets, and other economic development assets in attracting or retaining both employers and skilled workers generally or in targeted industries.
 
	A "transformative project" shall not include a redevelopment project at which more than 50 percent of the premises is occupied by one or more businesses engaged in final point of sale retail.
 
	b.	(1)  The authority may award incentive awards to transformative projects in accordance with the provisions of sections 55 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-323 through C.34:1B-335).
 
	(2)	(a)  For transformative projects completed in phases, the developer shall enter into a transformative phase agreement with the authority.
 
	(b)	As used in this subsection, "transformative phase agreement" shall mean a sub-agreement of the incentive award agreement that governs the timing, capital investment, and other applicable details of the respective phase of a phased project.
 
	(3)	Notwithstanding the provisions of section 57 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-325), or any other section of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.) to the contrary, a transformative project shall be completed, and the developer shall be issued a certificate of occupancy for the transformative project facilities by the applicable enforcing agency, within five years of executing the incentive award agreement, except that the authority may, in its discretion, extend this deadline by up to one additional year.  For transformative projects completed in phases, the transformative project shall be completed, and the developer shall be issued certificates of occupancy for all phases of the transformative project facilities by the applicable enforcing agency, within 10 years of executing either the incentive award agreement or the first transformative phase agreement corresponding to the transformative project.
 
	(4)	Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 55 and 60 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-323 and C.34:1B-328), or any other section of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.) to the contrary, each phase of a transformative project completed in phases shall have a separate eligibility period.  After completing each phase, the developer shall submit a certification that the phase is completed.  If the authority approves the certification, the tax credit allowed to the developer shall be increased by the tax credit amount corresponding to that phase.  Notwithstanding the different eligibility periods for each phase, all conditions and requirements applicable during an eligibility period pursuant to sections 55 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-323 through 34:1B-335) shall apply to the entire transformative project until the end of the eligibility period for the last phase.
 
	(5)	Notwithstanding the provisions of section 60 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-328), or any other section of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.) to the contrary, for a transformative project completed in phases, a review of the project financing gap shall be performed at the certification of completion of each phase, and the authority shall re-evaluate the developer's rate of return in the seventh year and at the end of the eligibility period for the last phase, provided that the authority may also re-evaluate the developer's rate of return during the fifth year of any earlier phase.
 
	(6)	A transformative project receiving an incentive award pursuant to this section, other than a project that includes 250,000 or more square feet of film studios, professional stages, television studios, recording studios, screening rooms, or other infrastructure for film production, shall be located in an incentive area, a distressed municipality, a government-restricted municipality, or an enhanced area.  A transformative project receiving an incentive award pursuant to this section that includes 250,000 or more square feet of film studios, professional stages, television studios, recording studios, screening rooms, or other infrastructure for film production may be located anywhere in the State.  The authority shall not consider an application for a transformative project unless the applicant submits with its application a letter evidencing support for the transformative project from the governing body of the municipality in which the transformative project is located.
 
	c.	The authority shall review the transformative project cost, evaluate and validate the project financing gap estimated by the developer, and conduct a State fiscal impact analysis to ensure that the overall public assistance provided to the transformative project will result in a net positive benefit to the State.  In determining whether a transformative project will result in a net positive benefit to the State, the authority shall not consider the value of any taxes exempted, abated, rebated, or retained under the "Five-Year Exemption and Abatement Law," P.L.1991, c.441 (C.40A:21-1 et seq.), the "Long Term Tax Exemption Law," P.L.1991, c.431 (C.40A:20-1 et al.), the "New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act," P.L.1983, c.303 (C.52:27H-60 et seq.), or any other law that has the effect of lowering or eliminating the developer's State or local tax liability.  The determination made pursuant to this subsection shall be based on the potential tax liability of the developer without regard for potential tax losses if the developer were to locate in another state.  The authority shall assess the cost of these reviews to the applicant.  A developer shall pay to the authority the full amount of the direct costs of an analysis concerning the developer's application for an incentive award that a third party retained by the authority performs, if the authority deems such retention to be necessary.  The authority shall evaluate the net economic benefits on a present value basis under which the requested tax credit allocation amount is discounted to present value at the same discount rate as the projected benefits from the implementation of the proposed transformative project for which an award of tax credits is being sought.  Projects: that are predominantly residential; that are institutional projects; that qualify as special mission nonprofit projects; or that are located in a government-restricted municipality, which municipality is also designated as the county seat of a county of the second class, and is located in close proximity, as determined by the authority, to a multi-modal transportation hub, a public or private institution of higher education, and a health care facility licensed pursuant to P.L.1971, c.136 (C.26:2H-1 et seq.) that serves underrepresented populations, shall be excluded from the calculation of the net benefit test required pursuant to this subsection.
 
	d.	In determining net benefits for any business or person considering locating in a transformative project and applying to receive from the authority any other economic development incentive subsequent to the award of transformative project tax credits pursuant to section 65 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-333), the authority shall not credit the business or person with any benefit that was previously credited to the transformative project pursuant to section 65 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-333).
 
	e.	The authority shall administer the credits awarded pursuant to this section in accordance with the provisions of sections 62 and 63 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-330 and C.34:1B-331).
 
	f.	Prior to allocating an incentive award to a developer, the authority shall confirm with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of the Treasury that the developer is in substantial good standing with the respective department, or the developer has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan, and the developer shall certify that each contractor or subcontractor performing work at the transformative project: (1) is registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); (2) has not been debarred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in the State; and (3) possesses a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  The authority may also contract with an independent third party to perform a background check on the developer.
 
	g.	Notwithstanding the limitation on incentive awards set forth in subsection b. of section 61 and section 98 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-329 and C.34:1B-362) to the contrary, the authority may allow a developer of a transformative project a tax credit in an amount not to exceed the lesser of:
 
	(1)	(a) (i) 85 percent of the eligible project cost for a transformative project that is located in a government-restricted municipality, which municipality qualified as a government-restricted municipality prior to the effective date of P.L.2025, c.2 (C.34:1B-335.3 et al.); or
 
	(ii)	80 percent of the eligible project cost for a transformative project that is: located in a government-restricted municipality, which municipality did not qualify as a government-restricted municipality prior to the effective date of P.L.2025, c.2 (C.34:1B-335.3 et al.); or an institutional project, subject to the limitation of subsection c. of section 61 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-329); 
 
	(b)	60 percent of the eligible project cost for a residential transformative project that receives a four-percent allocation from the federal Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program administered by the agency or a transformative project that is located in a qualified incentive tract, enhanced area, or a municipality with a Municipal Revitalization Index score of at least 50; or
 
	(c)	50 percent of the eligible project cost for any other transformative project;
 
	(2)	the total value of the project financing gap; or
 
	(3)	$400,000,000, except that for a transformative project that is developed in phases, the $400,000,000 limitation on incentive awards set forth in this paragraph shall apply to the total aggregate award for all phases of the transformative project.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.65; amended 2021, c.160, s.29; 2023, c.98, s.9; 2025, c.2, s.8; 2025, c.127, s.14; 2025, c.313, s.6; 2025, c.398, s.2.

34:1B-334  Report by State college, university.
	66. a. Beginning the year next following the year in which P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.) takes effect and every two years thereafter, a State college or university established pursuant to chapter 64 of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes shall, pursuant to an agreement executed between the State college or university and the authority, prepare a report on the implementation of the program, and submit the report to the authority, the Governor, and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), to the Legislature.  Each biennial report required under this section shall include a description of each redevelopment project receiving a tax credit under the program, a detailed analysis of the consideration given in each project to the factors set forth in sections 58 and 59 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-326 and C.34:1B-327), in the case of a commercial project, the return on investment for incentive awards provided and the commercial project's impact on the State's economy, and any other metrics the State college or university determines are relevant based upon national best practices.  The authority shall prepare a written response to the report, which the authority shall submit to the Governor and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), to the Legislature.
 
	b.	On or before December 31, 2023, the authority shall submit a report to the Governor and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), the Legislature on the effectiveness of the program in encouraging development in government-restricted municipalities, which report shall include, at a minimum, recommendations to incentivize additional development in government-restricted municipalities through financial assistance or other incentives that the authority determines are appropriate.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.66; amended 2023, c.98, s.10.

34:1B-335  Regulations.
	67. a. Notwithstanding the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) to the contrary, except as otherwise provided in subsection b. of this section, the chief executive officer of the authority may adopt, immediately, upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, regulations that the chief executive officer deems necessary to implement the provisions of sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through 34:1B-335), which regulations shall be effective for a period not to exceed 180 days from the date of the filing.  The chief executive officer shall thereafter amend, adopt, or readopt the regulations in accordance with the requirements of P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	b.	Notwithstanding the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) to the contrary, the chief executive officer of the authority shall, in consultation with the agency, adopt, immediately, upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, such rules and regulations as the chief executive officer deems necessary to implement the provisions of sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through 34:1B-335), as amended and supplemented by P.L.2023, c.98 (C.34:1B-335.1 et al.), which rules and regulations shall be effective for a period not to exceed 365 days after the date of the filing.  Before the expiration of the rules and regulations, the chief executive officer shall amend, adopt, or readopt the rules and regulations in accordance with the requirements of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.67; amended 2023, c.98, s.11.

34:1B-335.1  Program applications, "New Jersey Aspire Program Act".
	14. a. (1) Except as otherwise provided in subsection b. of this section, all program applications completed after the effective date of P.L.2023, c.98 (C.34:1B-335.1 et al.) shall be subject to the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through 34:1B-335), as amended as supplemented by P.L.2023, c.98 (C.34:1B-335.1 et al.), including the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to subsection b. of section 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-335).
 
	(2) Except as otherwise provided in subsection b. of this section, all program applications completed on or before the effective date of P.L.2023, c.98 (C.34:1B-335.1 et al.) shall be subject to the provisions of the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through 34:1B-335), as such provisions remained in effect immediately before the effective date of P.L.2023, c.98 (C.34:1B-335.1 et al.), including the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to subsection a. of section 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-335).
 
	b.	Notwithstanding any provision of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.) to the contrary, if a completed application for a residential project is submitted to the authority on or before the 121st calendar day next following effective date of P.L.2023, c.98 (C.34:1B-335.1 et al.), the applicant for the residential project has received all applicable approvals pursuant to the "Municipal Land Use Law," P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-1 et seq.) on or before the 121st calendar day next following the effective date of P.L.2023, c.98 (C.34:1B-335.1 et al.), and the applicant submits written notice to the authority, before the authority's approval or denial of the application, electing for the application to be governed under the provisions of this subsection, then the residential units constructed for occupancy by low- and moderate-income households within the residential project shall not be subject to the affordability controls adopted by the authority, in consultation with the agency, pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection a. of section 56 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-324) and subsection b. of section 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-335).  In this event, the application for the residential project shall be reviewed, approved, and administered in accordance with the provisions of the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through 34:1B-335), as such provisions remained in effect immediately before the effective date of P.L.2023, c.98 (C.34:1B-335.1 et al.), including the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to subsection a. of section 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-335), except that the application shall be subject to:
 
	(1) the determination of a reasonable and appropriate return on investment, as defined in section 55 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-323), as amended by P.L.2023, c.98 (C.34:1B-335.1 et al.); and
 
	(2) the limitation on tax credit awards set forth in subsection b. of section 61 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-329) and subsection g. of section 65 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-333), respectively, as amended by P.L.2023, c.98 (C.34:1B-335.1 et al.).
 
L.2023, c.98, s.14.

34:1B-335.2  Completed program application, pending approval, withdrawal, timeline.
	15.	If an applicant has submitted a completed program application that is pending approval by the authority on the effective date of P.L.2023, c.98 (C.34:1B-335.1 et al.), the applicant may withdraw the application at any time before the authority approves or denies the application.  If the applicant withdraws the application, the authority shall return all application fees paid by the applicant, and the withdrawal shall not serve to prejudice the consideration of any program application submitted by the applicant thereafter.
 
L.2023, c.98, s.15.

34:1B-335.3  Approved projects, certain requirements.
	10. a. Notwithstanding any provision of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.), section 14 of P.L.2023, c.98 (C.34:1B-335.1), or any provision of law to the contrary, any project approved by the authority after the effective date of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.) shall be subject to:
 
	(1)	the requirements of subsection f. of section 57 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-325), as amended by P.L.2025, c.2 (C.34:1B-335.3 et al.), concerning the average occupancy rate of commercial projects;
 
	(2)	any lower fees promulgated by the authority on or after the effective date of P.L.2025, c.2 (C.34:1B-335.3 et al.), except that such lower fees shall not apply to any fees already paid to the authority;
 
	(3)	the requirements of paragraphs (1) and (4) of subsection f. of section 60 of P.L. 2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-328), as amended by P.L.2025, c.2 (C.34:1B-335.3 et al.), concerning the execution of community benefits agreements;
 
	(4)	the requirements of subsection b. of section 62 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-330), as amended by P.L.2025, c.2 (C.34:1B-335.3 et al.);
 
	(5) the requirements of subsection a. of section 63 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-331), as amended by P.L.2025, c.2 (C.34:1B-335.3 et al.);
 
	(6)	the provisions of subsection b. and subsection c. of section 60 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-328), as amended by P.L.2025, c.2 (C.34:1B-335.3 et al.); and
 
	(7)	any other provision concerning the terms and conditions of an incentive award issued under the New Jersey Aspire Program that the authority determines will make the administration of the program consistent with the provisions of the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335), as amended and supplemented by P.L.2025, c.2 (C.34:1B-335.3 et al.), provided that such provision shall not have a materially adverse impact on any projects approved by the authority before the effective date of P.L.2025, c.2 (C.34:1B-335.3 et al.).
 
	b.	Notwithstanding any provision of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.), section 14 of P.L.2023, c.98 (C.34:1B-335.1), or any other provision of law to the contrary, any project approved by the authority after the effective date of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.) shall not be subject to any proration of tax credits for any year of the eligibility period.
 
L.2025, c.2, s.10.

34:1B-335.4  Findings and declarations.
	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that: 
 
	a.	Due to its location, population, and pool of talent, New Jersey is well situated to promote and expand its sports and entertainment industry.  
 
	b.	Nationally, sports and entertainment facilities are major drivers of economic activity and are often located in downtown areas of the country’s major cities.  In large metropolitan statistical areas, multiple facilities in different states may compete for the same events and visitors, and New Jersey is no exception.
 
	c.	The New Jersey Economic Development Authority can effectively utilize sports and entertainment facilities as catalysts for broad economic development in targeted communities. 
 
	d.	Sports and entertainment facilities attract visitors and businesses to the State by leveraging the economic and cultural benefits of building and supporting world-class facilities capable of hosting events that can bring communities together.
 
	e.	Full-scale renovations can extend and expand the lifespan of sports and entertainment facilities, shoring up key infrastructure components and modernizing facilities so they remain safe and competitive, and so they continue to serve the State, the local community, and the purposes for which they were built. 
 
	f.	Governmental support, alongside operator equity, is commonly needed to make the renovation and enhancement of these facilities a reality.  Public investment is leveraged to preserve and expand an economic engine that benefits governmental entities through the generation of tax receipts and creation of jobs, the private businesses serving and benefitting from the facility, their customers, employees, and the general public.  
 
	g.	Projects involving the development, redevelopment, or rehabilitation of sports and entertainment facilities are inherently beneficial to the State because they provide vital contributions to the communities in which they are located.
 
	h.	The Legislature declares that two principal objectives underscore the policy purposes of P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.4 et al.): first, that providing spaces for communities to gather will result in thriving communities; and second, although the State must help to provide these spaces through an incentive program that reflects the economics of sports and entertainment facilities, because the current suite of economic development programs cannot succeed in this endeavor, the enactment of P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.4 et al.) is necessary to encourage the development of sports and entertainment projects that will prevent the loss of events to other states with newer or more newly renovated facilities, as well as the resulting loss of tax revenues, jobs, and other economic activity.  
 
L.2025, c.399, s.1.

34:1B-335.5  Definitions.
	2.	As used in sections 3 through 4 of P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.6 through C.34:1B-335.7), all terms shall have the same meanings as defined in section 55 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-323), except as follows:
 
	"Co-applicant" means an entity that:  is exempt from federal taxation pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 26 U.S.C. s.501(c)(3), or is a governmental entity; contributes or contributed capital, real property, or services related to the project that directly affect and serve the tenants or customers of the tenants of the project; and enters into an agreement with the developer that specifies the co-applicant's participation in the redevelopment project.
 
	"Commitment period" means the period beginning with the commencement of the eligibility period of a sports and entertainment project, or for a sports and entertainment project completed in phases, beginning with the commencement of the phase in which more than 50 percent of the sports and entertainment project is completed, which period shall continue until the end of the period of time used for the gross economic benefit determined pursuant to subsection c. of section 3 of P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.6), and which period shall be evidenced by the submission of a copy of a lease for the property that, at a minimum, meets the duration of the commitment period.
 
	"Eligibility period" means the period not less than five years, as specified in an incentive award agreement, during which a developer may claim a tax credit under the program, provided that the developer of a phased sports and entertainment project may elect a separate eligibility period for each phase of no less than five years.
 
	"Project financing gap" means the part of the total project cost that remains to be financed after all other sources of capital have been accounted for, including, but not limited to, developer contributed capital, which shall not be less than 20 percent of the total project cost, and investor or financial entity capital or loans for which the developer, after making all good faith efforts to raise additional capital, certifies that additional capital cannot be raised from other sources based on incremental revenue generated at the facility by the sports and entertainment project on a non-recourse basis on market terms.
 
	"Sports and entertainment facility" means a facility that is an arena that:  is used primarily for live sports or entertainment performances, games, contests, or other events; has a seating capacity of at least 15,000 individuals; and has been operating for at least 15 years in a city of the first class, as classified under N.J.S.40A:6-4, that contains an international airport.
 
	"Sports and entertainment project" means a project with a project cost of at least $50,000,000, which project consists of the renovation of a sports and entertainment facility, whether publicly or privately owned or operated.
 
	"Sports and entertainment project phase agreement" means a sub-agreement of the incentive award agreement that governs the timing, capital investment, and other applicable details of each respective phase of a phased sports and entertainment project.
 
	"Workforce development agreement" means a contractual relationship, as approved by the authority, over the term of the commitment period, which may be renewed annually, between a developer and a New Jersey-based: public or private university or college; public or private high school; workforce development organization; vocational or technical school or institution; labor organization, business, employer association, or nonprofit organization that provides workforce training, apprenticeship, and career development services; entities or consortia consisting of any of the aforementioned entities that develop and deliver workforce training programs; or any combination thereof. 
 
L.2025, c.399, s.2.

34:1B-335.6  Sports and entertainment project requirements.
	3.	a.  (1)  Prior to June 30, 2027, a developer seeking tax credits for a sports and entertainment project shall submit an application to the authority in the form and manner prescribed pursuant to sections 55 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-323 through C.34:1B-335), as amended and supplemented, except as otherwise provided in this section and section 4 of P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.7).  
 
	(2)	Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, for the purposes of administering sections 1 through 4 of P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.4 through C.34:1B-335.7), a “sports and entertainment project,” as that term is defined in section 2 of P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.5), shall be considered a “redevelopment project,” as that term is used in sections 55 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-323 through C.34:1B-335), as amended and supplemented.
 
	b.	(1)  A sports and entertainment project may be completed in a maximum of five phases, and the developer shall enter into a sports and entertainment project phase agreement with the authority for each phase.  
 
	(2)	Notwithstanding the provision of any law to the contrary, a sports and entertainment project shall be completed, and the developer shall have completed its expenditure of eligible project costs, within six years of executing the incentive award agreement, except that the authority may, in its discretion, extend this deadline by up to one additional year.  For a sports and entertainment project completed in phases, the final phase of the sports and entertainment project shall be completed, and the developer shall have completed its expenditure of eligible project costs, within 10 years of executing the incentive award agreement or the sports and entertainment phase agreement corresponding to the first phase of the sports and entertainment project, whichever was executed later.
 
	(3)	Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, for a sports and entertainment project completed in phases, each phase shall have a separate eligibility period, and the developer shall contribute capital of no less than 20 percent of the project costs for each phase.  After completing each phase, the developer shall submit a certification to the authority attesting that the phase is completed.  If the authority approves the certification, the tax credit certificate allowed to the developer shall be increased by the tax credit amount corresponding to that phase. Notwithstanding the different eligibility periods for each phase, all conditions and requirements applicable during an eligibility period for any phase of the project, pursuant to sections 55 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-323 through C.34:1B-335), as amended and supplemented, except as otherwise provided in this section and section 4 of P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.6 and C.34:1B-335.7), shall apply to the entire sports and entertainment project until the end of the eligibility period for the last phase.
 
	c.	(1)  In lieu of the requirements of subsection c. of section 58 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-326), the authority shall review the project costs of a sports and entertainment project; evaluate and validate the project financing gap, as defined in section 2 of P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.5), estimated by the developer; and conduct a State fiscal impact analysis to ensure that the gross economic benefit of the sports and entertainment facility to the State over the duration of the commitment period is at least 150 percent of the overall public assistance provided to the sports and entertainment project.  In determining the gross economic benefits of the sports and entertainment facility, the authority's consideration shall include, but not be limited to, the direct and indirect benefits to the State, including local taxes that may benefit the State, and may include induced benefits to the State, including benefits derived from construction.  The determination shall include all such benefits to the State that result from the sports and entertainment facility over the duration of the commitment period.  The authority shall assess the cost of these reviews to the applicant.  A developer shall pay to the authority the full amount of the direct costs of an analysis concerning the developer's application for tax credits that a third party retained by the authority performs, if the authority deems such retention to be necessary.
 
	(2)	In addition to the evaluation conducted pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection, the authority shall conduct an analysis of the developer's project financing gap, as defined in section 2 of P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.5), in lieu of determining whether the developer’s actual rate of return on investment exceeds the reasonable and appropriate rate of return on investment at the time of board approval, which analysis shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of subsection c. of section 60 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-328), except as otherwise provided in this section and section 4 of P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.6 and 34:1B-335.7), or in the guidelines developed pursuant to subsection c. of section 4 of P.L.2025, c.399 ( 34:1B-335.7).
 
	d.	In addition to the requirements of sections 55 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-323 through C.34:1B-335), as amended and supplemented, the developer of a sports and entertainment project shall enter into a workforce development agreement, except that a co-applicant may execute the workforce development agreement on behalf of the developer.  The workforce development agreement shall include the provision of opportunities for workforce hiring, training, or apprenticeship, or other measures determined appropriate by the authority.  
 
	e.	(1)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection f. of section 60 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-328) to the contrary, the developer of a sports and entertainment project shall enter into a community benefits agreement with the authority and the municipality in which the sports and entertainment project is located.  The agreement shall include, at a minimum, requirements for training, employment, and youth development and free services to underserved communities in and around the community in which the sports and entertainment project is located.  Prior to entering a community benefits agreement, the municipality in which the sports and entertainment project is located shall hold at least one previously advertised public hearing at which residents, community groups, and other stakeholders shall have an opportunity testify concerning the needs of the community that the agreement should address, and the minutes of the meeting shall be included in the resolution of the governing body of the municipality adopting the community benefits agreement.
 
	(2) The community benefits agreement shall provide for the creation of a community advisory committee to oversee the implementation of the agreement, monitor successes, ensure compliance with the terms of the agreement, and produce an annual public report.  The community advisory committee created pursuant to this paragraph shall be comprised of representatives of diverse community groups and residents of the municipality in which the redevelopment project is located.
 
	(3)	When the developer submits the annual report required pursuant to section 62 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-330) to the authority, the developer shall certify, under the penalty of perjury, that it is in compliance with the terms of the community benefits agreement.  If the developer fails to provide the certification required pursuant to this paragraph, or the authority determines that the developer is not in compliance with the terms of the community benefits agreement based on a report from the community advisory committee pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection, the authority may rescind an award or recapture all or part of any tax credits awarded.
 
	f.	(1)  During the commitment period, each worker employed to perform construction work at the sports and entertainment facility shall be paid not less than the prevailing wage rate for the worker's craft or trade, as determined by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) and P.L.2005, c.379 (C.34:11-56.58 et seq.).
 
	(2) During the commitment period, each worker employed to perform building services work at the sports and entertainment facility, whether pursuant to contract by the developer or a commercial tenant, commercial subtenant, or other commercial occupant, shall be paid not less than the prevailing wage rate for the worker's craft or trade, as determined by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) and P.L.2005, c.379 (C.34:11-56.58 et seq.).
 
	(3) During the commitment period, all other requirements of sections 55 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-323 through C.34:1B-335), as amended and supplemented, that apply during the eligibility period of a redevelopment project shall apply to the sports and entertainment project during the entirety of the commitment period, except as otherwise provided in this section and section 4 of P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.6 and C.34:1B-335.7).
 
	g.	Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (4) of subsection a. of section 57 of P.L. 2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-325) to the contrary, the developer of a sports and entertainment project may have undertaken construction at the sports and entertainment facility before the date of application for tax credits pursuant to P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.4 et al.), provided that, except for demolition and site remediation activities, the developer has not commenced any construction for the sports and entertainment project before such time.  
 
	h.	In addition to the requirements of sections 55 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-323 through C.34:1B-335), as amended and supplemented, a sports and entertainment project shall exceed the standards established by the authority in accordance with the green building manual prepared by the Commissioner of Community Affairs pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2007, c.132 (C.52:27D-130.6), regarding the use of renewable energy, energy-efficient technology, and non-renewable resources to reduce environmental degradation and encourage long-term cost reduction.  The replacement or retrofitting of existing components and infrastructure at the sports and entertainment facility as part of the sports and entertainment project shall result in a material reduction, as determined by the authority in the guidelines developed pursuant to subsection c. of section 4 of P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.7), of the energy usage, greenhouse gas emissions, and co-pollutant emissions for the components and infrastructure replaced.
 
	i.	Notwithstanding any provision of law, rule, or regulation to the contrary, any fees, including application fees, imposed by the authority for a sports and entertainment project shall be equal to the fees for a transformative project under the New Jersey Aspire Program.
 
	j.	(1)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection b. of section 61 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-329) to the contrary, the authority may allow a developer of a sports and entertainment project a tax credit in an amount not to exceed the lesser of:
 
	(a)	80 percent of the eligible project cost for the sports and entertainment project; or
 
	(b)	$300,000,000.
 
	(2)	For a sports and entertainment project that is completed in phases, the value of tax credits awarded for any single phase shall not exceed $95,000,000, provided that any eligible project costs, including the corresponding developer contributed capital, that could not be included in a phase due to the limitations of this paragraph may be included in a subsequent phase.

L.2025, c.399, s.3.

34:1B-335.7  Tax credits awarded and administered to developers.
	4.	a.  The authority may award tax credits to the developer of a sports and entertainment project in accordance with the provisions of sections 55 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-323 through C.34:1B-335), as amended and supplemented, except as otherwise provided in this section and section 3 of P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.7 and C.34:1B-335.6). 
 
	b.	The authority shall administer the tax credits awarded pursuant to this section and section 3 of P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.7 and C.34:1B-335.6) in accordance with the provisions of sections 55 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-323 through C.34:1B-335), as amended and supplemented, except as otherwise provided in this section and section 3 of P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.7 and C.34:1B-335.6).  
 
	c.	In accordance with the purposes and objectives set forth in P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.4 et al.), and with respect to the responsibilities of overseeing and implementing the award of tax credits to sports and entertainment projects, the authority shall develop guidelines governing the terms and conditions under which such tax credits may be awarded pursuant to this section and section 3 of P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.7 and C.34:1B-335.6).  The provisions of the “Administrative Procedure Act,” P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) shall not apply to the preparation, publication, or implementation of the guidelines developed pursuant to this section.

L.2025, c.399, s.4.

34:1B-336  Short title.
	68.	Sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.) shall be known and may be cited as the "Emerge Program Act."
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.68.

34:1B-337  Definitions.
 	69.	As used in sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.):

	"Affiliate" means an entity that directly or indirectly controls, is under common control with, or is controlled by the business.  Control exists in all cases in which the entity is a member of a controlled group of corporations, as defined pursuant to section 1563 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. s.1563), or the entity is an organization in a group of organizations under common control, as defined pursuant to subsection (c) of section 414 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. s.414).  A taxpayer may establish by clear and convincing evidence, as determined by the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, that control exists in situations involving lesser percentages of ownership than required by sections 1563 and 414 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. ss.1563 and 414).
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Aviation district" means all areas within the boundaries of the Atlantic City International Airport, established pursuant to section 24 of P.L.1991, c.252 (C.27:25A-24), and the Federal Aviation Administration William J. Hughes Technical Center and the area within a one-mile radius of the outermost boundary of the Atlantic City International Airport and the Federal Aviation Administration William J. Hughes Technical Center.
 
	"Board" means the Board of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Building services" means any cleaning or routine building maintenance work, including but not limited to sweeping, vacuuming, floor cleaning, cleaning of rest rooms, collecting refuse or trash, window cleaning, securing, patrolling, or other work in connection with the care or securing of an existing building, including services typically provided by a door-attendant or concierge. "Building services" shall not include any skilled maintenance work, professional services, or other public work for which a contractor is required to pay the "prevailing wage" as defined in section 2 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.26).
 
	"Business" means an applicant proposing to own or lease premises in a qualified business facility that is: a corporation that is subject to the tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5, or is a partnership, S corporation, limited liability company, or non-profit corporation.  A business shall include an affiliate of the business if that business applies for a credit based upon any capital investment made by or full-time employees of an affiliate.  If the business or tenant is a cooperative or part of a cooperative, then the cooperative may qualify for credits by counting the full-time employees and capital investments of its member organizations, and the cooperative may distribute credits to its member organizations.  If the business or tenant is a cooperative that leases to its member organizations, the lease shall be treated as a lease to an affiliate or affiliates.  
 
	"Capital investment" means expenses that a business or an affiliate of the business incurs, or is incurred on behalf of the business or affiliate by its landlord, following its submission of an application to the authority pursuant to section 72 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-340), but prior to the project completion date, as shall be defined in the project agreement, for: a. site preparation and construction, repair, renovation, improvement, equipping, or furnishing on real property or of a building, structure, facility, or improvement to real property; b. obtaining and installing furnishings and machinery, apparatus, or equipment, including but not limited to material goods subject to bonus depreciation under sections 168 and 179 of the federal Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. ss.168 and 179), for the operation of a business on real property or in a building, structure, facility, or improvement to real property; or any combination of the foregoing.
 
	"College or university" means a county college, an independent institution of higher education, a public research university, or a State college.
 
	"Commitment period" means a period that is 1.5 times the eligibility period specified in the project agreement entered into pursuant to section 73 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-341), rounded up, for each applicable phase agreement.
 
	"County college" means an educational institution established by one or more counties, pursuant to chapter 64A of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes.
 
	"Director" means the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.
 
	"Distressed municipality" means a municipality that is qualified to receive assistance under P.L.1978, c.14 (C.52:27D-178 et seq.), a municipality under the supervision of the Local Finance Board pursuant to the provisions of the "Local Government Supervision Act (1947)," P.L.1947, c.151 (C.52:27BB-1 et seq.), a municipality identified by the Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs to be facing serious fiscal distress, a SDA municipality, or a municipality in which a major rail station is located.
 
	"Doctoral university" means a university located within New Jersey that is classified as a doctoral university under the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education's Basic Classification methodology on the effective date of P.L.2017, c.221.
 
	"Eligibility period" means the period in which an eligible business may claim a tax credit under the program for a given project phase, beginning with the tax period in which the authority accepts certification of the eligible business that it has met the capital investment and employment requirements of the program for the respective project phase, and extending thereafter for a term of not more than seven years, with the term to be determined at the discretion of the applicant, provided that the term of the eligibility period may consist of nonconsecutive tax years if the applicant elects at any time after the end of the first tax period of the eligibility period to defer the continuation of the eligibility period to a subsequent tax period.  The authority may extend the eligibility period one additional tax period to accommodate a prorated payment pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection a. of section 77 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-345).
 
	"Eligible business" means any business that satisfies the criteria set forth in section 71 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-339) at the time of application for tax credits under the program.  
 
	"Eligible position" or "full-time job" means a full-time position in a business in this State which the business has filled with a full-time employee.  An eligible position shall not include an independent contractor or a consultant.
 
	"Employment and Investment Corridor" means the portions of the qualified incentive area that are not located within a distressed municipality and which:
 
	a.	are designated pursuant to the "State Planning Act," P.L.1985, c.398 (C.52:18A-196 et seq.), as Planning Area 1 (Metropolitan), Planning Area 2 (Suburban), a designated center under the State Development and Redevelopment Plan, or a designated growth center in an endorsed plan or until the State Planning Commission revises and readopts New Jersey's State Development and Redevelopment Plan and adopts regulations to revise this definition;
 
	b.	intersect with portions of: a port district, a qualified incentive tract, or federally-owned land approved for closure under a federal Commission on Base Realignment and Closure action;
 
	c.	are the proposed site of a qualified incubator facility, a tourism destination project, or transit oriented development; or
 
	d.	contain: a vacant commercial building having over 400,000 square feet of office, laboratory, or industrial space, or any combination of office, laboratory, or industrial space, available for occupancy for a period of over one year; or a site that has been negatively impacted by the approval of a "qualified business facility," as defined pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-208).
 
	"Enhanced area" means (1) a municipality that contains an urban transit hub as defined in section 2 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-208), (2) the five municipalities with the highest poverty rates according to the 2017 Municipal Revitalization Index, and (3) the three municipalities with the highest percentage of SNAP recipients according to the 2017 Municipal Revitalization Index.
 
	"Full-time employee" means a person:
 
	a.	who is employed by a business for consideration for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment, and whose wages are subject to withholding as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq.;
 
	b.	who is employed by a professional employer organization pursuant to an employee leasing agreement between the business and the professional employer organization, pursuant to P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.) for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment, and whose wages are subject to withholding as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq.; or
 
	c.	who is a resident of another State, but whose income is not subject to the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq., due to a reciprocity agreement with the other state, or who is a partner of a business who works for the partnership for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment, and whose distributive share of income, gain, loss, or deduction, or whose guaranteed payments, or any combination thereof, is subject to the payment of estimated taxes, as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq., due to a reciprocity agreement with the other state.
 
	With respect to a logistics, manufacturing, energy, defense, aviation, or maritime business, excluding primarily warehouse or distribution operations, located in a port district having a container terminal, the requirement that employee health benefits are to be provided shall be deemed to be satisfied if the benefits are provided in accordance with industry practice by a third party obligated to provide such benefits pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement.
 
	A "full-time employee" shall include, but shall not be limited to, an employee that has been hired by way of a labor union hiring hall or its equivalent.  35 hours of employment per week in the State shall constitute one "full-time employee," regardless of whether or not the hours of work were performed by one or more persons.
 
	"Full-time employee" shall not include any person who works as an independent contractor or on a consulting basis for the business or a contract worker whose income is subject to withholding as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq., except that any person working as an independent contractor or contract worker whose income is subject to withholding as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq., for the business shall be deemed a full-time employee if the business demonstrates to the authority that: (a) the person working as an independent contractor for the business works at least 35 hours per week or renders any other standard service generally accepted by custom or practice as full- time employment, and the person is provided with employee health benefits under a health benefits plan authorized pursuant to State or federal law; and (b) the business provides documentation to the authority to permit the authority to verify the compensation paid to, and the time worked by, the person working as an independent contractor.  The business shall provide to the authority an annual report that identifies the number of persons working as independent contractors for the business and their contractual or partnering relationship with the business. 
 
	"Full-time employee" shall not include any person who, at the time of project application, works in New Jersey for consideration for at least 35 hours per week for the business, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment, but who, prior to project application, was not provided, by the business, with employee health benefits under a health benefits plan authorized pursuant to State or federal law.  
 
	"Government-restricted municipality" means a municipality in this State with a municipal revitalization index distress score of at least 75, that met the criteria for designation as an urban aid municipality in the 2019 State fiscal year, and that, on the effective date of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.), is subject to financial restrictions imposed pursuant to the "Municipal Stabilization and Recovery Act," P.L.2016, c.4 (C.52:27BBBB-1 et seq.), or is restricted in its ability to levy property taxes on property in that municipality as a result of the State of New Jersey owning or controlling property representing at least 25 percent of the total land area of the municipality or as a result of the federal government of the United States owning or controlling at least 50 acres of the total land area of the municipality, which is dedicated as a national natural landmark.
 
	"Incentive area" means:
 
	a.	an aviation district; 
 
	b. 	a port district; 
 
	c.	a distressed municipality or enhanced area; 
 
	d.	an area designated pursuant to the "State Planning Act," P.L.1985, c.398 (C.52:18A-196 et seq.), as Planning Area 1 (Metropolitan), Planning Area 2 (Suburban), Planning Area 3 (Fringe Planning Area); or a Designated Center under the State Development and Redevelopment Plan;
 
	e.	an area located within a smart growth area and planning area designated in a master plan adopted by the New Jersey Meadowlands Commission pursuant to subsection (i) of section 6 of P.L.1968, c.404 (C.13:17-6) or subject to a redevelopment plan adopted by the New Jersey Meadowlands Commission pursuant to section 20 of P.L.1968, c.404 (C.13:17-21); 
 
	f.	an area located within any land owned by the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, established pursuant to P.L.1971, c.137 (C.5:10-1 et seq.), within the boundaries of the Hackensack Meadowlands District as delineated in section 4 of P.L.1968, c.404 (C.13:17-4); 
 
	g.	an area located within a regional growth area, rural development area zoned for industrial use as of the effective date of P.L.2016, c.75, or town, village, or a military and federal installation area designated in the comprehensive management plan prepared and adopted by the Pinelands Commission pursuant to the "Pinelands Protection Act," P.L.1979, c.111 (C.13:18A-1 et seq.); 
 
	h.	an area located within a government-restricted municipality;
 
	i.	an area located within land approved for closure under any federal Commission on Base Realignment and Closure action; 
 
	j.	an area located within an area designated pursuant to the "State Planning Act," P.L.1985, c.398 (C.52:18A-196 et seq.), as Planning Area 4A (Rural Planning Area), Planning Area 4B (Rural/Environmentally Sensitive), or Planning Area 5 (Environmentally Sensitive), so long as that area designated as Planning Area 4A (Rural Planning Area), Planning Area 4B (Rural/Environmentally Sensitive), or Planning Area 5 (Environmentally Sensitive) is located within: (1) a designated center under the State Development and Redevelopment Plan; (2) a designated growth center in an endorsed plan until the State Planning Commission revises and readopts New Jersey's State Development and Redevelopment Plan and adopts regulations to revise this definition as it pertains to Statewide planning areas; (3) any area determined to be in need of redevelopment pursuant to sections 5 and 6 of P.L.1992, c.79 (C.40A:12A-5 and C.40A:12A-6) or in need of rehabilitation pursuant to section 14 of P.L.1992, c.79 (C.40A:12A-14); (4) any area on which a structure exists or previously existed including any desired expansion of the footprint of the existing or previously existing structure provided the expansion otherwise complies with all applicable federal, State, county, and local permits and approvals; or (5) any area on which an existing tourism destination project is located; or 
 
	k. an area located in a qualified opportunity zone.
 
	"Independent institution of higher education" means a college or university incorporated and located in New Jersey, which by virtue of law, character, or license is a nonprofit educational institution authorized to grant academic degrees and which provides a level of education that is equivalent to the education provided by the State's public institutions of higher education, as attested by the receipt of and continuation of regional accreditation by the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools, and which is eligible to receive State aid under the provisions of the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of New Jersey, but does not include any educational institution dedicated primarily to the education or training of ministers, priests, rabbis, or other professional persons in the field of religion.
 
	"Industrial premises" or "industrial space" means premises or space in which at least 51 percent of the square footage will be or has been used for the assembling, processing, manufacturing, or any combination thereof, of finished or partially finished products from materials or fabricated parts, including, but not limited to, factories or as a warehouse if the business uses the warehouse as part of the chain of distribution for products assembled, processed, manufactured, or any combination thereof, by the business at the qualified business facility; for the breaking or demolishing of finished or partially finished products; or for the production of oil or gas or the generation or transformation of electricity.
 
	"Industrial use" means assembling, processing, manufacturing, or any combination thereof, of finished or partially finished products from materials or fabricated parts; the breaking or demolishing of finished or partially finished products; or the production of oil or gas or the generation or transformation of electricity.  "Industrial use" includes farming purposes as that term is defined under 26 U.S.C. s.6420(c)(3)(A), undertaken in an industrial space.
 
	"Infrastructure Fund" means the Recovery Infrastructure Fund established pursuant to section 79 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.52:27D-520) to fund local infrastructure improvements.  
 
	"Labor harmony agreement" means an agreement between a business that serves as the owner or operator of a retail establishment or distribution center and one or more labor organizations, which requires, for the duration of the agreement: that any participating labor organization and its members agree to refrain from picketing, work stoppages, boycotts, or other economic interference against the business; and that the business agrees to maintain a neutral posture with respect to efforts of any participating labor organization to represent employees at an establishment or other unit in the retail establishment or distribution center, agrees to permit the labor organization to have access to the employees, and agrees to guarantee to the labor organization the right to obtain recognition as the exclusive collective bargaining representatives of the employees in an establishment or unit at the retail establishment or distribution center by demonstrating to the New Jersey State Board of Mediation, Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement, or a mutually agreed-upon, neutral, third-party, that a majority of workers in the unit have shown their preference for the labor organization to be their representative by signing authorization cards indicating that preference.  The labor organization or organizations shall be from a list of labor organizations which have requested to be on the list and which the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development has determined represent substantial numbers of retail or distribution center employees in the State.
 
	"Major rail station" means a railroad station that is located within a qualified incentive area and that provides to the public access to a minimum of six rail passenger service lines operated by the New Jersey Transit Corporation.
 
	"Mega project" means a project of special economic importance, as determined pursuant to regulations adopted by the board, as measured by the level of new jobs, new capital investment, and opportunities to leverage leadership in a high-priority targeted industry, as determined by the authority pursuant to rules and regulations promulgated to implement sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.).
 
	"Minimum environmental and sustainability standards" means standards established by the authority in accordance with the green building manual prepared by the Commissioner of Community Affairs pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2007, c.132 (C.52:27D-130.6), regarding the use of renewable energy, energy-efficient technology, and non-renewable resources to reduce environmental degradation and encourage long-term cost reduction.
 
	"Municipal Revitalization Index" means the index by the Department of Community Affairs ranking New Jersey's municipalities according to eight separate indicators that measure diverse aspects of social, economic, physical, and fiscal conditions in each locality.
 
	"New full-time job" means an eligible position created by a business that did not previously exist in this State.  For the purposes of determining the number of new full-time jobs, the eligible positions of an affiliate shall be considered eligible positions of the business.
 
	"Other eligible area" means the portions of the incentive area that are not located within a distressed municipality, or the employment and investment corridor.
 
	"Partnership" means an entity classified as a partnership for federal income tax purposes.
 
	"Port district" means the portions of an incentive area that are located within the "Port of New York District" of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, as defined in Article II of the Compact Between the States of New York and New Jersey of 1921; or a 15-mile radius of the outermost boundary of each marine terminal facility established, acquired, constructed, rehabilitated, or improved by the South Jersey Port District established pursuant to "The South Jersey Port Corporation Act," P.L.1968, c.60 (C.12:11A-1 et seq.).
 
	"Professional employer organization" means an employee leasing company registered with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.).
 
	"Program" means the Emerge Program established by section 70 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-338).
 
	"Project" means the capital investment at a qualified business facility and the employment commitment pursuant to the project agreement.
 
	"Project agreement" means the contract executed between an eligible business and the authority pursuant to section 73 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-341), which sets forth the terms and conditions under which the eligible business may receive the incentives authorized pursuant to the program.
 
	"Project labor agreement" means a form of pre-hire collective bargaining agreement covering terms and conditions of a specific project that satisfies the requirements set forth in section 5 of P.L.2002, c.44 (C.52:38-5).
 
	"Project phase agreement" means a sub-agreement of the project agreement that governs the timing, capital investment, employment levels, and other applicable details of the respective phase.
 
	"Public research university" means a public research university as defined in section 3 of P.L.1994, c.48 (C.18A:3B-3).
 
	"Qualified business facility" means any building, complex of buildings, or structural components of buildings, and all machinery and equipment located therein, used in connection with the operation of a business that is not engaged in final point of sale retail business at that location, unless the building, complex of buildings or structural components of buildings, and all machinery and equipment therein, are used in connection with the operation of a tourism destination project located in the Atlantic City Tourism District as established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2011, c.18 (C.5:12-219).
 
	"Qualified incentive tract" means: a. a population census tract having a poverty rate of 20 percent or more; or b. a census tract in which the median family income for the census tract does not exceed 80 percent of the greater of the Statewide median family income or the median family income of the metropolitan statistical area in which the census tract is situated.
 
	"Qualified incubator facility" means a commercial building located within an incentive area: that contains 5,000 or more square feet of office, laboratory, or industrial space; that is located near, and presents opportunities for collaboration with, a research institution, teaching hospital, college, or university; and within which at least 50 percent of the gross leasable area is restricted for use by one or more technology startup companies during the commitment period.
 
	"Qualified opportunity zone" means a federal population census tract in this State that was eligible to be designated as a qualified opportunity zone pursuant to 26 U.S.C. s.1400Z-1.
 
	"Quality child care facility" is a child care center licensed by the Department of Children and Families or a registered family child care home with the Department of Human Services, operating continuously, which has not been subject to an enforcement action, and which has and maintains a licensed capacity for children age 13 years or younger who attend for less than 24 hours a day.
 
	"Retained full-time job" means an eligible position that currently exists in New Jersey and is filled by a full-time employee, but which, because of a potential relocation by the business or is at risk of being lost to another state or country.  For the purposes of determining the number of retained full-time jobs, the eligible positions of an affiliate shall be considered eligible positions of the business.
 
	"SDA district" means an SDA district as defined in section 3 of P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-3).
 
	"SDA municipality" means a municipality in which an SDA district is situated.
 
	"Small business" means a business engaged primarily in a targeted industry with fewer than 100 employees, as determined at the time of application. 
 
	"State college" means a State college or university established pursuant to chapter 64 of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes.
 
	"Targeted industry" means any industry identified from time to time by the authority which shall initially include advanced transportation and logistics, advanced manufacturing, aviation, autonomous vehicle and zero-emission vehicle research or development, clean energy, life sciences, hemp processing, information and high technology, finance and insurance, professional services, film and digital media, non-retail food and beverage businesses including food innovation, and other innovative industries that disrupt current technologies or business models.
 
	"Technology startup company" means a for-profit business that has been in operation fewer than seven years at the time that it initially occupies or expands in a qualified business facility and is developing or possesses a proprietary technology or business method of a high technology or life science-related product, process, or service, which proprietary technology or business method the business intends to move to commercialization.  The business shall be deemed to have begun operation on the date that the business first hired at least one employee in a full-time position.
 
	"Tourism destination project" means a qualified non-gaming business facility that will be among the most visited privately owned or operated tourism or recreation sites in the State, and which is located within the incentive area and has been determined by the authority to be in an area appropriate for development and in need of economic development incentive assistance, including a non-gaming business within an established tourism district with a significant impact on the economic viability of that tourism district.
 
	"Transit oriented development" means a qualified business facility located within a 1/2-mile radius, or one-mile radius for projects located in a Government-restricted municipality, surrounding the mid-point of a New Jersey Transit Corporation, Port Authority Transit Corporation, or Port Authority Trans-Hudson Corporation rail, bus, or ferry station platform area, including all light rail stations.
 
	"Transit hub" means an urban transit hub, as defined in section 2 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-208), that is located within an eligible municipality, as defined in section 2 of P.L.2007, c.346 (C.34:1B-208), and that is also located within an incentive area.
 
	"Transit hub municipality" means a Transit Village or a municipality: a. which qualifies for State aid pursuant to P.L.1978, c.14 (C.52:27D-178 et seq.), or which has continued to be a qualified municipality thereunder pursuant to P.L.2007, c.111; and b. in which 30 percent or more of the value of real property was exempt from local property taxation during tax year 2006.  The percentage of exempt property shall be calculated by dividing the total exempt value by the sum of the net valuation which is taxable and that which is tax exempt. 
 
	"Transit Village" means a municipality that has been designated as a transit village by the Commissioner of Transportation and the Transit Village Task Force.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.69; amended 2021, c.160, s.30.

34:1B-338  Emerge Program.
  	70. a. The Emerge Program is hereby established as a program under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.  The authority shall administer the program to encourage economic development, job creation, and the retention of significant numbers of jobs in imminent danger of leaving the State.  The board may approve the award of tax credits to an eligible business upon application of the chief executive officer of the eligible business and following the execution of a letter of intent and the payment of fees, subject to the limitations set forth in subsection b. of this section:
 
	b.	value of all tax credits approved by the authority for businesses eligible pursuant to section 71 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-339) shall be subject to the limitations set forth in section 98 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-362). 
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.70.

34:1B-339  Application, tax credits.
	71. a. Beginning on the effective date of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.), but prior to March 1, 2029, to be eligible for tax credits under the program, a business's chief executive officer, or equivalent officer, shall demonstrate to the authority at the time of application that:
 
	(1) the business will make, acquire, or lease a capital investment at the qualified business facility equal to or greater than the applicable amount set forth in subsection b. of this section;
 
	(2) the business will create or retain new and retained full-time jobs in the State in an amount equal to or greater than the applicable number set forth in subsection c. of this section;
 
	(3) the qualified business facility is located in a qualified incentive area;
 
	(4) the award of tax credits will be a material factor in the business's decision to create or retain the number of new and retained full-time jobs set forth in its application;
 
	(5) the award of tax credits, the capital investment resultant from the award of tax credits, and the resultant creation and retention of new and retained full-time jobs will yield a net positive benefit to the State equaling at least 400 percent of the requested tax credit allocation amount, or for a phased project the requested tax credit allocation amount for the initial phase, and on a cumulative basis each phase thereafter, which determination shall be calculated prior to considering the value of the requested tax credit under the program and shall be based on the benefits generated during the period of time from approval through the end of the commitment period, or through the end of the longer period of extended commitment that the business may elect for purposes of receiving credit for benefits projected to occur after the expiration of the commitment period, except that:
 
	(a) an award of tax credits to a business for a qualified business facility located in a distressed municipality or an enhanced area shall yield a net positive benefit to the State, based on the benefits generated during the period of time from approval through the end of the commitment period, that equals at least 300 percent of the requested tax credit amount;
 
	(b) an award of tax credits to a business for a qualified business facility located in a government-restricted municipality, or for a mega project, shall yield a net positive benefit to the State, based on the benefits generated during the period of time from approval through the end of the commitment period, that equals at least 200 percent of the requested tax credit amount;
 
	(c) the net economic benefits shall be evaluated on a present value basis with the requested tax credit allocation amount discounted to present value at the same discount rate as the benefits from capital investment resultant from the award of tax credits and the resultant retention and creation of full-time jobs as provided in subparagraph (d) of this paragraph; and
 
	(d) a business may elect a period of extended commitment beyond the commitment period for which time the economic benefits shall be creditable to the determination of the net economic benefit of the project, and a business electing a period of extended commitment and failing to maintain the project through the expiration of that extended commitment period shall be obligated to repay a proportion of the incremental benefits received on account of having extended the commitment period, taking into consideration the number of years of extended commitment during which the business maintained the project;
 
	(e) in making the determination required pursuant to this paragraph, the authority shall not consider the value of any taxes exempted, abated, rebated, or retained under the "Five-Year Exemption and Abatement Law," P.L.1991, c.441 (C.40A:21-1 et seq.), the "Long Term Tax Exemption Law," P.L.1991, c.431 (C.40A:20-1 et al.), the "New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act," P.L.1983, c.303 (C.52:27H-60 et seq.), or any other law that has the effect of lowering or eliminating the business's State or local tax liability, and the business's chief executive officer or equivalent officer shall certify, under the penalty of perjury, that all documents submitted, and factual assertions made, to the authority to demonstrate that the award of tax credits will yield a net positive benefit to the State in accordance with this paragraph are true and accurate at the time of submission;  
 
	(f) If, during the term of the program, the methodology used by the authority in projecting benefits of a project in making the determination required pursuant to this paragraph is modified, the respective percentages by which the benefits must exceed the requested tax credit allocation amount set forth pursuant to this paragraph (5) may be adjusted to ensure consistent application of the respective thresholds in this paragraph (5) applied to each application;
 
	(6) the qualified business facility shall be in compliance with minimum environmental and sustainability standards; 
 
	(7) the project shall comply with the authority's affirmative action requirements, adopted pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1979, c.303 (C.34:1B-5.4); and
 
	(8) (a) each worker employed to perform construction work or building services work at the qualified business facility shall be paid not less than the prevailing wage rate for the worker's craft or trade, as determined by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) and P.L.2005, c.379 (C.34:11-56.58 et seq.), unless:
 
	(i) the work performed under the contract is performed at a qualified business facility owned by a landlord that is not a business receiving authority assistance;
 
	(ii) the landlord is a party to the construction contract, building services contract, or both; and
 
	(iii) the qualified business facility constitutes a lease of less than 35 percent of the entire facility at the time of contract and under any agreement to subsequently lease the qualified business facility.
 
	(b) In accordance with section 1 of P.L.1979, c.303 (C.34:1B-5.1), nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as requiring the payment of prevailing wage for construction commencing more than two years after the authority has issued the first certificate of compliance pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection a. of section 77 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-345).
 
	b. (1) The minimum capital investment required to be eligible under the program shall be as follows:
 
	(a) for the rehabilitation, improvement, fit-out, or retrofit of an existing industrial, warehousing, logistics, or research and development portion of the premises for continued similar use by the business, a minimum investment of $20 per square foot of gross leasable area;
 
	(b) for the new construction of an industrial, warehousing, logistics, or research and development portion of the premises for use by the business, a minimum investment of $60 per square foot of gross leasable area;
 
	(c) for the rehabilitation, improvement, fit-out, or retrofit of existing portion of the premises that does not qualify pursuant to subparagraph (a) or (b) of this paragraph, a minimum investment of $40 per square foot of gross leasable area; 
 
	(d) for the new construction of a portion of the premises that does not qualify pursuant to subparagraph (a) or (b) of this paragraph, a minimum investment of $120 per square foot of gross leasable area; and
 
	(e) for a small business, no new minimum capital investment shall be required, provided the applicant has demonstrated evidence satisfactory to the authority of its intent to remain in the State for the commitment period.
 
	(2) In the event the business invests less than that amount set forth in paragraph (1) of this subsection in the qualified business facility, the business shall donate the uninvested balance to the infrastructure fund established pursuant to section 79 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.52:27D-520).
 
	(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection, the authority may adopt, pursuant to the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), rules and regulations adjusting the minimum capital investment amounts required under the program when necessary to respond to the prevailing economic conditions in the State.
 
	c. (1) The minimum number of new or retained full-time jobs required to be eligible under the program shall be as follows:
 
	(a) for a small business, 25 percent growth of its workforce with new full-time jobs within the eligibility period in accordance with subsection e. of section 76 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-344);
 
	(b) for a business engaged primarily in a targeted industry which does not qualify as a small business, 25 new full-time jobs;
 
	(c) for any other business, a minimum of 35 new full-time jobs;
 
	(d) for a business eligible for new full-time jobs under subparagraphs (b) or (c) of this paragraph, the business shall also be eligible for retained full-time jobs in addition to the new full-time jobs if the business will retain 150 retained full-time jobs when locating in a government-restricted municipality, 250 retained full-time jobs when locating in a qualified incentive tract or enhanced area municipality, or 500 retained full-time jobs when locating anywhere else in the State;
 
	(e) for a business not eligible under subparagraphs (b), (c), or (d) of this paragraph and locating in a qualified incentive tract, enhanced area, or government-restricted municipality that will retain 500 or more retained full-time jobs, a minimum of the business's retained full-time jobs at the time of application;
 
	(f) for a business not eligible under subparagraphs (b), (c), (d), or (e) of this paragraph and located in the State that will retain 1,000 or more retained full-time jobs, a minimum of the business's retained full-time jobs at the time of application.
 
	(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection, the authority may adopt, pursuant to the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), rules and regulations adjusting the minimum number of new or retained full-time jobs required under the program when necessary to respond to the prevailing economic conditions in the State.
 
	d.	A business that provides and adheres to a plan that demonstrates that the qualified business facility is capable of accommodating more than half of the business's new and retained full-time employees as approved and that certifies, under the penalty of perjury, that not less than 80 percent of the withholdings of new and retained full-time jobs are subject to the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq. shall be eligible.  The requirements set forth in this subsection may be modified by the authority to respond to an emergency, disaster, or other factors that result in employees of an eligible business having to work from a location other than the qualified business facility.
 
	e.	The chief executive officer of the business, or an equivalent officer, shall certify that all factual representations made by the business to the authority pursuant to subsection a. of this section are true under the penalty of perjury.
 
	f.	A business eligible pursuant to this section may submit an application to the authority in accordance with the provisions of section 72 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-340) on or after the effective date of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.) but prior to March 1, 2029.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.71; amended 2021, c.160, s.31; 2023, c.98, s.12.

34:1B-340  Application for approval of project.
 	72. a. A business that meets the eligibility criteria in section 71 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-339) and is seeking a grant of tax credits for a project under the program shall submit an application for approval of the project to the authority in a form and manner prescribed in regulations adopted by the authority pursuant to the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	b. (1) Before the board may consider an eligible business's application for tax credits, the authority shall confirm with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of the Treasury whether the eligible business is in substantial good standing with the respective department, or, if necessary, has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan for the eligible business.  The business entity shall certify that contractors or subcontractors that will perform work at the qualified business facility: (a) are registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); (b) have not been debarred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in the State; and (c) possess a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  The authority may also contract with an independent third party to perform a background check on the eligible business.  Provided that the eligible business is in substantial good standing, or has entered into such an agreement, and each contractor and subcontractor is in compliance with this paragraph, before the board may approve an eligible business's application for tax credits, the eligible business shall execute a non-binding letter of intent with the chief executive officer of the authority, specifying the amount and terms and conditions of tax credits that the authority is prepared to propose for board approval and that are intended to be a material factor in the decision by the eligible business to create or retain the proposed number of new and retained full-time jobs, and in which the eligible business certifies such tax credits are a material factor in its decision.
 
	(2)	To assist the authority in determining whether the award of tax credits is a material factor in the eligible business's decision to create or retain the minimum number of new and retained full-time jobs for eligibility under the program, the chief executive officer of the authority shall require the eligible business to submit, as part of its application, a full economic analysis of all locations under consideration by the eligible business; all lease agreements, ownership documents, or substantially similar documentation for the eligible business's proposed in-State locations; and all lease agreements, ownership documents, or substantially similar documentation for potential out-of-State location alternatives, to the extent they exist.  The chief executive officer of the authority may further consider the costs associated with opening and maintaining a business in New Jersey, competitive proposals that the eligible business has received from other states, the prevailing economic conditions, and any other factors that the chief executive officer of the authority deems relevant to assist the authority in determining whether an award of tax credits is a material factor in the eligible business's decision.  Based on this information, the authority shall independently verify and confirm the eligible business's assertion that the award of tax credits under the program is a material factor in the eligible business's decision to create or retain the minimum number of new and retained full-time jobs for eligibility under the program and, in the case of retained full-time jobs, the jobs are actually at risk of leaving the State, before the authority may award the eligible business any tax credits under the "Emerge Program Act," sections 70 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-338 et al.).  The chief executive officer of the eligible business, or an equivalent officer, shall certify that all factual representations made by the business to the authority pursuant to this paragraph are true under the penalty of perjury. 
 
	c.	An eligible business shall pay to the authority the full amount of the direct costs of an analysis concerning the eligible business's application for a tax credit, which a third party retained by the authority performs, if the authority deems such retention to be necessary.  The authority shall have the discretion to waive all or a portion of the costs of application for a small business. 
 
	d.	If at any time during the eligibility period the authority determines that the eligible business made a material misrepresentation on the eligible business's application, the eligible business shall forfeit all tax credits awarded under the program, which shall be in addition to any other criminal or civil penalties to which the business and the officer may be subject.
 
	e.	If circumstances require an eligible business to amend its application to the authority, then the chief executive officer of the eligible business, or an equivalent officer, shall certify to the authority that the information provided in its amended application is true under the penalty of perjury.
 
	f.	Nothing shall preclude a business from applying for tax credits under the program for more than one project pursuant to one or more applications.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.72; amended 2021, c.160, s.32.

34:1B-341  Project agreement.
  	73. a. Following approval by the board, but before the issuance of tax credits, the authority shall require an eligible business to enter into a project agreement.  The terms of the project agreement shall be consistent with the eligibility requirements of section 71 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-339), as applicable, and shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
 
	(1) (a)  a detailed description of the proposed project which will result in job creation or retention, and the number of new and retained full-time jobs that are approved for tax credits;
 
	(b)	for a phased project, a project phase agreement for which each phase identifies a description of the phase, the expected capital investment and number of new full-time jobs, and the time following acceptance of the project agreement when each phase is to begin and be completed, with the awarding of tax credits under the project agreement to be predicated on the number of full-time jobs created through the fulfillment of each project phase agreement;
 
	(2)	the eligibility period of the tax credits or, for a phased project, the eligibility period of the tax credits for each phase;
 
	(3)	personnel information that will enable the authority to administer the program;
 
	(4)	a requirement that the eligible business maintain the project at a location in New Jersey for the commitment period, with at least the minimum number of full-time jobs as required by this program, and a provision to permit the authority to recapture all or part of any tax credits awarded, at its discretion, if the eligible business does not remain in compliance with this provision for the required term or significantly reduces the number of full-time employees, or the salaries thereof, to which the eligible business certified at the commencement of the eligibility period;
 
	(5)	a method for the eligible business to certify that it has met the capital investment and employment requirements of the program set forth in subsections b. and c. of section 71 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-339) and to report annually to the authority the number of new and retained full-time employees, and the salaries thereof, for which the tax credits are to be allowed;
 
	(6)	representations that the eligible business is in substantial good standing with the Department of Environmental Protection, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, and the Department of the Treasury or has entered into an agreement with the departments that includes a practical corrective action plan, and the project complies with all applicable laws, and specifically, that the project does not violate any environmental law;
 
	(7)	a provision permitting an audit of the payroll records of the business from time to time, as the authority deems necessary;
 
	(8)	a provision that the chief executive officer of the authority receives annual reports from the eligible business and that allows the authority to confirm that the eligible business is in substantial good standing with the Department of Environmental Protection, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, and the Department of the Treasury, or has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan.  As part of the annual reports required by this paragraph, the eligible business shall confirm that each contractor or subcontractor performing work at the qualified business facility: (a) is registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); (b) has not been debarred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in the State; and (c) possesses a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  If the eligible business does not submit the report required under this paragraph, if the Department of Environmental Protection, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, and the Department of the Treasury advises that the eligible business is neither in substantial good standing nor has entered into a practical corrective action plan, or if the eligible business fails to confirm that each contractor or subcontractor is in compliance with this paragraph, then the eligible business may forfeit the issuance of tax credits, pending resolution of the underlying violations or other issues;
 
	(9)	a requirement for the eligible business to engage in on-site consultations with the Division of Workplace Safety and Health in the Department of Health;
 
	(10) a provision permitting the authority to amend the agreement; 
 
and
 
	(11) a provision establishing the conditions under which the authority, the eligible business, or both, may terminate the agreement.
 
	b. (1) For a project whose total project cost equals or exceeds $10 million, in addition to the project agreement, an eligible business shall enter into a community benefits agreement with the authority and the county or municipality in which the qualified business facility is located.  The agreement may include, but shall not be limited to, requirements for training, employment, and youth development and free services to underserved communities in and around the community in which the qualified business facility is located.  Prior to entering a community benefits agreement, the governing body of the county or municipality in which the qualified business facility is located shall hold at least one public hearing at which the governing body shall hear testimony from residents, community groups, and other stakeholders on the needs of the community that the agreement should address.
 
	(2)	The community benefits agreement shall provide for the creation of a community advisory committee to oversee the implementation of the agreement, monitor successes, ensure compliance with the terms of the agreement, and produce an annual public report.  The community advisory committee created pursuant to this paragraph shall be comprised of representatives from community groups and residents of the county or municipality in which the qualified business facility is located.
 
	(3)	At the time the eligible business submits the annual report required pursuant to section 77 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-345) to the authority, the eligible business shall certify, under the penalty of perjury, that it is in compliance with the terms of the community benefits agreement.  If the eligible business fails to provide the certification required pursuant to this paragraph or the authority determines that the eligible business is not in compliance with the terms of the community benefits agreement based on the reports submitted by the community advisory committee pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection, then the authority may rescind the award or recapture all or part of any tax credits awarded.
 
	(4)	An eligible business shall not be required to enter into a community benefits agreement pursuant to this subsection if the eligible business submits to the authority a copy of the either eligible business's approval letter from the authority or a redevelopment agreement applicable to the qualified business facility, provided that the approval letter or redevelopment agreement is certified by the municipality in which the project is located and includes provisions that meet or exceed the standards required for a community benefits agreement in this subsection, as determined by the chief executive officer pursuant to rules adopted by the authority.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.73; amended 2021, c.160, s.33.

34:1B-342  Site plan approval, financing, site control for qualified business facility.
  	74. a. Following board approval within a time established by the authority and prior to the authority and an eligible business executing a project agreement, the eligible business shall demonstrate that it has obtained site plan approval and has committed financing for, and site control of, the qualified business facility.  If the eligible business obtained site control of the qualified business facility prior to the execution of the letter of intent pursuant to section 72 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-340), then the authority may rescind approval of the award of tax credits, unless the eligible business disclosed the fact that the eligible business had obtained the site prior to executing the letter of intent and the authority determines that the award of tax credits was still a material factor in the eligible business's decision to create or retain the minimum number of new and retained full-time jobs for eligibility under the program.  The eligible business shall provide an estimated date of completion and shall submit periodic progress reports.  The authority may rescind an award of tax credits if an eligible business fails to provide the information required under this section within the period indicated in the approval of the tax credits by the board.  The authority may rescind an award of tax credits under the program if a project fails to advance in accordance with the project agreement.
 
	b.	Upon completion of the capital investment and employment requirements of the program, an eligible business shall submit to the authority certifications evidencing that the eligible business has satisfied the conditions relating to the capital investment and employment requirements of the project agreement with supporting evidence satisfactory to the authority.  Absent extenuating circumstances and the written approval of the authority, the eligible business shall submit the certification within three years following the date of approval of the application.  The authority may grant two six-month extensions of the deadline; provided that the date of certification shall not occur later than four years following the date of approval of the application by the authority; provided further that the authority may grant one additional extension not to exceed one year upon a finding by the authority that: (1) the project is delayed due to unforeseeable acts related to the project beyond the eligible business's control and without its fault or negligence; (2) the eligible business is using best efforts, with all due diligence, to proceed with the completion of the project and the submission of the certification; and (3) the eligible business has made, and continues to make, all reasonable efforts to prevent, avoid, mitigate, and overcome the delay.  To qualify for the one-year extension, the eligible business shall provide timely notice to the authority of the delay within 30 days after the eligible business has actual or constructive knowledge of the delay, and shall provide periodic reports, not less than every 30 days, of the status of the delay and the steps the eligible business is taking to mitigate or overcome the delay.
 
	c.	If the Governor declares an emergency, then the chief executive officer of the authority shall have the discretion to grant an extension for the duration of the emergency and the board of the authority, upon recommendation of the chief executive officer, may grant two additional six-month extensions; provided, however, that: (i) the extensions are due to the economic disruption caused by the emergency; (ii) the project is delayed due to unforeseeable acts related to the project beyond the eligible business's control and without its fault or negligence; (iii) the eligible business is using best efforts, with all due diligence, to proceed with the completion of the project and the submission of the certification; and (iv) the eligible business has made, and continues to make, all reasonable efforts to prevent, avoid, mitigate, and overcome the delay.
 
	d.	The chief executive officer of the eligible business, or an equivalent officer, shall certify that the information provided pursuant to this section is true under the penalty of perjury.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.74; amended 2021, c.160, s.34.

34:1B-343  Total amount of tax credit.
 	75. a. The total amount of the tax credit for an eligible business for each new or retained full-time job shall be as set forth in subsections b. through g. of this section.  The total tax credit amount shall be calculated and credited to the business annually for each year of the eligibility period, notwithstanding any other provisions of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.) to the contrary.
 
	b.	The base amount of the tax credit for each new or retained full-time job for an eligible business shall be as follows: 
 
	(1)	for a qualified business facility located within a government-restricted municipality, or which is a mega project, $4,000 per year;
 
	(2)	for a qualified business facility located within an enhanced area, $3,500 per year;
 
	(3)	for a qualified business facility located within a distressed municipality, $3,000 per year; 
 
	(4)	for a project in a qualified opportunity zone or an employment and investment corridor, $2,500 per year; and
 
	(5)	for a project in other eligible areas, $500 per year.
 
	c. (1) In addition to the base amount of the tax credit, the amount of the tax credit to be awarded for each new or retained full-time job shall be increased with the following bonuses:
 
	(a)	for an eligible business with a qualified business facility located in a municipality with a Municipal Revitalization Index distress score greater than 50, an increase of $1,000 per year;
 
	(b)	for an eligible business with a qualified business facility at which the capital investment in industrial or research and development premises for industrial or research and development use by the business is in excess of the minimum capital investment required for eligibility pursuant to subsection b. of section 71 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-339), an increase of $500 per year for each additional amount of investment that exceeds the minimum amount required for eligibility by 40 percent, with a maximum increase of $1,500 per year, unless the project qualifies as a mega project or the qualified business facility is located in a government-restricted municipality, in which case the maximum increase is $5,000 per year; 
 
	(c)	for an eligible business with large numbers of new full-time jobs during the eligibility period, the increases shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
 
	(i)	if the number of new full-time jobs is between 251 and 400, $500 per year;
 
	(ii)	if the number of new full-time jobs is between 401 and 600, $750 per year; 
 
	(iii)	if the number of new full-time jobs is between 601 and 800, $1,000 per year;
 
	(iv)	if the number of new full-time jobs is between 801 and 1,000, $1,250 per year; 
 
	(v)	if the number of new full-time jobs is in excess of 1,000, $1,500 per year;
 
	(d)	for an eligible business that annually funds an industry-specific training program, which has the capacity to enroll 10 percent or more of the eligible business's full-time workforce, or pays a State educational institution to provide to the public an industry-specific training program, an increase of $500 per year; provided, however, that if the training program is provided by a State educational institution that is within 10 miles of the qualified business facility, then the increase shall be $1,000 per year;
 
	(e)	for an eligible business that qualifies as a small business, an increase of $500 per year;
 
	(f)	for an eligible business with new full-time jobs and retained full-time jobs at the qualified business facility with a median salary in excess of the existing median salary for the county in which the project is located, or, in the case of a project in a government-restricted municipality, a business with employees in full-time positions at the project with a median salary in excess of the median salary for the government-restricted municipality, an increase of $200 per year during the eligibility period for each 35 percent by which the project's median salary levels exceeds the county or government-restricted municipality median salary, with a maximum increase of $1,000 per year;
 
	(g)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2021, c.160);
 
	(h)	for an eligible business engaged primarily in a targeted industry, an increase of $500 per year;
 
	(i)	for an eligible business with a qualified business facility located in a qualified incubator facility, an increase of $500 per year; 
 
	(j)	for an eligible business that enters into a labor harmony agreement in accordance with section 69 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-337), an increase of $2,000 per year for the portion of the project subject to that labor harmony agreement; provided further that an eligible business receiving a bonus under this subparagraph may exceed the limitation applicable to the eligible business pursuant to subsection d. of this section by an amount not to exceed $1,000;
 
	(k)	for an eligible business that provides its employees access to child care either through an on-site quality child care facility free of charge to its employees or through reimbursements paid by the eligible business to its employees for the cost of child care in accordance with standards adopted by the authority, an increase of $1,000 per year; 
 
	(l)	for an eligible business that enters, or has previously entered, into an active partnership with a re-entry program for the purpose of identifying and promoting employment opportunities at the eligible business for former inmates and current inmates leaving the corrections system, and that hires at least one active participant in the re-entry program as a full-time employee, an increase of $500 per year;
 
	(m)	for an eligible business with a qualified business facility that exceeds the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design's "Silver" rating standards but does not exceed "Gold" rating standards or completes substantial environmental remediation, an additional increase of $250 per year, or for an eligible business with a qualified business facility that exceeds the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design's "Gold" rating standards, an additional increase of $500 per year; 
 
	(n)	for an eligible business in a targeted industry with a qualified business facility that is used by the eligible business to conduct a full time collaborative relationship with a college or university, including, but not limited to, a doctoral university, an increase of $1,000 per year;
 
	(o)	for an eligible business with a project that generates solar, geo-thermal, wind, or any other renewable or distributed energy on site for use within the qualified business facility of an amount that equals at least 50 percent of the qualified business facility electric supply service needs, an increase of $500 per year;
 
	(p)	for an eligible business with a marine terminal project in a municipality located outside a government-restricted municipality, but within the geographical boundaries of the South Jersey Port District, an increase of $1,500 per year; 
 
	(q)	for an eligible business with a qualified business facility located in a qualified opportunity zone, an increase of $1,000 per year; and
 
	(r)	for an eligible business if one-third or more of the members of the eligible business's governing board or other governing body self-identify as members of an underrepresented community, which may include Black, African American, Hispanic, Latino, Asian, Pacific Islander, Native American, Native Hawaiian, Alaska Native or gay, lesbian, bisexual or transgender, an increase of $2,000 per year for each new or retained full-time job. The authority shall work with the Chief Diversity Officer or other State entities to ensure that the bonus provided under this subparagraph is implemented faithfully and in compliance with law. 
 
	(2)	The authority shall not award a bonus to an eligible business with full-time jobs at the qualified business facility that pay less than $15 per hour or 120 percent of the minimum wage fixed under subsection a. of section 5 of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a4), whichever is higher. 
 
	(3)	The authority may adopt, pursuant to the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), criteria in addition to, or in place of, the criteria set forth in paragraph (1) of this subsection in response to the prevailing economic conditions in the State.
 
	d.	The gross amount of the tax credit available to an eligible business for each new or retained full-time job shall be the sum of the base amount set forth in subsection b. of this section and the various additional bonus amounts for which the business is eligible pursuant to subsection c. of this section, subject to the following limitations:
 
	(1)	for a mega project or a project in a government-restricted municipality, the gross amount for each new or retained full-time job shall not exceed $8,000 per year;
 
	(2)	for a qualified business facility located within an enhanced area, the gross amount for each new or retained full-time job shall not exceed $6,000 per year;
 
	(3)	for a qualified business facility within a distressed municipality, the gross amount for each new or retained full-time job shall not exceed $5,000 per year;
 
	(4)	for a qualified business facility in a qualified opportunity zone or an employment and investment corridor, the gross amount for each new or retained full-time job shall not exceed $4,000 per year; and
 
	(5)	for a qualified business facility in other eligible areas, the gross amount for each new or retained full-time job shall not exceed $3,000 per year. 
 
	e.	The authority shall reduce the gross amount of tax credits per full-time job: (1) if the median salary of new full-time jobs and retained full-time jobs subject to the project agreement is less than the existing median salary for the county in which the qualified business facility is located; or (2) for a project located in a government-restricted municipality, if the median salary of new full-time jobs and retained full-time jobs subject to the project agreement is less than the existing median salary for the municipality in which the qualified business facility is located.  The authority shall reduce the gross amount of tax credits per full-time job by an amount, in percentage points, equal to the percentage the median salary of new full-time jobs and retained full-time jobs subject to the project agreement is below the existing median salary for the county or government-restricted municipality in which the qualified business facility is located.  The authority shall not award a tax credit to an eligible business if the median salary of new full-time jobs and retained full-time jobs that would otherwise be subject to the project agreement is 30 percent or more below the relevant existing median salary for the county or government-restricted municipality in which the qualified business facility is located.
 
	f.	After the determination by the authority of the gross amount of tax credits for which an eligible business is eligible pursuant to subsection d. of this section, the final total tax credit amount shall be calculated as follows: (1) for each new full-time job, the eligible business shall be allowed tax credits equaling 100 percent of the gross amount of tax credits for each new full-time job; and (2) for each retained full-time job, the eligible business shall be allowed tax credits equaling 50 percent of the gross amount of tax credits for each retained full-time job.
 
	g.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections a. through f. of this section to the contrary, for each application approved by the board, the amount of tax credits available to be applied by the business annually shall not exceed an amount determined by the authority to be necessary to induce the project to be sited in New Jersey as determined by the board.  The authority shall determine the amount necessary to complete the project through staff analysis of all locations under consideration by the eligible business and all lease agreements, ownership documents, or substantially similar documentation for the eligible business's proposed in-State locations and potential out-of-State location alternatives, competitive proposals from other states, the prevailing economic conditions, and any other information that the authority deems relevant.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.75; amended 2021, c.160, s.35.

34:1B-344  Forfeit of credit.
 	76. a. (1) If, in any tax period, an eligible business reduces the total number of full-time employees in its Statewide workforce by more than 20 percent from the number of full-time employees in its Statewide workforce in the last tax period prior to the credit amount approval under the program, then the eligible business shall forfeit its credit amount for that tax period and each subsequent tax period, until the first tax period for which documentation demonstrating the restoration of the eligible business's Statewide workforce to the threshold levels required by this subsection has been reviewed and approved by the authority, for which tax period and each subsequent tax period the full amount of the credit shall be allowed.
 
	(2)	If the annual report filed by an eligible business pursuant to section 77 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-345) provides that the number of new full-time employees employed by the eligible business subject to the project agreement, or the salaries thereof, was reduced by more than 10 percent of the number of new full-time employees, or salaries thereof, in the annual report of the prior year, or the project agreement if the annual report is the first such report filed, then the authority may reevaluate the net positive economic benefit of the project and reduce the size of the award accordingly. This reduction shall not affect any recapture under subsection f. of this section.
 
	b.	If, in any tax period, the number of full-time employees employed by the eligible business subject to the project agreement, or the salaries thereof, drops below 80 percent of the number of new and retained full-time jobs, and the salaries thereof, specified in the project agreement or the project phase agreement, then the eligible business shall forfeit its tax credit amount for that tax period and each subsequent tax period, until the first tax period for which documentation demonstrating the restoration of the number of full-time employees employed by the eligible business subject to the project agreement to 80 percent of the number of jobs specified in the project agreement or project phase agreement or the restoration of 80 percent of the salaries specified in the project agreement is reviewed and approved by the authority.
 
	c.	Except for an eligible business that is a small business engaged primarily in a targeted industry: 
 
	(1)	If the qualified business facility is sold in whole or in part during the eligibility period, the new owner shall not acquire the capital investment of the seller, provided, however, that any tax credits of tenants shall remain unaffected.  The seller shall forfeit all tax credits for the tax period in which the sale occurs and all subsequent tax periods, provided, however, that an eligible business may change the location of the qualified business facility if
 
	the new facility: 
 
	(a) meets all applicable location qualifying criteria and has gross leasable area not less than the gross leasable area of the qualified business facility initially approved by the authority and the alternate qualified business facility meets the minimum capital investment and sustainability requirements of the program; or 
 
	(b) does not meet all applicable location qualifying criteria or has less gross leasable area than the gross leasable area of the qualified business facility initially approved by the authority, if the alternate qualified business facility meets the minimum capital investment and sustainability requirements of the program, provided that the authority shall require a cost comparison of the originally approved location and the alternate qualified business facility illustrating the respective economics of the project which reflect occupancy at the alternate proposed qualified business facility location for the remaining duration of the commitment period and shall re-calculate the net economic benefit of the project to reflect the economics of occupancy at the alternate proposed location for the remaining duration of the net benefit test period in lieu of the economics of continuing occupancy at the qualified business facility proposed to be vacated, and provided further that the award of tax credits shall be reduced consistent with the variations in qualifying criteria for the alternate qualified business facility location as well as in a manner consistent with the revised net economic benefit calculation.
 
	In the event that the modified project economics materially deviate from the economics of the initial approval in a manner that undermines the recommendation of approval made by the staff of the authority at the time of the initial approval, then the business requesting to re-locate a qualified business facility shall be required to obtain the approval of the members of the authority.
 
	(2)	If a tenant subleases its tenancy in whole or in part during the eligibility period, the new tenant shall not acquire the tax credits of the sublessor, and the sublessor shall forfeit all tax credits for any tax period of its sublease in which the sublessor, in continued occupation of a portion of the qualified business facility, fails to maintain the number of jobs required for the sublessor to earn tax credits for the tax period or fails to independently satisfy the minimum capital investment or sustainability requirements for the program as set forth in section 71 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-339).  Provided, however, if the capital investment of the sublessor in the occupied portion of the qualified business facility is below the project minimum capital investment as set forth in section 71 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-339), the sublessor may include capital investment made by or on behalf of the new tenant in the subleased portion of the qualified business facility, so long as that capital investment is not the subject of an independent application under an incentive program with the authority. 
 
	d.	A small business may move its qualified business facility provided that the business remains in New Jersey during the commitment period.
 
	e.	The authority may require a small business to submit a growth plan, which specifies the number of new full-time employees in the State that the eligible business will hire each year of the eligibility period; provided that by the end of the eligibility period, the eligible business shall have a minimum of 25 percent growth of its workforce with new full-time jobs.  If the eligible business meets the number of new full-time employees specified in the growth plan each year of the eligibility period, then the eligible business shall be entitled to an increased credit amount for that tax period, and each subsequent tax period, for each additional full-time employee added above the number of full-time employees certified, until the full-time employees number the maximum number projected for the final year of the eligibility period.  Failure to meet the projections in any year shall not constitute a default but shall cause the authority to reduce the award in accordance with a schedule attached to the project agreement.
 
	f. (1) The authority may recapture all or part of a tax credit awarded if an eligible business does not remain in compliance with the requirements of a project agreement for the duration of the commitment period.  A recapture pursuant to this subsection may include interest on the recapture amount, at a rate equal to the statutory rate for corporate business or insurance premiums tax deficiencies, plus any statutory penalties, and all costs incurred by the authority and the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury in connection with the pursuit of the recapture, including, but not limited to, counsel fees, court costs, and other costs of collection.  Failure of the eligible business to meet any program criteria shall constitute a default and shall result in the recapture of all or part of the tax credit awarded.
 
	(2)	If all or part of a tax credit sold or assigned pursuant to section 78 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-346) is subject to recapture, then the authority shall pursue recapture from the eligible business and not from the purchaser or assignee of the tax credit transfer certificate.  The purchaser or assignee of a tax credit transfer certificate shall be subject to any limitations and conditions that apply to the use of the tax credits by the eligible business.
 
	(3)	Any funds, net of costs incurred by the authority, recaptured pursuant to this subsection, including penalties and interest, shall be deposited into the General Fund of the State.
 
	g.	A business may include an affiliate for any period, provided that the business provides a valid tax clearance certificate for the affiliate and a verification of the nature of the affiliate relationship during the relevant period, and provided further that the affiliate provides acceptable responses to the authority's legal disclosures inquiries, as determined by the authority.  A formal modification of the authority's approval of the project agreement shall not be necessary to add or remove an affiliate after approval or execution of the project agreement.
 
	h.	A business may change its name filed with the authority by providing a copy of the filed amendment to the certificate of incorporation or formation, as the case may be, of the business and a valid tax clearance certificate with the business's new name.  A formal modification of the authority's approval shall not be necessary to change a business's name after approval or execution of the project agreement.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.76; amended 2021, c.160, s.36.

34:1B-345  Annual report.
  	77. a. (1) An eligible business which is awarded tax credits under the program shall submit annually, no later than the date indicated in the project agreement, commencing in the year in which the grant of tax credits is issued and for the remainder of the commitment period, a report that indicates that the eligible business continues to maintain the number of new and retained full-time jobs, and the salaries thereof, specified in the project agreement.  As part of the annual report required pursuant to this subsection, an eligible business shall provide to the authority a copy of its applicable New Jersey tax return showing business income and withholdings as a condition of its continuation in the program, and the quarterly wage report required under R.S.43:21-14 submitted to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development together with an annual payroll report showing: (a) the new full-time jobs which were created in accordance with the project agreement, and (b) the new full-time jobs created during each subsequent year of the commitment period.  The failure of an eligible business to submit to the authority a copy of its annual payroll report or submit the quarterly wage report in accordance with the provisions of this subsection during the eligibility period shall result in the forfeiture of the award for that year.  An eligible business shall explain, in the reports required by this subsection, the reason for any discrepancies between the annual payroll report submitted by the eligible business and the quarterly wage report.  The chief executive officer of the eligible business, or an equivalent officer, shall certify that the information provided pursuant to this paragraph is true under the penalty of perjury.  Claims, records, or statements submitted by an eligible business to the authority in order to receive tax credits shall not be considered claims, records, or statements made in connection with State tax laws.
 
	(2)	Upon receipt and review of each report submitted during the eligibility period, the authority shall provide to the eligible business and the director a certificate of compliance indicating the amount of tax credits that the eligible business may apply against its tax liability.  The authority shall pro rate the tax credit for the first and last years of the eligibility period based on the number of full months the project was certified in the year the eligible business first certifies.
 
	b. (1) In conducting its annual review, the authority may require a business to submit any information determined by the authority to be necessary and relevant to its review.
 
	(2)	An eligible business shall forfeit the credit amount for any tax period for which the eligible business's documentation remains uncertified as of the date for certification indicated in the project agreement, although credit amounts for the remainder of the years of the eligibility period shall remain available to the eligible business.
 
	c.	Full-time employment for an accounting or privilege period shall be determined as the average of the monthly full-time employment for the period.
 
	d. (1) Upon receipt by the director of the certificate of compliance, the director shall allow the eligible business a tax credit.  The eligible business may apply the credit allowed by the director against the eligible business's tax liability for the tax period in which the director allowed the tax credit or may carry forward the credit for use by the eligible business in any of the next seven successive tax periods, which credit shall expire thereafter.
 
	(2) (a) The amount of credit allowed may be applied against the tax liability otherwise due pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5.
 
	(b)	Credits granted to a partnership shall be passed through to the partners, members, or owners, respectively, pro-rata, or pursuant to an executed agreement among the partners, members, or owners documenting an alternate distribution method provided to the director accompanied by any additional information as the director may prescribe.  With respect to credits passed through to a person subject to tax liability due pursuant to section 2 or 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), the person shall be allowed to apply credits against the person's tax liability without the provision of a tax credit certificate to the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury for the tax period accompanying the person's tax return and the person shall be considered the tax certificate holder and be subject to subparagraph (c) of this paragraph.  The authority may recapture all or part of any tax credits claimed by a person pursuant to subparagraph (b) of this paragraph with penalties and interest from the person or the business in the event the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury does not issue a tax credit certificate in an amount at least equal to the tax credit amount claimed on the person's tax return for the applicable tax period.
 
	(3)	The director shall prescribe the order of priority of the application of the credit allowed under this section and any other credits allowed by law against the tax imposed under section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5).  The amount of a credit applied under this section against the tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5) for a privilege period, together with any other credits allowed by law, shall not reduce the tax liability to an amount less than the statutory minimum provided in subsection (e) of section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5).
 
	(4)	In lieu of applying any credit certificate or credit transfer certificate against tax liability otherwise due pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5, the credit certificate or credit transfer certificate may be surrendered to the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury for a cash payment equal to 90 percent of the amount of tax credits evidenced by the certificate, provided that the issuance date of the credit certificate or credit transfer certificate to the taxpayer surrendering such certificate occurred at least two years prior to the date of surrender and the credit certificate or credit transfer certificate has not been sold or assigned previously.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.77; amended 2021, c.160, s.37.

34:1B-346  Application for tax credit transfer certificate.
  	78. a. An eligible business may apply to the director and the chief executive officer of the authority for a tax credit transfer certificate, within three years of the tax period in which the director allows the eligible business a tax credit, in lieu of any amount of the tax credit against the eligible business's State tax liability.  The tax credit transfer certificate, upon receipt thereof by the eligible business from the director and the chief executive officer of the authority, may be sold or assigned, in an amount not less than $25,000, within three years of the tax period in which the eligible business receives the tax credit transfer certificate from the director, to another person that may have a tax liability pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and 54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5.  A purchaser or assignee of a tax credit transfer certificate pursuant to this section shall apply the transferred credit against the same tax for which the eligible business was approved a tax credit under the program.  The tax credit transfer certificate provided to the eligible business shall include a statement waiving the eligible business's right to claim the credit that the eligible business has elected to sell or assign.  
 
	b. (1) The eligible business shall not sell or assign a tax credit transfer certificate allowed under this section for consideration received by the eligible business of less than 85 percent of the transferred credit amount before considering any further discounting to present value which shall be permitted.  The tax credit transfer certificate issued to the eligible business by the director shall be subject to any limitations and conditions imposed on the application of State tax credits pursuant to sections 70 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-338 et al.) and any other terms and conditions that the director may prescribe.
 
	(2)	With respect to credits to be sold or assigned, in full or in part, pursuant to an application to the authority for a tax credit transfer certificate by a business to a person subject to tax liability due pursuant to section 2 or 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 or C.54:18A-3), the person shall be allowed to apply the credits against the person's tax liability without the provision of a tax credit certificate to the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury for the tax period accompanying its tax return, and the person be considered a tax credit transferee and be subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection.
 
	(3)	The authority may recapture all or part of any tax credits claimed by a person pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection with penalties and interest from the person or the business in the event the authority does not issue a tax credit certificate in an amount at least equal to the tax credit amount claimed on the person's tax return for the applicable tax period.
 
	c.	A purchaser or assignee of a tax credit transfer certificate pursuant to this section shall not make any subsequent transfers, assignments, or sales of the tax credit transfer certificate.
 
	d.	The authority shall publish on its Internet website the following information concerning each tax credit transfer certificate approved by the authority and the director pursuant to this section:
 
	(1)	the name of the transferrer;
 
	(2)	the name of the transferee;
 
	(3)	the value of the tax credit transfer certificate; 
 
	(4)	the State tax against which the transferee may apply the tax credit; and
 
	(5)	the consideration received by the transferrer.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.78.

34:1B-347  Report by State college, university.
 	80.	Beginning the year next following the year in which P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.) takes effect and every two years thereafter, a State college or university shall, pursuant to an agreement executed between the State college or university and the authority, prepare a report on the implementation of the program, and submit the report to the authority, the Governor, and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), to the Legislature.  Each biennial report required under this section shall include a description of each eligible business receiving a tax credit under the program, a detailed analysis of the consideration given to each applicant, an analysis of whether the incentives awarded influenced the eligible business's decisions to locate a qualified business facility in the State, the return on investment for incentives awarded, the eligible business's impact on the State's economy, and any other metrics the State college determines are relevant based upon national best practices.  The authority shall prepare a written response to the report, which the authority shall submit to the Governor and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), to the Legislature.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.80.

34:1B-348  Regulations.
  	81.	Notwithstanding the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), to the contrary, the chief executive officer of the authority may adopt, immediately, upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, regulations that the chief executive officer deems necessary to implement the provisions of sections 70 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-338 et al.), including but not limited to examples of and the determination of capital investment and the determination of the limits, if any, on the expense or type of furnishings that may constitute capital improvements, which regulations shall be effective for a period not to exceed 180 days from the date of the filing.  The chief executive officer shall thereafter amend, adopt, or readopt the regulations in accordance with the requirements of P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.81.

34:1B-349  Short title.
  	82.	Sections 82 through 88 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-349 et al.) shall be known and may be cited as the "Main Street Recovery Finance Program Act."
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.82.

34:1B-350  Definitions.
 	83.	As used in sections 82 through 88 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-349 et al.):

	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Board" means the Board of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Eligible microbusiness" means a business enterprise located in the State that produces goods or provides services and has fewer than 10 full-time employees and annual gross revenue of less than $1,500,000 at the time of application for a loan under the program.
 
	"Eligible small business" means any business that satisfies the criteria set forth in subsection b. of section 85 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-352) at the time of application for a grant under the program.
 
	"Program" means the Main Street Recovery Finance Program established pursuant to section 84 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-351).
 
	"Small business" means a business engaged in the conduct of a trade or business in this State that qualifies as a "small business concern" within the meaning of the federal "Small Business Act," Pub.L.85-536 (15 U.S.C. § 631 et seq.) for the purpose of the small business's eligibility assistance from the United States Small Business Administration.
 
	L.2020, c.15 6, s.83; amended 2021, c.160, s.39.

34:1B-351  Main Street Recovery Finance Program.
 	84.	The Main Street Recovery Finance Program is hereby established as a program under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.  The authority shall administer the program for the purpose of providing grants, loans, and loan guarantees to eligible small businesses in accordance with the provisions of sections 82 through 88 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-349 et al.).  A business seeking a grant, loan, or loan guarantee under the program shall submit an application to the authority.  The authority shall adopt eligibility criteria for the program and may consider a business's benefit to the community in which it is situated and the degree to which the business enhances economic development in communities that have been severely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic when making awards under the program.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.84; amended 2021, c.160, s.40.

34:1B-352  Grants to eligible small businesses.
 	85. a. As part of the Main Street Recovery Finance Program, the authority shall provide grants to eligible small businesses from the Main Street Recovery Fund, subject to appropriation or the availability of federal funds, provided that the authority shall undertake a disparity study of the relative availability of capital and related banking resources for small businesses and microbusiness that are women- and minority-owned business enterprises in this State and the authority's historic support of such businesses, and, as recommended by the study, shall establish policies, practices, protocols, and, if appropriate, minimum percentages of the fund to be set aside for eligible small businesses and microbusinesses that are minority-owned business enterprises or women-owned business enterprises.  Grants awarded pursuant to the program may be used by an eligible small business for capital improvements or to cover operating expenses.  The authority may dedicate up to 10 percent of the amount appropriated for the purposes of this section to provide technical assistance grants to for-profit or non-profit entities that are experienced in providing technical assistance services or to eligible microbusinesses to help such eligible microbusinesses in applying for the grants authorized under this section.
 
	b. (1) A small business shall be eligible to receive a grant pursuant to this section if the small business demonstrates to the authority that:
 
	(a)	the small business has complied with all requirements for filing tax and information returns and for paying or remitting required State taxes and fees by submitting, as a part of the application, a tax clearance certificate, as described in section 1 of P.L.2007, c.101 (C.54:50-39); and
 
	(b)	each worker employed by the small business shall be paid not less than $15 per hour or 120 percent of the minimum wage fixed under subsection a. of section 5 of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a4), whichever is higher, except an employee who customarily and regularly receives gratuities or tips shall be paid not less than 120 percent of the minimum wage.
 
	(2)	In addition to the requirements of paragraph (1) of this subsection, a small business shall be eligible to receive a grant pursuant to this subsection for capital improvements only if the small business demonstrates to the authority at the time of application that:
 
	(a)	any capital improvement in excess of $50,000 and undertaken with grant funds shall comply with standards established by the authority in accordance with the green building manual prepared by the Commissioner of Community Affairs pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2007, c.132 (C.52:27D-130.6), regarding the use of renewable energy, energy-efficient technology, and non-renewable resources to reduce environmental degradation and encourage long-term cost reduction; and
 
	(b)	each worker employed to perform construction work in connection with a capital improvement undertaken with grant funds in excess of $50,000 shall be paid not less than the prevailing wage rate for the worker's craft or trade, as determined by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.).
 
	c.	An eligible small business seeking a grant pursuant to this section shall submit an application for approval to the authority in the form and manner prescribed in regulations adopted by the authority pursuant to the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).  Before the board may consider an eligible small business's application for grants, the authority shall confirm with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of the Treasury whether the eligible small business is in substantial good standing with the respective department, or has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan for the eligible small business.  The authority may also contract with an independent third party to perform a background check on the eligible small business.  The eligible small business, or an authorized agent thereof, shall certify under the penalty of perjury that any information provided in the application required pursuant to this subsection is true.
 
	d.	Following approval of an application, but before the disbursement of grant funds, the authority shall require an eligible small business to enter into a grant agreement.  The grant agreement shall specify the amount of the grant to be awarded the eligible small business and the frequency of payments.  If the authority determines that an eligible small business made a material misrepresentation on the eligible small business's grant application or the eligible small business has failed to comply with any requirement set forth in subsection b. of this section, then the small business shall return to the authority any grant awarded pursuant to this section.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.85; amended 2021, c.160, s.41.

34:1B-353  Moneys available to eligible lenders.
	86. a. As part of the Main Street Recovery Finance Program, the authority shall make loans and grants available from the Main Street Recovery Fund, subject to annual appropriation and the availability of funds, to eligible community development finance institutions, minority depository institutions, and other eligible lenders pursuant to subsection b. of this section and to eligible microbusinesses pursuant to subsection c. of this section, provided that funds shall be made available to eligible microbusinesses certified by the State as a "minority business" or a "women's business" pursuant to P.L.1986, c.195 (C.52:27H-21.17 et seq.) in a manner consistent with authority requirements within paragraph a. of section 85 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-352).  The authority may dedicate up to 10 percent of the amount appropriated for the purposes of this section to provide technical assistance grants to for-profit or non-profit entities that are experienced in providing technical assistance services or to eligible microbusinesses to help such eligible microbusinesses in applying for loan packaging services under the programs authorized to receive grants and loans pursuant to this section. 
 
	b.	The authority shall provide loans and grants to eligible community development finance institutions, minority depository institutions, and other eligible lenders in accordance with this subsection.  Loans and grants made available to eligible community development finance institutions, minority depository institutions, and other eligible lenders pursuant to this paragraph shall be used to strengthen capital structures, leverage additional debt capital, and increase lending and investing in economically disadvantaged communities.  The authority shall require an eligible community development finance institution, minority depository institution, or other eligible lender that receives a grant or loan pursuant to this subsection to enter into an agreement with the authority.  
 
	As used in this section, "other eligible lender" means a zone development corporation as defined in section 3 of P.L.1983, c.303 (C.52:27H-62) that is located in a municipality with a population greater than 100,000 or another nonprofit lender with at least 10 years experience lending to microbusinesses.
 
	c.	The authority shall provide loans to eligible microbusinesses in accordance with this subsection.  Loans made available to eligible microbusinesses pursuant to this subsection may be used for capital improvements, employee training, salaries for new positions, and to pay for day-to-day operating expenditures, including payroll, rent, utilities, insurance, and purchases of goods and services.  The authority shall require an eligible microbusiness to enter into a loan agreement.  Loans made pursuant to this subsection shall have a term and an interest rate determined by the authority based on conditions currently prevailing in the market.  The authority may forgive loans provided to eligible microbusinesses pursuant to this subsection at the authority's discretion.  The authority may, through the terms of the loan agreement, establish terms governing the incidence of default by an eligible microbusiness.  
 
	d.	Prior to March 1, 2025, an eligible community development finance institution, minority depository institution, or other eligible lender seeking a loan or a grant pursuant to subsection b. of this section or an eligible microbusiness seeking a loan pursuant to subsection c. of this section shall submit an application for approval to the authority in the form and manner prescribed in regulations adopted by the authority pursuant to the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).  Before the authority may approve an application, the authority shall confirm with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of the Treasury whether the applicant is in substantial good standing with the respective department, or has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan for the applicant.  The authority may also contract with an independent third party to perform a background check on the applicant.  The applicant, or an authorized agent thereof, shall certify under the penalty of perjury that any information provided in the application required pursuant to this subsection is true.  
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.86; amended 2021, c.160, s.42.

34:1B-354  Regulations.
 	88.	Notwithstanding the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), to the contrary, the chief executive officer of the authority may adopt, immediately, upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, regulations that the chief executive officer deems necessary to implement the provisions of sections 82 through 88 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-349 et al.), which regulations shall be effective for a period not to exceed 180 days from the date of the filing.  The chief executive officer shall thereafter amend, adopt, or readopt the regulations in accordance with the requirements of P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.88.

34:1B-355  Working Group on Entrepreneur Zones.
 	90. a. There is established in the New Jersey Economic Development Authority a Working Group on Entrepreneur Zones for the purpose of making recommendations for the establishment of entrepreneur zones throughout the State.  The working group shall consider whether the establishment of entrepreneur zones in which the State provides the tax incentives, regulation relief, and financial support to local entrepreneurs is the most effective way to create jobs in the State.  The working group shall identify census tracts within the State that are suitable for designation as an entrepreneur zone.
 
	b.	The working group shall consist of 14 members appointed by the chief executive officer of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.
 
	c.	Appointments to the working group shall be made within 30 days after the effective date of P.L.2021, c.160.  Vacancies in the membership of the working group shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments were made.
 
	d.	Members of the working group shall serve without compensation, but the authority shall reimburse such members for actual expenses necessarily incurred in the discharge of their duties. 
 
	e.	Members of the working group shall be subject to the provisions of subsection l. of section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.90; amended 2021, c.160, s.44.

34:1B-362  Combined value, all tax credits.
	98. a. The combined value of all tax credits awarded under the "Historic Property Reinvestment Act," sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through C.34:1B-276); the "Brownfields Redevelopment Incentive Program Act," sections 9 through 19 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-277 through C.34:1B-287); the "New Jersey Innovation Evergreen Act," sections 20 through 34 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-288 through C.34:1B-302); the "Food Desert Relief Act," sections 35 through 42 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-303 through C.34:1B-310); the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335); the "Emerge Program Act," sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.); section 6 of P.L.2010, c.57 (C.34:1B-209.4); the "Cultural Arts Incentives Program Act," P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-383 et al.); the "Next New Jersey Program Act," P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-394 et al.); P.L.2025, c.111 (C.55:14K-106 et al.); the "Next New Jersey Manufacturing Program Act," P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-403 et al.); and sections 1 through 4 of P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.4 through C.34:1B-335.7) shall not exceed an overall cap of  $14 billion over a nine-year period, subject to the conditions and limitations set forth in this section.  Of this $14 billion, $2.5 billion shall be reserved for transformative projects approved under the Aspire Program.
 
	b. (1) The total value of tax credits awarded under any constituent program of the "New Jersey Economic Recovery Act of 2020," P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.); the "Cultural Arts Incentives Program Act," P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-383 et al.); the "Next New Jersey Program Act," P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-394 et al.), P.L.2025, c.111 (C.55:14K-106 et al.); and the “Next New Jersey Manufacturing Program Act,” P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-403 et al.) shall be subject to the following limitations, except as otherwise provided in subsection c. of this section:
 
	(a)	for tax credits awarded under the "Historic Property Reinvestment Act," sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through C.34:1B-276), the total value of tax credits annually awarded during each of the first six years of the nine-year period shall not exceed $50 million;
 
	(b) (i) for tax credits awarded under the "Brownfields Redevelopment Incentive Program Act," sections 9 through 19 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-277 through C.34:1B-287), the total value of tax credits annually awarded during each of the first six years of the nine-year period shall not exceed $50 million, and the total value of tax credits awarded over the entirety of the nine-year period shall not exceed $100,000,000;
 
	(ii) from the tax credits made available to the "Brownfields Redevelopment Incentive Program Act," sections 9 through 19 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-277 through C.34:1B-287), the sum of $200,000,000 in tax credits shall be allocated to the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency, established pursuant to P.L.1983, c.530 (C.55:14K-1 et seq.), which tax credits shall be sold through competitive auctions conducted pursuant to sections 3 through 7 of P.L.2025, c.111 (C.55:14K-106 through C.55:14K-110).  All proceeds of the tax credit auctions shall be used by the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency for the purposes authorized in subsection b. of section 4 of P.L.2025, c.111 (C.55:14K-107).  Notwithstanding any provision of law or regulation to the contrary, the tax credits reallocated to the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency shall not be subject to any requirements or conditions of the "New Jersey Economic Recovery Act of 2020," P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.), as amended or supplemented;
 
	(c)	for tax credits awarded under the "New Jersey Innovation Evergreen Act," sections 20 through 34 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-288 through C.34:1B-302), the total value of tax credits annually awarded during each of the first six years of the nine-year period shall not exceed $60 million, and the total value of tax credits awarded over the entirety of the nine-year period shall not exceed $300,000,000;
 
	(d)	for tax credits awarded under the "Food Desert Relief Act," sections 35 through 42 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-303 through C.34:1B-310), the total value of tax credits annually awarded during each of the first six years of the nine-year period shall not exceed $40 million;
 
	(e)	for tax credits awarded under the "Cultural Arts Incentives Program Act," P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-383 et al.), the total value of tax credits awarded during the nine-year period shall not exceed $1,200,000,000; 
 
	(f)	for tax credits awarded under the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335), and the "Emerge Program Act," sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.), not including tax credits awarded for transformative projects, the total value of tax credits annually awarded during each of the first six years of the nine-year period shall not exceed $1.1 billion.  If the authority awards tax credits in an amount less than the annual limitation, then the uncommitted portion of the annual limitation shall be made available for qualified offshore wind projects awarded under section 6 of P.L.2010, c.57 (C.34:1B-209.4), pursuant to subparagraph (h) of this paragraph, projects awarded a tax credit pursuant to the "Next New Jersey Program Act," P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-394 et al.), pursuant to subparagraph (k) of this paragraph, projects awarded a tax credit pursuant to the “Next New Jersey Manufacturing Program Act,” P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-403 et al.), pursuant to subparagraph (l) of this paragraph, cultural arts institutions awarded a tax credit pursuant to the “Cultural Arts Incentives Program Act,” P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-383 et al.), pursuant to subparagraph (l) of this paragraph, or New Jersey studio partners, New Jersey film-lease production companies, and taxpayers, other than New Jersey studio partners and New Jersey film-lease production companies awarded under sections 1 and 2 of P.L.2018, c.56 (C.54:10A-5.39b and C.54A:4-12b), pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph and subsection d. of this section.  During each of the first six years of the nine-year period, the authority shall annually award tax credits valuing no greater than $715 million for projects located in the northern counties of the State, and the authority shall annually award tax credits valuing no greater than $385 million for projects located in the southern counties of the State under the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335), and the "Emerge Program Act," sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.).  If during any of the first six years of the nine-year period, the authority awards tax credits under the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335), and the "Emerge Program Act," sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.), in an amount less than the annual limitation for projects located in northern counties or southern counties, as applicable, the uncommitted portion of the annual limitation shall be available to be deployed by the authority in a subsequent year, provided that the uncommitted portion of tax credits shall be awarded for projects located in the applicable geographic area, except that (i) after the completion of the third year of the nine-year period, the authority may deploy 50 percent of the uncommitted portion of tax credits for any previous year without consideration to the county in which a project is located; and (ii) after the completion of the sixth year of the nine-year period, the authority may deploy all available tax credits, including the uncommitted portion of the annual limitation for any previous year, without consideration to the county in which a project is located;
 
	(g)	except as provided in  subparagraphs (j) and (n) of this paragraph, for tax credits awarded for transformative projects under the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335), the total value of tax credits awarded during the nine-year period shall not exceed $2.5 billion.  The total value of tax credits awarded for transformative projects in a given year shall not be subject to an annual limitation, except that the total value of tax credits awarded to any transformative project shall not exceed $400 million;
 
	(h)	from the tax credits made available, pursuant to subparagraph (f) of this paragraph, to the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335), and the "Emerge Program Act," sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.), not including tax credits awarded for transformative projects, an amount not to exceed $350,000,000 shall be made available for qualified offshore wind projects awarded a credit pursuant to section 6 of P.L.2010, c.57 (C.34:1B-209.4) during the first three years of the nine-year period;
 
	(i)	beginning in fiscal year 2023, from the tax credits made available, pursuant to subparagraph (f) of this paragraph, to the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335), and the "Emerge Program Act," sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.), not including tax credits awarded for transformative projects, additional amounts shall be made available for New Jersey studio partners, New Jersey film-lease production companies, and taxpayers, other than New Jersey studio partners and New Jersey film-lease production companies pursuant to sections 1 and 2 of P.L.2018, c.56 (C.54:10A-5.39b and C.54A:4-12b); 
 
	(j)	beginning in fiscal year 2024, from the tax credits made available, pursuant to subparagraph (f) of this paragraph, to the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335), and the "Emerge Program Act," sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.), not including tax credits awarded for transformative projects, an amount not to exceed $500,000,000 may be annually transferred for the award to transformative projects under the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335), provided that: (i) the remaining allocation of tax credits otherwise available for transformative projects, pursuant to subparagraph (g) of this paragraph, is less than $1,000,000,000; and (ii) the authority board determines that the transfer of tax credits is warranted based on such criteria as the authority deems appropriate, which may include the criteria set forth in paragraph (2) of this subsection.  If a transfer of tax credits is made pursuant to this subparagraph, the authority shall award no greater than 65 percent of the tax credits transferred pursuant to this subparagraph to transformative projects located in the northern counties of the State and no greater than 35 percent of the tax credits transferred pursuant to this subparagraph to transformative projects located in the southern counties of the State, which allocation based on location in certain counties shall be determined notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph (f) of this paragraph; 
 
	(k) beginning in fiscal year 2025, from the tax credits made available, pursuant to subparagraph (f) of this paragraph, to the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335), and the "Emerge Program Act," sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.), but not including tax credits awarded for transformative projects, an amount not to exceed $500,000,000 shall be made available for projects awarded a tax credit pursuant to the "Next New Jersey Program Act," P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-394 et al.);
 
	(l)  once the tax credits allocated for competitive auctions conducted pursuant to sections 3 through 7 of P.L.2025, c.111 (C.55:14K-106 through C.55:14K-110) pursuant to subsubparagraph (ii) of subparagraph (b) of this paragraph are exhausted, from the tax credits made available, pursuant to subparagraph (f) of this paragraph, to the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335), and the "Emerge Program Act," sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.), but not including tax credits awarded for transformative projects, the sum of $300,000,000 shall be made available to the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency, established pursuant to P.L.1983, c.530 (C.55:14K-1 et seq.), which tax credits shall be sold through  competitive auctions conducted pursuant to sections 3 through 7 of P.L.2025, c.111 (C.55:14K-106 through C.55:14K-110).  The amount made available pursuant to this subparagraph shall be allocated in annual installments, each of which is not to exceed the cap set forth in paragraph (3) of subsection a. of section 4 of P.L.2025, c.111 (C.55:14K-107), as needed to conduct auctions pursuant to that section.  All proceeds of the tax credit auctions shall be used by the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency for the purposes authorized in subsection b. of section 4 of P.L.2025, c.111 (C.55:14K-107).  Notwithstanding any provision of law or regulation to the contrary, the tax credits reallocated to the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency shall not be subject to any requirements or conditions of the "New Jersey Economic Recovery Act of 2020," P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.), as amended or supplemented; 
 
	(m)	beginning in fiscal year 2026, from the tax credits made available, pursuant to subparagraph (f) of this paragraph, to the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335), and the "Emerge Program Act," sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.), but not including tax credits awarded for transformative projects, an amount not to exceed $500,000,000 shall be made available for projects awarded a tax credit pursuant to the “Next New Jersey Manufacturing Program Act,” P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-403 et al.), and an amount not to exceed $500,000,000 shall be made available for cultural arts institutions awarded a tax credit pursuant to the “Cultural Arts Incentives Program Act,” P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-383 et al.). In accordance with the provisions of subsection g. of section 5 of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-407), $100,000,000 of the tax credits made available to the “Next New Jersey Manufacturing Program Act,” P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-403 et al.), pursuant to this subparagraph shall be reserved exclusively for eligible businesses that are clean energy product manufacturers;
 
	(n)	during each of the seventh and eighth years of the nine-year period, an additional amount of $1.25 billion in tax credits shall be made available for tax credit awards under the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335), and the "Emerge Program Act," sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.), in addition to any amounts otherwise available for these purposes.  After the completion of the nine-year period, any uncommitted balance of tax credits available for awards under the “New Jersey Aspire Program Act,” sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335), and the “Emerge Program Act,” sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.), shall be available to be deployed by the authority in subsequent years for projects approved under those two programs until all tax credits have been committed; and
 
	(o)	from the tax credits made available pursuant to subparagraph (n) of this paragraph, an amount not to exceed $300,000,000 in tax credits shall be made available for tax credit awards under sections 1 through 4 of P.L.2025, c.399 (C.34:1B-335.4 through C.34:1B-335.7).
 
	(2)	The authority may in any given year determine that it is in the State's interest to approve an amount of tax credits in excess of the annual limitations set forth in paragraph (1) of this subsection, but in no event more than $200,000,000 in excess of the annual limitation, upon a determination by the authority board that such increase is warranted based on specific criteria that may include:
 
	(i)	the increased demand for opportunities to create or retain employment and investment in the State as indicated by the volume of project applications and the amount of tax credits being sought by those applications;
 
	(ii)	the need to protect the State's economic position in the event of an economic downturn;
 
	(iii)	 the quality of project applications and the net economic benefit to the State and municipalities associated with those applications;
 
	(iv)	opportunities for project applications to strengthen or protect the competitiveness of the State under the prevailing market conditions;
 
	(v)	enhanced access to employment and investment for underserved populations in distressed municipalities and qualified incentives tracts;
 
	(vi)	increased investment and employment in high-growth technology sectors and in projects that entail collaboration with education institutions in the State;
 
	(vii)  increased development proximate to mass transit facilities; and
 
	(viii)  any other factor deemed relevant by the authority.
 
	c.	In the event that the authority in any year approves projects for tax credits in an amount less than the annual limitations set forth in paragraph (1) of subsection b. of this section, then the uncommitted portion of the annual limitation shall be available to be deployed by the authority in future years for projects under the same program, provided however, that in no event shall the aggregate amount of tax credits approved be in excess of the overall cap of $14 billion, and in no event shall the uncommitted portion of the annual limitation for any previous year be deployed after the conclusion of the nine-year period, except as set forth in subparagraphs (n) and (o) of paragraph (1) of subsection b. of this section.
 
	d.	Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, the uncommitted balance of the total value of tax credits authorized for award by the authority pursuant to subparagraph (f) of paragraph (1) of subsection b. of this section to the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335), and the "Emerge Program Act," sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.), shall be made available for tax credits allowed to New Jersey studio partners, New Jersey film-lease production companies, and taxpayers, other than New Jersey studio partners and New Jersey film-lease production companies pursuant to sections 1 and 2 of P.L.2018, c.56 (C.54:10A-5.39b and C.54A:4-12b).  The value of tax credits, including tax credits allowed through the granting of tax credit transfer certificates, made available to New Jersey studio partners, New Jersey film-lease production companies, and taxpayers, other than New Jersey studio partners and New Jersey film-lease production companies pursuant to this subsection shall be as follows:
 
	(1)	in fiscal year 2023, $250,000,000 for New Jersey studio partners and $250,000,000 for New Jersey film-lease production companies;
 
	(2)	in fiscal year 2024, $250,000,000 for New Jersey studio partners and $250,000,000 for New Jersey film-lease production companies; and
 
	(3)	in fiscal year 2025, $250,000,000 for New Jersey studio partners, $250,000,000 for New Jersey film-lease production companies, and $300,000,000 for taxpayers, other than New Jersey studio partners and New Jersey film-lease production companies.
 
	If the value of tax credits, including tax credits allowed through the granting of tax credit transfer certificates, approved to New Jersey studio partners and New Jersey film-lease production companies in any fiscal year pursuant to this subsection is less than the cumulative total amount of tax credits permitted to be approved in that fiscal year, the authority shall certify the amount of the remaining tax credits available for approval to each such category in that fiscal year and shall increase the cumulative total amount of tax credits permitted to be approved for New Jersey studio partners and New Jersey film-lease production companies in the subsequent fiscal year by the certified amount remaining for each such category from the prior fiscal year.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.98; amended 2021, c.160, s.47; 2021, c.367, s.4; 2023, c.97, s.4; 2023, c.98, s.13; 2023, c.197, s.13; 2024, c.33, s.1; 2024, c.49, s.10; 2025, c.111, s.2; 2025, c.123, s.11; 2025, c.127, s.10;  2025, c.399, s.5.

34:1B-363  Short title.
	99.	Sections 99 through 105 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-363 through C.34:1B-369) shall be known and may be cited as the "Economic Development Authority Integrity and Protection Act."
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.99.

34:1B-364  Definitions.
 	100. As used in sections 99 through 105 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-363 through C.34:1B-369):
 
	"Economic development incentive" means a financial incentive, awarded by the authority to a person or entity, or agreed to between the authority and a person or entity, for the purpose of stimulating economic development or redevelopment in New Jersey, including, but not limited to, a bond, grant, loan, loan guarantee, matching fund, tax credit, tax deduction, or other tax expenditure.
 
	"Fraud" means a deception or misrepresentation made by any person or entity with the knowledge that the deception or misrepresentation could result in some unauthorized benefit to that person or entity or another person or entity, including any act that constitutes fraud under applicable federal or State law.
 
	"Economic development investigation" means an investigation of fraud, abuse, or illegal acts perpetrated within economic development incentive programs by applicants for, or recipients of, economic development incentives.
 
	"Office of the Economic Development Inspector General" means the Office of the Economic Development Inspector General created by section 102 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-366).
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.100.

34:1B-365  Chief Compliance Officer.
 	101. a. The New Jersey Economic Development Authority shall employ a Chief Compliance Officer, who shall be appointed by the Chief Executive Officer of the authority.
 
	b.	The Chief Compliance Officer shall:
 
	(1)	create, maintain, monitor, and coordinate procedures to ensure that all economic development incentive programs, authority employees, and economic development incentive program applicants and recipients comply fully with the requirements of the corresponding economic development incentive program;
 
	(2)	on such periodic basis as determined by the authority, arrange for systematic audits of economic development incentive programs for compliance with the laws, regulations, codes, orders, procedures, advisory opinions and rulings concerning those programs;
 
	(3)	maintain a central database of information concerning the management of all economic development incentive programs and information on economic development incentive program applicants and recipients to provide for the regular and ongoing reporting, verification, and monitoring of the State's economic development incentive programs;
 
	(4)	prior to the adoption of any rule or regulation by the authority or the board related to the general administration of the programs administered by the authority pursuant to section 6 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-274), section 19 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-287), section 29 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-297), section 34 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-302), section 41 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-309), section 52 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-320), section 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-335), section 79 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.52:27D-520), section 88 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-354), and section 97 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-361), or any other regulation specifically related to the recapture of economic development incentive award values, review and certify that the provisions of program rules or regulations provide the authority with adequate procedures to pursue the recapture of the value of an economic development incentive in the case of substantial noncompliance, fraud, or abuse by the economic development incentive recipient, and that program rules and regulations are sufficient to ensure against economic development incentive fraud, waste, and abuse; and
 
	(5)	refer, to the Economic Development Inspector General and to the Attorney General, information on suspected fraud or abuse identified by the Division of Portfolio Management and Compliance.
 
	c.	The Chief Compliance Officer, in consultation with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development and the Department of the Treasury, shall:
 
	Develop, adopt, and implement a corrective action plan within six months of receiving notice of any program deficiency issued by the Economic Development Inspector General, that is designed to enable the authority to properly manage the economic development incentive programs administered by the authority.
 
	d.	To ensure against economic development incentive fraud, waste, and abuse, the authority may recapture all or any portion of the value of an economic development incentive awarded pursuant to any of the authority's economic development incentive programs in the case of substantial noncompliance, fraud, or abuse by the economic development incentive recipient.  The authority may incorporate provisions in the regulations for each economic development incentive program that the authority deems necessary to implement this subsection.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.101; amended 2021, c.160, s.48.

34:1B-366  Office of the Economic Development Inspector General.
 	102. a. There is established, in but not of the Department of the Treasury, the Office of the Economic Development Inspector General, which shall operate independent of the oversight or management of the Chief Executive Officer and the authority.  The Office of the Economic Development Inspector General shall operate under the Economic Development Inspector General, who shall be a retired member of the Judicial Branch of the State, to be appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate for a term of four years.  The Economic Development Inspector General shall direct the work of the Office of the Economic Development Inspector General and have the following general functions, duties, powers, and responsibilities:
 
	(1)	to appoint such deputies, directors, assistants, and other officers and employees as may be needed for the Office of the Economic Development Inspector General to meet its responsibilities, and to prescribe their duties and fix their compensation within the amounts appropriated therefor;
 
	(2)	to conduct and supervise State government activities relating to State economic development incentive integrity, fraud, and abuse;
 
	(3)	to call upon any department, office, division, or agency of State government to provide such information, resources, or other assistance as the Economic Development Inspector General deems necessary to discharge the duties and functions and to fulfill the responsibilities of the Economic Development Inspector General under sections 99 through 105 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-363 through C.34:1B-369). Each department, office, division, and agency of this State shall cooperate with the Economic Development Inspector General and furnish the Office of the Economic Development Inspector General with the assistance necessary to accomplish the purposes of sections 99 through 105 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-363 through C.34:1B-369);
 
	(4)	to coordinate activities to prevent, detect, and investigate economic development incentive fraud and abuse among the following: the authority, State and local government officials, and all economic development incentive applicants and recipients;
 
	(5)	to recommend and implement policies relating to economic development incentive integrity, fraud, and abuse, and monitor the implementation of any recommendations made by the Office of the Economic Development Inspector General to the authority for the administration of economic development incentives;
 
	(6)	to perform any other functions that are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the mission of the Office of the Economic Development Inspector General; and
 
	(7)	to direct an economic development incentive applicant or recipient to cooperate with the Office of the Economic Development Inspector General and provide such information or assistance as shall be reasonably required by the Office of the Economic Development Inspector General.
 
	b.	As it relates to ensuring compliance with applicable economic development incentive standards and requirements, identifying and reducing fraud and abuse, and improving the efficiency and effectiveness of economic development incentives, the functions, duties, powers, and responsibilities of the Economic Development Inspector General shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
 
	(1)	to establish, in consultation with the authority and the Attorney General, guidelines under which the withholding of payments or exclusion from economic development incentive programs shall be imposed on an economic development incentive applicant or recipient;
 
	(2)	to review the utilization of economic development incentives to ensure that economic development incentive funds are appropriately spent to meet the goals and purposes of an individual economic development incentive program;
 
	(3)	to review and audit contracts, reports, documentation, claims, and all awards of economic development incentives to determine compliance with applicable laws, regulations, guidelines, and standards, and enhance program integrity;
 
	(4)	to consult with the authority to optimize the economic development incentive management information system in furtherance of the mission of the Office of the Economic Development Inspector General.  The authority shall consult with the Economic Development Inspector General on matters that concern the operation, upgrade, and implementation of the economic development incentive management information system;
 
	(5)	to coordinate the implementation of information technology relating to economic development incentive integrity, fraud, and abuse;
 
	(6)	to conduct educational programs for economic development incentive for State and local government officials and economic development incentive recipients designed to limit economic development incentive fraud and abuse; and
 
	(7)	to provide notice to the Chief Compliance Officer, appointed pursuant to section 101 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-365) if the Economic Development Inspector General determines that a program deficiency exists in an economic development incentive program administered by the authority and to provide notice to the Chief Executive Officer of the Authority of pending investigations if the Economic Development Inspector General determines that such disclosure is consistent with the public interest in maintaining the integrity of an economic development incentive program administered by the authority or to abate the continuation of fraud or abuse.
 
	c.	As it relates to investigating allegations of economic development incentive fraud and abuse and enforcing applicable laws, rules, regulations, and standards, the functions, duties, powers, and responsibilities of the Economic Development Inspector General shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
 
	(1)	to conduct economic development investigations concerning any acts of misconduct within economic development incentive programs;
 
	(2)	to provide information concerning the economic development investigations of the Office of the Economic Development Inspector General to the Attorney General, law enforcement authorities, and any prosecutor of competent jurisdiction, and endeavor to develop these economic development investigations in a manner that expedites and facilitates criminal prosecutions and the recovery of improperly expended economic development incentives, including the maintenance of detailed records for cases processed by the Economic Development Inspector General. The records shall include: information on the total number of cases processed and, for each case, the agency and division to which the case is referred for an economic development investigation; the date on which the case is referred; and the nature of the suspected fraud or abuse.
 
	(3)	to provide information and evidence relating to suspected criminal acts that the Economic Development Inspector General may obtain in carrying out its duties to law enforcement officials when appropriate, and to provide such information to the Attorney General and county prosecutors in order to facilitate criminal economic development investigations and prosecutions;
 
	(4)	to refer complaints alleging criminal conduct to the Attorney General or other appropriate prosecutorial authority.  The Economic Development Inspector General shall maintain a record of all matters referred to the Attorney General and shall be authorized to disclose information received, as appropriate and as may be necessary to resolve the matter referred, to the extent consistent with the public interest in disclosure, the need for protecting the confidentiality of complainants and informants, and preserving the confidentiality of ongoing criminal economic development investigations.  Notwithstanding any referral made pursuant to this subsection, the Economic Development Inspector General may pursue any administrative or civil remedy under the law.  A referral by the inspector general to the Attorney General or a prosecutorial authority shall in no way preclude the inspector general from performing its own separate, independent investigation; and
 
	(5)	in furtherance of an economic development investigation, to compel at a specific time and place, by subpoena, the appearance and sworn testimony of any person whom the Economic Development Inspector General reasonably believes may be able to give information relating to a matter subject to an economic development investigation:
 
	(a)	for this purpose, the Economic Development Inspector General is empowered to administer oaths and examine witnesses under oath, and compel any person to produce at a specific time and place, by subpoena, any documents, books, records, papers, objects, or other evidence that the Economic Development Inspector General reasonably believes may relate to a matter subject to an economic development investigation; and
 
	(b)	if any person to whom a subpoena is issued fails to appear or, having appeared, refuses to give testimony, or fails to produce the books, papers, or other documents required, the Economic Development Inspector General may apply to the Superior Court and the court may order the person to appear and give testimony or produce the books, papers, or other documents, as applicable.  Any person failing to obey that order may be held by the court in contempt;
 
	(6)	subject to applicable State law, to have full and unrestricted access to all records, reports, audits, reviews, documents, papers, data, recommendations, tax information provided to the authority pursuant to subsection r. of R.S.54:50-9, or other material available to the authority and other State and local government agencies with respect to which the Office of the Economic Development Inspector General has responsibilities under sections 102 through 105 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-366 through C.34:1B-369);
 
	(7)	to solicit, receive, and investigate complaints related to economic development incentive integrity, fraud, and abuse; and
 
	(8)	to prepare cases, provide expert testimony, and support administrative hearings and other legal proceedings.
 
	d.	As it relates to recovering improperly obtained economic development incentives, imposing administrative sanctions, damages, or penalties, and negotiating settlements to assure that all governmental resources have been properly expended, the functions, duties, powers, and responsibilities of the Economic Development Inspector General shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
 
	(1)	to pursue civil and administrative enforcement actions against those who engage in fraud, abuse, or illegal acts perpetrated under economic development incentive programs.  These civil and administrative enforcement actions shall include the imposition of administrative sanctions, penalties, suspension of fraudulent or illegal awards, and actions for civil recovery and seizure of property or other assets connected with such economic incentive awards;
 
	(2)	to initiate civil suits consistent with the provisions of sections 99 through 105 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-363 through C.34:1B-369), maintain actions for civil recovery on behalf of the State, and enter into civil settlements;
 
	(3)	to require that the authority withhold payments to an economic development incentive applicant or recipient if the applicant or recipient unreasonably fails to produce complete and accurate records related to an economic development investigation that is initiated by the Office of the Economic Development Inspector General with reasonable cause; and
 
	(4)	to monitor and pursue the recoupment of economic development incentive awards or portions thereof, damages, penalties, and sanctions.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.102; amended 2021, c.160, s.49.

34:1B-367  Powers of Economic Development Inspector General.
  	103. a. The Economic Development Inspector General is authorized to request, and shall be entitled to receive, such information, assistance, and cooperation from any State or local government department, board, bureau, commission, or other agency or unit thereof, as may be necessary to carry out the duties and responsibilities of the Office of the Economic Development Inspector General pursuant to sections 102 through 105 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-366 through C.34:1B-369).
 
	b.	Upon the request of a prosecutor of competent jurisdiction, an office, department, or any other State or local government entity, the Economic Development Inspector General shall provide information, data, assistance, staff, and other resources as shall be necessary, appropriate and available to aid and facilitate the economic development investigation and prosecution of economic development incentive fraud.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.103.

34:1B-368  Report by Economic Development Inspector General.
 	104. The Economic Development Inspector General shall report annually to the Governor, to the Legislature, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), and to the Attorney General, the activities of the Office of the Economic Development Inspector General, as well as recommendations, if any, for legislation to provide for the management of the State's economic development incentive programs.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.104.

34:1B-369  Rules, regulations.
  	105. The Economic Development Inspector General, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), shall adopt rules and regulations, in consultation with the authority, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, and the Department of the Treasury, concerning the administration and enforcement of the Office of the Economic Development Inspector General's duties pursuant to sections 102 through 105 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-366 through C.34:1B-369) in a manner that is most compatible with ensuring against fraud and abuse in the State's economic development incentive programs.
 
	L.2020, c.156, s.105.

34:1B-370  Short title.
  	65. Sections 65 through 68 of P.L.2021, c.160 (C.34:1B-370 through 34:1B-373) shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Innovation Fellows Program Act."
 
	L.2021, c.160, s.65.

34:1B-371  Findings, declarations relative to entrepreneurs.
  	66. The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	One of the most difficult challenges for upstart entrepreneurs is forgoing employment to launch their businesses.
 
	b.	For diverse entrepreneurs from underserved populations, this challenge is often exacerbated as these entrepreneurs historically lack funding from family and friends to support their living expenses while building a business without income.
 
	c.	Having alternative sources of capital and new ways to deploy capital to entrepreneurs can be crucial for disadvantaged entrepreneurs in particular.
 
	d.	Although many universities provide fellowships for advancing business ideas, this assistance is often only available to students, and there is a dearth of programs designed specifically to support non-student entrepreneurs.
 
	e.	The New Jersey Economic Development Authority, through the New Jersey Innovation Fellows Program, shall seek to consolidate public and private economic development efforts through various funding sources into one targeted program to invest in diverse talent critical to New Jersey having a vibrant innovation ecosystem.
 
	L.2021, c.160, s.66.

34:1B-372  Definitions relative to the New Jersey Innovation Fellows Program.
  	67. As used in sections 65 through 68 of P.L.2021, c.160 (C.34:1B-370 through 34:1B-373):
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Chief executive officer" means the Chief Executive Officer of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.
 
	"Eligible municipality" means a city of the first class, a municipality with a private research university, a municipality that is qualified to receive assistance under P.L.1978, c.14 (C.52:27D-178 et seq.), a municipality under the supervision of the Local Finance Board pursuant to the provisions of the "Local Government Supervision Act (1947)," P.L.1947, c.151 (C.52:27BB-1 et seq.), a municipality identified by the Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs to be facing serious fiscal distress, a SDA municipality, or a municipality in which a major rail station is located.
 
	"Entrepreneur" means an individual starting a small business and who meets the eligibility criteria established by the authority for the program.
 
	"Program" means the New Jersey Innovation Fellows Program, established pursuant to section 68 of P.L.2021, c.160 (C.34:1B-373).
 
	"Targeted industry" means any industry identified from time to time by the authority that shall initially include advanced transportation and logistics, advanced manufacturing, aviation, autonomous vehicle and zero-emission vehicle research or development, clean energy, life sciences, hemp processing, information and high technology, finance and insurance, professional services, film and digital media, non-retail food and beverage businesses including food innovation, and other innovative industries that disrupt current technologies or business models.
 	L.2021, c.160, s.67.

 34:1B-373  "New Jersey Innovation Fellows Program."
 	68. a. There is established the "New Jersey Innovation Fellows Program" within the authority for the purpose of providing seed funding to teams of entrepreneurs, through the disbursement of fellowship grants, and facilitating economic growth and job creation in eligible municipalities.  The award of a fellowship grant to a team of entrepreneurs shall be limited to $350,000 per team and shall be used as income-replacement for entrepreneurs who leave the workforce to open and operate a business in an eligible municipality.
 
	b.	The chief executive officer shall award fellowship grants through a competitive grant solicitation to teams of no less than three entrepreneurs, in which at least half of the team members are first time entrepreneurs, with well-written business plans who:
 
	(1)	are seeking to open and operate a business in a targeted industry, which business is located in an eligible municipality;
 
	(2)	commit to working at the business on a full-time basis for two years next following receipt of the fellowship grant;
 
	(3)	participate in a mentorship program; and
 
	(4)	pay gross income tax pursuant to N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq. at the time of applying for the fellowship grant and remain New Jersey taxpayers during the time in which fellowship grants are disbursed and the next following two years.  If any member of the original awarded team of entrepreneurs ceases to be a New Jersey taxpayer during the time in which fellowship grants are disbursed and the next following two years, the fellowship grant may be rescinded, and any amount paid may be recouped, by the authority.
 
	c.	A team of entrepreneurs seeking to participate in the program shall submit an application in a form determined by the chief executive officer.  The application shall include information that the chief executive officer determines is necessary to administer the program.  
 
	d.	The chief executive officer shall award fellowship grants in intervals determined by the chief executive officer following application approval and the submission of proof by a team of entrepreneurs that the team has fulfilled the eligibility requirements pursuant to subsection b. of this section and any other requirements determined by the authority.  The submission of proof shall be subject to review and audit by the authority.
 
	e.	A team of entrepreneurs that includes at least one member who is a graduate of a New Jersey college or university or is a diverse entrepreneur, as defined in  section 2 of P.L.1997, c.349 (C.54:10A-5.29), and meets the eligibility requirements may receive a fellowship grant up to $400,000.
 
	f.	Within one year of the effective date of P.L.2021, c.160 (C.34:1B-370 et al.), the authority shall undertake a disparity study analyzing the relative availability of seed money and capital for diverse entrepreneurs, as defined in  section 2 of P.L.1997, c.349 (C.54:10A-5.29), in this State and the authority's historic support of such businesses.  If recommended by the study, the authority shall establish policies, practices, protocols, and, if appropriate, minimum percentages of the funds to be set aside to eligible teams of entrepreneurs that include at least one diverse entrepreneur or one female entrepreneur.  Regardless of whether the disparity study recommends a set-aside for diverse entrepreneurs, the authority may make up to 35 percent of the funds available for the award of fellowship grants to teams of entrepreneurs that include at least one member that either resides in a New Jersey State opportunity zone, as defined in section 45 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-313), or is seeking to open and operate a business in an opportunity zone eligible census tract.
 
	L.2021, c.160, s.68.

34:1B-374  Findings, declarations.
	1.	The Legislature finds and declares it to be the public policy of this State that: 

	a.	Investing in water conservation, stormwater management, renewable energy, energy efficiency, and flood and hurricane mitigation improvements to real property is a critical component in conserving natural resources and mitigating the effects of floods and hurricanes;  
 
	b.	The up-front costs of retrofitting properties with these improvements are often a barrier to investing in such improvements, and the additional cost of meeting and exceeding new code requirements in connection with new construction is a deterrent to the investments; 
 
	c.	Recent studies have demonstrated that the existing financing options for these projects have not made them sufficiently available to property owners and developers; 
 
	d.	Property assessed clean energy ("PACE") financing, in which repayment is made by way of a special assessment on the real property to which the improvement, including new construction upon previously unimproved real property, is made, is an innovative way for property owners to finance or refinance renewable energy, energy and water efficiency, and other eligible improvements which, in turn, saves a significant sum in utility costs or insurance premiums, creates jobs, stimulates local economies, reduces greenhouse gas emissions, and improves the safety and quality of the building stock;
 
	e.	To date, PACE programs for commercial properties ("C-PACE") operate in more than 24 other states and the District of Columbia, and they have facilitated more than $2 billion in investment in over 2,100 C-PACE projects; 
 
	f.	C-PACE financing will enable New Jersey municipalities to contribute toward their goals of community sustainability and reducing greenhouse gas emissions and energy consumption, and will provide a valuable service to the citizens of their communities; and
 
	g.	C-PACE financing serves a valid public purpose and enactment of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-374 et al.) is expressly declared to be in the public interest.
 
	L.2021, c.201, s.1.

34:1B-375  Definitions.
	2.	As used in sections 1 through 9 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-374 through C.34:1B-382):
 
	"Assignment agreement" means an agreement in which a participating municipality assigns a C-PACE assessment to a capital provider, its designee, successor or assign.
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority. 
 
	"Authorized municipality" means a municipality with a population that, as of the launch date, is in the top third of municipalities in the State in terms of population, according to the most recent American Community Survey published by the United States Census Bureau.
 
	"Capital provider" means:
 
	an accredited investor or qualified institutional buyer as defined respectively in Regulation D, Rule 501 (17 C.F.R.230.501 through 230.508) or Rule 144A (17 C.F.R.230.144A) of the federal "Securities Act of 1933" (15 U.S.C. s.77a et seq.), as amended; 
 
	the trustee or custodian of a trust or custody arrangement which provides that each beneficial owner of interests shall be an accredited investor or qualified institutional buyer; 
 
	a public entity; 
 
	a special purpose securitization vehicle for the sale and transfer of securities, which is restricted to those persons described in subsection a. or b. of this definition; or
 
	a commercial lending institution chartered by a state or the federal government, including, without limitation, a savings and loan association, a credit union, or a commercial bank.
 
	"C-PACE" means commercial property assessed clean energy. 
 
	"C-PACE assessment" means a local improvement assessment, in accordance with chapter 56 of Title 40 of the Revised Statutes, imposed by a participating municipality on a property, with the consent of the owner of the property, and determined based upon either the existing use of a property or the contemplated use of unimproved property upon completion of new construction, as a means of securing financing provided pursuant to section 9 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-382) to finance a C-PACE project at the property, payments in respect of which assessment are collected by the participating municipality and remitted to the entity that provided the financing or its designee.
 
	"C-PACE assessment agreement" means an agreement between a participating municipality and a property owner in which the property owner agrees to the imposition of a C-PACE assessment on the property benefited by a C-PACE project within the municipality, and in which the participating municipality agrees to levy, bill, collect, remit, and, to the extent necessary, enforce the C-PACE assessment.
 
	"C-PACE project" means:
 
	the acquisition, construction, installation, modification, or, in the discretion of the authority and in accordance with guidelines adopted by the authority, entry into a capital lease of an energy efficiency improvement or renewable energy system including energy storage, microgrid, water conservation improvement, stormwater management system, electric vehicle charging infrastructure, flood resistant construction improvement, or hurricane resistant construction improvement, in each case affixed to a property, including new construction upon previously unimproved real property, within a participating municipality, provided that, on the basis of supplemental program guidelines to be published by the authority within 90 days following the launch date, a qualified professional attests that such new construction exceeds the minimum standards of the local and State building codes otherwise applicable to the property; 
 
	at the discretion of, and in accordance with guidelines adopted by, the authority, a microgrid or district heating and cooling system in which a property owner within the municipality participates for the duration of the C-PACE assessment; or
 
	at the discretion of, and in accordance with guidelines adopted by, the authority, a power purchase agreement with respect to a renewable energy system affixed to a property.
 
	"Direct financing" means financing for a C-PACE project pursuant to a financing agreement entered into between a capital provider and a property owner.
 
	"Electric vehicle charging infrastructure" means equipment designed to deliver electric energy to a battery electric vehicle or a plug-in hybrid vehicle. 
 
	"Energy efficiency improvement" means an improvement to reduce energy consumption through conservation or a more efficient use of electricity, natural gas, propane, or other forms of energy, including, but not limited to:  air sealing; installation of insulation; installation of energy-efficient electrical, heating, cooling, or ventilation systems; building modifications to increase the use of daylight; energy efficient windows, doors, and glass; installation of energy or water controls or energy recovery systems; and installation of efficient lighting equipment.
 
	"Finance" or "financing" means the investing of capital in accordance with section 9 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-382), including, on the basis of supplemental program guidelines to be published by the authority within 90 days following the launch date, the refinancing of an investment in an existing C-PACE project.
 
	"Flood resistant construction improvement" means an improvement that mitigates the likelihood of flood damage, including, but not limited to, the installation of break-away walls and building elevation alterations.
 
	"Garden State C-PACE program" means the program established by the authority pursuant to sections 4 and 5 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-377 and C.34:1B-378).
 
	"Garden State program agreement" means an agreement between the authority and a participating municipality defining:
 
	the obligations of a municipality to participate in the Garden State C-PACE program, including the requirement that the participating municipality levy, bill, collect, remit, and enforce a C-PACE assessment; and 
 
	the obligations, if any, that the authority may undertake (1) with respect to the remittance of C-PACE assessments to capital providers if the remittance is authorized by regulations adopted by the Local Finance Board pursuant to section 38 of P.L.2000, c.126 (C.52:27D-20.1) and requested by the participating municipality, and (2) to review and approve the participation of individual capital providers or financings in the Garden State C-PACE program.  
 
	"Hurricane resistant construction improvement" means an improvement that enables a component of a structure to be in compliance with the standards for a "wind-borne debris region" adopted pursuant to the "State Uniform Construction Code Act," P.L.1975, c.217 (C.52:27D-119 et seq.), or into compliance with a successor standard under that code.
 
	"Launch date" means the date upon which the authority has taken all of the actions specified in subsection c. of section 5 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-378), other than any actions that are expressly required by P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-374 et al.) to be taken within 90 days following the launch date.
 
	"Local C-PACE program" means a program established by an authorized municipality or a county pursuant to section 6 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-379).
 
	"Local C-PACE program ordinance" means an ordinance adopted by an authorized municipality or a county, and approved by the authority pursuant to section 7 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-380), to establish a program within its jurisdiction pursuant to subsection b. of section 5 and subsection a. of section 6 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-378 and C.34:1B-379). 
 
	"Microgrid" means a group of interconnected loads and distributed energy resources within clearly defined electrical boundaries that acts as a single controllable entity with respect to the electric distribution system and that connects and disconnects from the electric distribution system to enable it to operate when both connected to, or independent of, the electric distribution system.
 
	"Notice of assessment" means the document filed with the county recording officer in the county in which a property is located, which notifies prospective holders of an interest in the property that a C-PACE assessment lien has been placed on the property.
 
	"Opt-in ordinance" means an ordinance adopted by a municipality by which it authorizes its participation in the Garden State C-PACE program and authorizes the municipality to enter into a Garden State program agreement with the authority.
 
	"Participating municipality" means:
 
	a municipality that adopts an opt-in ordinance and executes a Garden State program agreement; or 
 
	an authorized municipality that adopts an opt-in ordinance, executes a Garden State program agreement, and adopts a local C-PACE program ordinance and local C-PACE program guidelines approved by the authority.
 
	"Private entity" means a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, trust, or any other form of private organization, including but not limited to a "related competitive business segment of a public utility holding company," or a "related competitive business segment of an electric public utility or gas public utility," as those terms are defined in section 3 of P.L.1999, c.23 (C.48:3-51), so long as the organization is not subject to the jurisdiction of the Board of Public Utilities.
 
	"Program guidelines" means:
 
	any program-related rules or documents, or both, prepared and published by the authority that apply to the Garden State C-PACE program; or 
 
	any program-related rules or documents, or both, prepared and published by an authorized municipality or a county, and approved by the authority, that apply to local C-PACE programs pursuant to paragraph (3) of subsection b. of section 6 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-379).
 
	"Project costs" means costs associated with a C-PACE project and shall include: direct costs, including but not limited to, equipment, materials, and labor related to the purchasing, constructing, installing, modifying, or acquiring a C-PACE project; indirect costs, including, but not limited to, expenses and fees of engineers, architects, and other professionals, inspection fees and permits, warranties and pre-paid maintenance contracts; program fees; and financing costs of a capital provider, including, but not limited to, origination fees, prepaid interest and payment reserves, closing costs, counsel fees, trustee or custodian fees, recording fees, and other financing charges, except that the authority may implement an alternative definition of "project costs" in its program guidelines in connection with the financing of new construction.
 
	"Property" means industrial, agricultural, or commercial property; residential property containing five or more dwelling units; common areas of condominiums and other planned real estate developments as defined in section 3 of P.L.1977, c.419 (C.45:22A-23); and property owned by a tax-exempt or nonprofit entity, including, but not limited to, schools, hospitals, institutions of higher education, or religious institutions, within a participating municipality upon which a C-PACE assessment is imposed at the request of a property owner in connection with a C-PACE project.
 
	"Property owner" means an owner of a property within a participating municipality who consents to a C-PACE assessment being imposed on the property.
 
	"Renewable energy system" means an improvement by which electrical, mechanical, or thermal energy is produced from a method that uses one or more of the following fuels or energy sources:  hydrogen, solar energy, geothermal energy, biomass, or wind energy, together with the other fuels and energy sources that the authority, after consultation with the Board of Public Utilities, may determine pursuant to program guidelines prepared and published pursuant to subsection c. of section 5 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-378).
 
	"Solar renewable energy certificate" means the same as defined in section 3 of P.L.1999, c.23 (C.48:3-51).
 
	"Stormwater management system" means the same as defined in section 3 of P.L.2019, c.42 (C.40A:26B-3).
 
	"Transition renewable energy certificate" means a certificate issued by the Board of Public Utilities or its designee, under the solar energy transition incentive program, which is designed to transition between the solar renewable energy certificate program and a solar successor incentive program to be developed by the Board of Public Utilities pursuant to P.L.2018, c.17 (C.48:3-87.8 et al.).
 
	"Uniform assessment documents" means a uniform C-PACE assessment agreement, assignment agreement, and notice of assessment, a model lender consent to a C-PACE assessment pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-378), and any other uniform or model documents prepared by the authority and used in the Garden State C-PACE program and local C-PACE programs, except that the authority shall not mandate a uniform financing agreement, which shall be supplied by the capital provider for direct financing.  
 
	"Water conservation improvement" means an improvement that reduces water consumption, increases the efficiency of water use, or reduces water loss.
 
	L.2021, c.201, s.2; amended 2024, c.75, s.1.

34:1B-376  Report to Governor, Legislature.
 	3. a. (1) No later than 18 months after the launch date and annually thereafter, the authority shall prepare and submit to the Governor and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), to the Legislature, a report describing the implementation and operation of the Garden State C-PACE program, including information relating to any administrative costs, the number of C-PACE projects, the location of C-PACE projects, and the amount of financing issued for C-PACE projects under the Garden State C-PACE program.
 
	(2)	No later than 18 months after an authorized municipality or a county establishes a local C-PACE program pursuant to section 6 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-379), and annually thereafter, the municipality or county shall prepare and submit to the Governor, the authority, and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), the Legislature, a report describing the implementation and operation of its local C-PACE program, including information relating to any administrative costs, the number of C-PACE projects, the location of C-PACE projects, and the amount of financing issued for C-PACE projects under its local C-PACE program. 
 
	b. (1) No later than five years after the launch date, the authority shall prepare and submit to the Governor and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), to the Legislature, a report that reviews and assesses implementation of the Garden State C-PACE program.  The report shall evaluate the Garden State C-PACE program, including a review of foreclosure rates and any other factors the authority deems appropriate.  The report may also identify and recommend legislative changes to P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-374 et al.).  The report shall include an assessment of whether the costs incurred in implementing the Garden State C-PACE Program are an effective means of facilitating the financing of projects.
 
	(2)	No later than five years after an authorized municipality or a county establishes a local C-PACE program pursuant to section 6 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-379), the municipality or county shall prepare and submit to the Governor, the authority and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), the Legislature, a report that reviews and assesses implementation of the local C-PACE program.  The report shall evaluate its local C-PACE program, including a review of foreclosure rates and any other factors the authority deems appropriate.  The report may also identify and recommend legislative changes to P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-374 et al.).
 
	c.	The authority shall post all reports prepared by the authority pursuant to this section on its Internet website.  Each authorized municipality and each county that has established a local C-PACE program shall post all reports prepared by it pursuant to this section on its Internet website.
 
	L.2021, c.201, s.3.

34:1B-377  Garden State C-PACE program.
 	4. a. The authority shall establish a Garden State C-PACE program to facilitate the financing of C-PACE projects in municipalities that adopt an opt-in ordinance.  The Garden State C-PACE program shall consist of the development of uniform assessment documents and program guidelines for the financing of C-PACE projects to be undertaken by property owners as local improvements and the provision by ordinance, subject to the approval of the authority, for a C-PACE assessment to be imposed on properties within the municipality, if the owner of a property requests the C-PACE assessment in order to undertake and finance a C-PACE project.  C-PACE projects on an individual property subject to the same C-PACE assessment agreement collectively shall constitute a separate local improvement and shall be assessed separately to the property owner benefitted thereby. 
 
	b.	The authority may contract with, and set the compensation of, one or more third-party administrators, whether private, public or quasi-public, or for-profit or not-for-profit, to assist the authority in its implementation or administration, or a combination thereof, of the Garden State C-PACE program pursuant to a competitive bidding process.  The authority may delegate any duties under the program to one or more third-party administrators, provided that the authority shall not delegate its responsibility for general oversight of the Garden State C-PACE program.
 
	c.	The authority may enter into a memorandum of agreement with one or more State government agencies or instrumentalities whereby any of the powers the authority may exercise or responsibilities it must fulfill pursuant to P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-374 et al.) may be exercised or fulfilled, as the case may be, by such agency or instrumentality, and any fund that may be used for administrative expenses by the authority may be used by such agency or instrumentality in exercising such powers or fulfilling such responsibilities.
 
	d.	The authority may establish a loss reserve, issue guarantees, or both, to mitigate the repayment risk assumed by capital providers providing direct financing, in order to improve the availability and financial terms of such financing of C-PACE projects for property owners.
 
	L.2021, c.201, s.4.

34:1B-378  Information published on Internet website.
 	5. a. Within 270 days after the effective date of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-374 et al.), the authority shall establish the Garden State C-PACE program by publishing on its Internet website:
 
	(1)	uniform assessment documents; 
 
	(2)	a model opt-in ordinance; 
 
	(3)	Garden State C-PACE program guidelines adopted pursuant to subsection c. of this section; and 
 
	(4)	a description of the process by which a county or an authorized municipality applies to the authority for approval of a local C-PACE program ordinance.
 
	The Garden State C-PACE program shall not be operational and available for the participation of capital providers, municipalities and property owners until the authority has taken all of the actions required by this subsection.
 
	b.	The model opt-in ordinance, as well as any local C-PACE program ordinance, shall prescribe a subset of the criteria for qualifying a C-PACE project for a C-PACE assessment, including the following:
 
	(1)	financing recipients shall be the legal or beneficial owners of the property or duly authorized by the legal or beneficial owners of the property, there shall be no defaults on any mortgage loans on the subject property, all tax payments, charges, and assessments with respect to the property shall be current, the legal or beneficial owners of the property shall not be subject to any bankruptcy proceeding, and the subject property shall not be the subject of a bankruptcy proceeding;
 
	(2)	the principal amount of the C-PACE assessment, when combined with mortgage and other lien obligations on a property shall not exceed 90 percent of the appraised value of the property after including the value created by the C-PACE project;
 
	(3)	 the maximum duration of a C-PACE assessment, which shall be determined pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (6) of subsection c. of this section, shall not exceed the weighted average useful life of the improvements in the C-PACE project or 30 years, whichever is less; 
 
	(4)	the amount of the C-PACE assessment for a property shall be a specific amount, and the terms of repayment of direct financing shall be solely determined and negotiated between a property owner and capital provider subject to the maximum duration of an assessment in paragraph (3) of this subsection; and
 
	(5)	 a property owner seeking a C-PACE assessment shall receive written consent of the existing mortgage holders on the property prior to the closing of the financing.
 
	c.	Pursuant to the purposes and objectives outlined in P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-374 et al.), and with respect to the responsibilities of overseeing and implementing the Garden State C-PACE program, the authority shall develop, in consultation with the Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs, program guidelines governing the terms and conditions under which financing may be made available under the Garden State C-PACE program.  Any amendments to the Garden State C-PACE program guidelines shall require the approval of the authority's board of directors.
 
	Pursuant to the purposes and objectives outlined in P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-374 et al.), and with respect to the responsibilities of overseeing and implementing a local C-PACE program, a county or authorized municipality shall develop program guidelines governing the terms and conditions under which financing may be made available under the local C-PACE program.  The program guidelines, and any amendments thereto, for a local C-PACE program shall be consistent with the Garden State C-PACE program guidelines and the requirements set forth in P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-374 et al.) for C-PACE projects and financing, and shall be subject to approval by the authority pursuant to subsection a. of section 7 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-380).
 
	The Garden State C-PACE program guidelines and any local C-PACE program guidelines shall include, but not be limited, to:
 
	(1)	a uniform project application, uniform application requirements, including uniform application documents; and the procedures for a property owner to obtain approval of a C-PACE project and a capital provider to finance a C-PACE project;
 
	(2)	minimum standards for a C-PACE project to qualify for C-PACE financing; 
 
	(3)	eligibility criteria for a property owner and property to qualify for a C-PACE assessment; 
 
	(4)	the underwriting criteria to be applied in determining the eligibility of properties and their owners to participate in the Garden State C-PACE program and local C-PACE programs and the maximum permitted amount of a financing based on a property's value and other characteristics;
 
	(5)	a requirement that all existing mortgage lien holders on a property be given notice prior to a C-PACE assessment and lien being filed in connection with that property, and that all property owners receive consent of the existing mortgage holders on the property;
 
	(6)	a requirement that the term of a financing be no longer than the forecast life of the improvements, which shall be calculated on a blended average basis taking account of the relative values of the fixed assets included in the C-PACE project, except that the authority may establish alternative criteria for establishing the maximum term of a financing for a C-PACE project that consists of new construction; 
 
	(7)	within 90 days following the launch date with respect to the Garden State C-PACE program guidelines only, supplemental program guidelines for refinancing projects completed prior to the submission of a project application for a C-PACE assessment and for the use of the Garden State C-PACE program in connection with the financing of new construction upon previously unimproved real property. 
 
	d.	Subject to the written consent of existing mortgage holders, the form of which shall be determined by the authority in its uniform assessment documents adopted pursuant to subsection a. of section 5 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-378), the C-PACE assessment shall be a single, continuous first lien on the property on and after the date of recordation of the C-PACE assessment agreement.  A property with delinquent taxes, charges, or assessments shall not be eligible for a C-PACE assessment.  Upon recordation of the C-PACE assessment agreement in the land records of the county in which the property is located, the lien thereof shall be perfected for all purposes in accordance with law, and the lien shall be a continuous first lien upon the real estate described in the assessment, paramount to all prior or subsequent alienations and descents of the real estate or encumbrances thereon, except subsequent taxes, charges, or assessments, without any additional notice, recording, filing, continuation filing, or action, until payment in full of the C-PACE assessment, notwithstanding any mistake in the name or names of any owner or owners, or any omission to name any owner or owners who are unknown, and notwithstanding any lack of form therein, or in any other proceeding which does not impair the substantial rights of the owner or owners or other person or persons having a lien upon or interest in any the real estate.  Any confirmation of the amount of the C-PACE assessment by the applicable municipality's governing body or by a court shall be considered as determining the amount of the existing lien and not as establishing the lien.  All C-PACE assessments shall be presumed to have been regularly assessed and confirmed and every assessment or proceeding preliminary thereto shall be presumed to have been regularly made or conducted until the contrary be shown.
 
	e.	A C-PACE assessment shall be treated as a municipal lien rather than a contractual lien for all purposes of law.
 
	f.	Funds to finance a C-PACE project may be disbursed to, or for the benefit of, the property owner at execution of the C-PACE assessment agreement, or may be disbursed in installments over time.  The funds shall not constitute public funds, and shall not be subject to the laws governing public funds, including, but not limited to, laws regarding the receipt, expenditure, deposit, investment, or appropriation of the same.  Payments of the C-PACE assessment shall commence as set forth in the C-PACE assessment agreement.  To the extent that upon completion of the C-PACE project, funds remain that have not been disbursed to the property owner, those funds on hand shall be used to reduce the amount of the C-PACE assessment in accordance with the C-PACE assessment agreement.
 
	g.	Except as provided in this subsection, if any payment of a C-PACE assessment is not made when that payment shall have become due, or later, consistent with any grace period provided or extended by a participating municipality for the payment of property tax bills as may be permitted or required by law, interest thereon shall be imposed at the same rate as may be imposed upon unpaid property taxes in the participating municipality.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, such statutory interest shall be in addition to any accrued interest and any amount fixed as a penalty for delinquency pursuant to the financing agreement between the property owner and the capital provider.  All such amounts shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as unpaid property taxes, including by accelerated tax sale if the participating municipality enforces collection of its unpaid property taxes through accelerated tax sales.  The proceeds of the sale shall also pay the outstanding past unpaid amounts of the C-PACE assessment.  However, the remaining balance not delinquent on a C-PACE assessment shall not be subject to acceleration or extinguishment in the event of a default in payment.  Any statutory interest collected by the municipality on a delinquent C-PACE assessment pursuant to this subsection shall be retained by the municipality.  Any accrued interest, or any amount fixed as a penalty for delinquency, pursuant to the financing agreement between the property owner and the capital provider shall be remitted to the capital provider.  If the property owner is delinquent on a C-PACE assessment as well as delinquent on taxes, charges, or other assessments, any payment shall be applied towards any and all such other delinquencies before being applied to any delinquent C-PACE assessment.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in the event that any lien on the property shall be exposed to tax sale, pursuant to the "tax sale law," R.S.54:5-1 et seq., and is struck off and sold to the participating municipality, the C-PACE assessment shall survive any subsequent action to foreclose the right of redemption and continue as a first lien upon the real estate described in the assessment, paramount to all prior or subsequent alienations and descents of the real estate or encumbrances, except subsequent taxes, charges, or other assessments, and provided that, notwithstanding the obligations of a participating municipality pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1942, c.54 (C.54:5- 53.1), while the participating municipality holds the lien or owns the property, the participating municipality shall not be responsible for or required to make any payment from its treasury or any other source in furtherance of or to satisfy the C-PACE assessment. A municipality shall not bear any other responsibility in furtherance or satisfaction of a C-PACE assessment, except that a municipality may be compelled to enforce a lien through an action to foreclose.  In the event of a taking of the property by eminent domain or condemnation, the C-PACE assessment may be accelerated or extinguished, at the election of the capital provider, provided the capital provider is compensated in accordance with the provisions of the "Eminent Domain Act of 1971," P.L.1971, c.361 (C.20:3-1 et seq.), by the governmental entity utilizing eminent domain or condemnation for the balance due on the unpaid C-PACE assessment and any interest, penalties, or other charges related thereto.  
 
	h. (1) C-PACE assessments shall be assigned directly by the participating municipality, and any assignee thereof, as security for financing from a capital provider to finance C-PACE projects.  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the assignment shall be an absolute assignment of all of the participating municipality's right, title, and interest in and to the C-PACE assessment, except for its obligations to bill, collect, remit, and enforce C-PACE assessments as set forth in the assignment agreement.  The proceeds of a C-PACE assessment shall be considered "special revenues" owned by the capital provider pursuant to chapter 9 of the federal bankruptcy code.
 
	(2)	C-PACE assessments assigned as provided hereunder shall not be included in the general funds of the participating municipality, or be subject to any laws regarding the receipt, deposit, investment, or appropriation of public funds, and shall retain such status notwithstanding enforcement of the assessment by the participating municipality or assignee as provided herein.  In the case of a participating municipality that is otherwise subject to tax or revenue sharing pursuant to law and which assigns C-PACE assessments as set forth in this section, the C-PACE assessments shall not be considered part of the tax or revenue sharing formula or calculation of municipal revenues for the purpose of determining whether that participating municipality is obligated to make payment to, or receive a credit from, any tax sharing or revenue sharing pool.  However, the redemption of any delinquent and unpaid C-PACE assessments, including any interest, penalties, or other charges related thereto, shall be paid no later than on the first available tax bill after the property has been sold after an action to foreclose the right of redemption.
 
	i.	The provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), shall not apply to the preparation, publication, or implementation of the uniform assessment documents or the program guidelines of the Garden State C-PACE program or a local C-PACE program.
 
	L.2021, c.201, s.5.

34:1B-379  Local C-PACE program.
  	6. a. An authorized municipality that has adopted an opt-in ordinance may also establish a local C-PACE program to facilitate the financing of C-PACE projects in that authorized municipality.  A county may also establish a local C-PACE program pursuant to a local C-PACE program ordinance to facilitate the financing of C-PACE projects in participating municipalities located in that county that have adopted an opt-in ordinance.  A local C-PACE program ordinance adopted by a county shall establish a program for the benefit of municipalities located within the county, but participating municipalities shall remain responsible for the process of levying, billing, collecting, remitting, and enforcing the C-PACE assessment.  In a county or authorized municipality that has established a local C-PACE program pursuant to a local C-PACE program ordinance, any C-PACE projects in that authorized municipality or, in the case of a county, in any participating municipality located in that county that has adopted an opt-in ordinance, may be financed pursuant to the Garden State C-PACE program or the local C-PACE program.  In a municipality that has not established, or is located in a county that has not established, a local C-PACE program pursuant to a local C-PACE program ordinance, any C-PACE projects in that municipality may be financed pursuant to the Garden State C-PACE program only.
 
	b.	Notwithstanding the provisions of P.L.2011, c.187 (C.40:56-1.4 et al.), or any other law, to the contrary, a county or authorized municipality seeking to establish and implement a local C-PACE program shall adopt a local C-PACE program ordinance consistent with this section and section 5 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-378).  An authorized municipality may establish a local C-PACE program through the adoption of a local C-PACE program ordinance if the municipality has entered a Garden State program agreement with the authority, and obtained approval of the ordinance from the authority pursuant to section 7 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-380).  A county may establish a local C-PACE program through the adoption of a local C-PACE program ordinance if the county has obtained approval of the ordinance from the authority pursuant to section 7 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-380).
 
	In addition to prescribing criteria for qualifying a C-PACE project for a C-PACE assessment pursuant to subsection b. of section 5 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-378), a local C-PACE program ordinance shall establish the following: 
 
	(1)	A participating municipality or a county may enter into an agreement with a county improvement authority or it may, pursuant to the "Local Public Contracts Law," P.L.1971, c.198 (C.40A:11-1 et seq.) enter into contracts with one or more private parties, to assist the participating municipality or county in its implementation and administration, or a combination thereof, of the local C-PACE program.  The municipality or county may delegate to one or more private parties or a county improvement authority such matters as the participating municipality determines, except that it may not delegate its reporting obligations pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-376) or its obligation to ensure that its local C-PACE program complies in all respects with P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-374 et al.) and its local C-PACE program guidelines. 
 
	(2)	An authorized municipality or a county may, in addition to direct financing, offer financing of C-PACE projects through the issuance of bonds pursuant to section 9 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-382).
 
	(3)	A local C-PACE program shall not be operational and available for the participation of capital providers and property owners until the authorized municipality or county, as applicable, by resolution of the governing body, authorizes local C-PACE program guidelines pursuant to subsection c. of section 5 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-378). The program guidelines for any local C-PACE program shall be consistent with the Garden State C-PACE program guidelines and the requirements set forth in P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-374 et al.) for C-PACE projects and financing, and shall be subject to approval by the authority pursuant to subsection a. of section 7 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-380).  In addition, such program guidelines may include supplemental provisions, provided that they are not inconsistent with the Garden State C-PACE program guidelines and the requirements set forth in P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-374 et al.).
 
	L.2021, c.201, s.6.

34:1B-380  Application to establish local C-PACE program.
  	7. a. An authorized municipality or a county seeking to establish a local C-PACE program pursuant to section 6 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-379) shall submit an application to the authority for approval.  The application to the authority shall consist of the following:
 
	(1)	a proposed local C-PACE program ordinance consistent with subsection b. of section 5 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-378); 
 
	(2)	acknowledgement that the authorized municipality or, in the case of a local C-PACE program established by a county, any participating municipality located in that county, shall use the uniform assessment documents prepared by the authority; and
 
	(3)	the authorized municipality's or county's proposed program guidelines.
 
	b. (1) The authority's review of a county's or authorized municipality's application shall be limited to confirming that it contains the items required by section 5 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-378) and is otherwise in compliance with the provisions of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-374 et al.).  Within 60 days after receipt of the application, the authority shall either approve or reject the application.  If the authority does not act within 60 days after receipt, the application shall be deemed approved.
 
	(2)	If the authority approves the application, or the application is deemed approved in accordance with paragraph (1) of this subsection, the county or authorized municipality may adopt the proposed ordinance establishing a local C-PACE program. 
 
	(3)	If the authority disapproves the application, it shall provide a detailed explanation to the county or authorized municipality as to the reasons for the disapproval and the changes necessary to bring the proposed local C-PACE program ordinance, local C-PACE program guidelines, and other elements of the proposed local C-PACE program into compliance with the requirements of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-374 et al.).  The county or authorized municipality shall not adopt the proposed local C-PACE program ordinance if the authority disapproves the application, but the county or authorized municipality may submit a revised or new application.
 
	c.	The authority may monitor and oversee a county's or authorized municipality's local C-PACE program to the extent it deems necessary to ensure the continuing compliance of the local C-PACE program with the requirements of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-374 et al.).  The authority's discretionary monitoring and oversight role pursuant to this subsection shall not include the review and approval of C-PACE project applications that are submitted to a local C-PACE program.  The authority shall review and approve C-PACE project applications that are submitted to the Garden State C-PACE program, but only an authorized municipality or county that has established a local C-PACE program pursuant to P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-374 et al.) may review and approve C-PACE project applications that are submitted to a local C-PACE program.
 
	A participating municipality or a county with a local C-PACE program shall incorporate into its local C-PACE program guidelines any revision or amendment made by the authority to the Garden State C-PACE program guidelines immediately upon the publication of the revision or amendment on the authority's website, unless the authority expressly provides otherwise, based upon a determination that the revision or amendment does not apply to local C-PACE programs.  Any such revisions or amendments made by the authority to the Garden State C-PACE program guidelines or incorporated into local C-PACE program guidelines shall not apply retroactively to C-PACE projects that were previously approved pursuant to the Garden State C-PACE program or local C-PACE programs.
 
	In the event that an authorized municipality or county desires to revise or amend its program guidelines in any other manner, such proposed revisions or amendments shall first be submitted to the authority for its review and approval before the revisions or amendments become effective.
 
	L.2021, c.201, s.7.

34:1B-381  Fee charged to county, municipality.
  	8. a. The authority may charge a county or authorized municipality a fee to review a proposed local C-PACE program ordinance or local C-PACE program guidelines.  The fee shall reflect the reasonable and actual cost of the review, provided that the fee shall be a one-time charge not to exceed $5,000.
 
	b.	The authority may charge the property owner a fee for the review of an application for a C-PACE project in the Garden State C-PACE program and for its fulfillment of such obligations, if any, that the authority may undertake to serve as an intermediary in the remittance of C-PACE assessments to capital providers if requested by the participating municipality.  The fee shall reflect the reasonable and actual costs of the review or fulfillment of any obligations that the authority may undertake.
 
	c.	A participating municipality may charge the property owner an annual fee for the billing, collecting, and remitting of the C-PACE assessment.  The fee shall reflect the reasonable and actual cost of the billing, collecting, and remitting of the annual amounts due for the C-PACE assessment.
 
	L.2021, c.201, s.8.

34:1B-382 Financing, assessment on property.
	9. a. Financing for the implementation of C-PACE projects, including the refinancing of an investment in an existing improvement that qualifies as a C-PACE project, provided the existing improvement was completed no more than three years prior to the submission of an application to the Garden State C-PACE program or local C-PACE program for the financing, shall be made available to property owners in exchange for a C-PACE assessment on the property.  The C-PACE assessment shall be used to repay the financing.
 
	b.	The governing body of a county or authorized municipality may apply to a county improvement authority that issues bonds pursuant to paragraph (3) of subsection (j) of section 12 of P.L.1960, c.183 (C.40:37A-55), or, in the case of an authorized municipality, may issue bonds on its own to finance project costs for C-PACE projects pursuant to a local C-PACE program or the Garden State C-PACE program.  
 
	(1)	Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, bonds issued by a participating municipality shall be authorized and issued by ordinance of the municipality, may be issued in one or more series on such additional terms, and may be sold at public or private sale, all as set forth in the ordinance.
 
	(2)	Bonds issued by a county improvement authority shall be authorized and issued in the manner set forth in the "county improvement authorities law," P.L.1960, c.183 (C.40:37A-44 et seq.).
 
	(3)	Bonds issued by a participating municipality or county improvement authority shall be non-recourse obligations of the issuer and shall not be considered to be direct and general obligations of the issuer, or the State of New Jersey or any political subdivision thereof.  Any bonds issued or authorized by a municipality pursuant to P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-374 et al.) shall not be considered gross debt of the municipality on any debt statement filed in accordance with the "Local Bond Law," N.J.S. 40A:2-1 et seq.  
 
	(4)	Bonds issued by a municipality or county improvement authority pursuant to this subsection may be backed by one or more C-PACE assessment contracts. 
 
	c.	The authority shall allow capital providers to directly finance project costs for C-PACE projects, or for such costs to be financed through bond issuance.  Any direct financing provided by a capital provider pursuant to P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-374 et al.) shall not be guaranteed or secured by the full faith and credit of any public entity, including the State of New Jersey or any political subdivision thereof, shall not be considered to be direct and general obligations of any public entity, including the State of New Jersey or any political subdivision thereof, shall not be considered gross debt of any municipality on any debt statement filed in accordance with the "Local Bond Law," N.J.S.40A:2-1 et seq., except to the extent the authority may provide a guaranty as provided for in subsection d. of section 4 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-377).  The Garden State C-PACE program and any local C-PACE program shall permit all capital providers that meet the eligibility requirements established in their program guidelines to provide financing through the program.
 
	d.	An authorized municipality or county that has established a local C-PACE program shall allow capital providers to directly finance project costs for C-PACE projects under the program.  The repayment of any financing provided by a capital provider shall not be guaranteed or secured by the full faith and credit of any public entity, including the State of New Jersey or any political subdivision thereof, shall not be considered to be direct and general obligations of any public entity, including the State of New Jersey or any political subdivision thereof, shall not be considered gross debt of any municipality on any debt statement filed in accordance with the "Local Bond Law," N.J.S.40A:2-1 et seq., except to the extent the authority may provide a guaranty as provided for in subsection d. of section 4 of P.L.2021, c.201 (C.34:1B-377).  
 
	e.	A property owner who installs a renewable energy system under the Garden State C-PACE program or a local C-PACE program may also assign or transfer any solar renewable energy certificates, transition renewable energy certificates, or other renewable energy certificates or credits that accrue to the property owner from the operation of the system to the authority, the municipality, the county improvement authority, other public entity, or the private entity, or capital provider as applicable, which has financed the C-PACE project.  If any solar renewable energy certificates, transition renewable energy certificates, or other renewable energy certificates or credits are assigned or transferred to a municipality, county, county improvement authority, other public entity, or private entity, the municipality, county, county improvement authority, other public entity, or private entity, or capital provider is authorized to sell, grant, assign, convey, or otherwise dispose of its interest in the certificates or credits to repay the financing.
 
	f.	Other than as identified in this section, no public entity, including the State of New Jersey or any political subdivision thereof, may issue bonds to finance any C-PACE program, except to the extent the authority may issue bonds pursuant to P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-1 et seq.).
 
	g.	Any direct financing provided by a capital provider for a C-PACE project under subsection b. or subsection c. of this section shall be considered "authority financial assistance" as that term is defined in section 1 of P.L.1979, c.303 (C.34:1B-5.1), and work on the project undertaken in connection with the assistance shall be subject to the prevailing wage requirements of that section.
 
	L.2021, c.201, s.9; amended 2024, c.75, s.2.

34:1B-383  Short title.
	1.	P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-383 et al.) shall be known and may be cited as the "Cultural Arts Incentives Program Act."
 
L.2023, c.197, s.1.

34:1B-384  Findings, declarations.
	2.	The Legislature finds and declares that:
 
	a.	The New Jersey Economic Development Authority can effectively utilize cultural arts institution facilities as catalysts for broad economic development in targeted communities.  Under the legislation, facilities engaged in the cultural, educational, or artistic enrichment of the people of this State are provided with the opportunity to facilitate targeted development, utilizing proceeds from the sale of State tax credits.  This approach harnesses the ability of cultural arts institution facilities to attract visitors and businesses to the State by leveraging the incalculable economic and cultural benefits of building and supporting world class cultural arts institutions. 
 
	b.	Projects involving the development or rehabilitation of a cultural arts institution facility are inherently beneficial to the State because they provide vital contributions to the communities in which they are located, and together the arts community provides immeasurable economic and cultural benefits to the State. 
 
	c.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2025, c.127)
 
	d.	The Legislature declares that two principal objectives underscore the policy approach of this legislation: first, that providing spaces for arts and culture to flourish will result in thriving communities; and second, the State must help to provide these spaces through an incentives program that better reflects the economics of arts and culture facilities and that the current suite of real estate programs cannot succeed in this endeavor.
 
L.2023, c.197, s.2; amended 2025, c.127, s.1.

34:1B-385  Definitions.
	3.	As used in P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-383 et al.):
 
	"Affiliate" means an entity that directly or indirectly controls, is under common control with, or is controlled by a cultural arts institution.  Control exists in all cases in which the entity is a member of a controlled group of corporations as defined pursuant to section 1563 of the federal Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. s.1563) or the entity is an organization in a group of organizations under common control that is subject to the regulations applicable to organizations pursuant to subsection (b) or (c) of section 414 of the federal Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. s.414).  A cultural arts institution may establish by clear and convincing evidence, as determined by the authority, that control exists in situations involving lesser percentages of ownership if the cultural arts institution shall have control, at a minimum, of all aspects of compliance with this program.  An affiliate of a cultural arts institution may contribute to the project cost and may satisfy the requirement for site control during construction and the eligibility period, but in no event shall the tax credit certificate be issued to any affiliate.
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Board" means the board of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	"Cultural arts institution" means a governmental entity or nonprofit or governmental economic or community development entity incorporated pursuant to Title 15 of the Revised Statutes or Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes, operating on a not-for-profit basis, and having a mission of, or experience in, cultural, educational, or artistic enrichment of the people of this State.  A "cultural arts institution" shall include a for-profit business seeking a tax credit for a cultural arts institution facility open to the public provided that the cultural arts institution facility is receiving a federal historic rehabilitation tax credit pursuant to section 47 of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 26 U.S.C. s.47, or a tax credit pursuant to the "Historic Property Reinvestment Act," sections 2 through 8 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-270 through C.34:1B-276).  A “cultural arts institution” shall include any nonprofit that operates a museum or memorial honoring New Jersey veterans of foreign military conflicts.  A “cultural arts institution” shall also include a developer that has a partnership agreement with the National Park Service.
 
	"Cultural arts institution facility" means an existing or proposed facility within this State, operated and maintained by a cultural arts institution or the National Park Service.  A "cultural arts institution facility" includes, without limitation, an aquarium, botanical society, historical society, library, museum, gallery, performing arts center, national historical park, war memorial or museum, or any related facility that is principally for the support and benefit of any of the foregoing.
 
	"Cultural arts project" means a capital project for the construction or improvement of a cultural arts institution facility that is located in the State for which a cultural arts institution is to be awarded tax credits by the authority under the program pursuant to a tax credit agreement, provided that the project for which the tax credits are awarded will result in a capital investment of at least $5,000,000.
 
	"Director" means the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.
 
	"Eligibility period" means the period during which a cultural arts institution may claim, sell, transfer, or otherwise use a tax credit under the program, beginning with the tax period in which the authority accepts certification of the cultural arts institution that it has met the capital investment requirements of the program and extending thereafter for a term of at least five years. 
 
	"Eligible position" means a full-time position in an entity in this State which the entity has filled with a full-time employee.  An eligible position shall not include an independent contractor or a consultant.
 
	"Government-restricted municipality" means a municipality in this State with a municipal revitalization index distress score of at least 75, that met the criteria for designation as an urban aid municipality in the 2019 State fiscal year, and that, on the effective date of P.L.2020, c.156, is subject to financial restrictions imposed pursuant to the "Municipal Stabilization and Recovery Act," P.L.2016, c.4 (C.52:27BBBB-1 et seq.), or is restricted in its ability to levy property taxes on property in that municipality as a result of the State of New Jersey owning or controlling property representing at least 25 percent of the total land area of the municipality or as a result of the federal government of the United States owning or controlling at least 50 acres of the total land area of the municipality, which is dedicated as a national natural landmark.
 
	"New full-time job" means an eligible position created by a cultural arts institution at a cultural arts project that did not previously exist in this State.  For the purposes of determining the number of new full-time jobs, the eligible positions of an affiliate shall be considered eligible positions of the cultural arts institution.
 
	"Program" means the Cultural Arts Incentives Program established pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-386).
 
	"Project cost" means the costs incurred in connection with a cultural arts project by a cultural arts institution until the issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy, or until such other time specified by the authority, for a specific investment or improvement, including the costs relating to lands, buildings, improvements, real or personal property, or any interest therein, including leases discounted to present value, including lands under water, riparian rights, space rights, and air rights acquired, owned, developed or redeveloped, constructed, reconstructed, rehabilitated, or improved, any environmental remediation costs, plus costs not directly related to construction, including capitalized interest paid to third parties, of an amount not to exceed 20 percent of the total costs, and the cost of infrastructure improvements, including ancillary infrastructure projects.  The fees associated with the application or administration of tax credits under P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-383 et al.) shall not constitute a project cost.  
 
	"Project financing gap" means the part of the total project cost, including reasonable and appropriate return on investment, that remains to be financed after all other sources of capital have been accounted for, including, but not limited to capital contributed by the cultural arts institution, which shall not be less than 20 percent of the total project cost, and investor or financial entity capital or loans; provided, however, that for a cultural arts project located in a government-restricted municipality, the capital contributed by the cultural arts institution shall not be less than 10 percent of the total project cost. 
 
	"Qualified incentive tract" means a population census tract having a poverty rate of 20 percent or more or a census tract in which the median family income for the census tract does not exceed 80 percent of the greater of the statewide median family income or the median family income of the metropolitan statistical area in which the census tract is situated.
 
	"Tax credit agreement" means a tax credit agreement entered into pursuant to section 8 of P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-390) between the authority and a cultural arts institution.
 
	"Work First New Jersey program" means the Work First New Jersey program established pursuant to P.L.1997, c.38 (C.44:10-55 et seq.).

 L.2023, c.197, s.3; amended 2025, c.127, s.2.

34:1B-386  "Cultural Arts Incentives Program" established, New Jersey Economic Development Authority.
	4. a. The Cultural Arts Incentives Program is established as a program under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.  The board shall certify an eligible cultural arts institution based on the requirements of section 5 of P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-387), and may approve the award of a tax credit to a cultural arts institution pursuant to the provisions of P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-383 et al.).  The value of all tax credits approved by the authority to cultural arts institutions under the program shall be subject to the limitations set forth in section 98 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-362).  Any tax credit awarded under the program may be utilized by a cultural arts institution for the same project in conjunction with a tax credit award made pursuant to the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335); provided, however, that any tax credit awarded under the program shall not be considered to be developer contributed capital for the purposes of calculating the project financing gap for an incentive award under the "New Jersey Aspire Program Act," sections 54 through 67 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-322 through C.34:1B-335).
 
	b. (1) The authority shall administer the program to incentivize the establishment of cultural arts projects by a cultural arts institution independently or in collaboration with one or more governmental entities.  A cultural arts project involving the development or rehabilitation of a cultural arts institution facility shall be eligible for a tax credit award in an amount not to exceed 100 percent of eligible project costs.  The value of tax credits approved by the authority under the program for a cultural arts project shall not exceed $75,000,000 per cultural arts project.
 
	(2) (a) A cultural arts institution shall sell and transfer the tax credits awarded under the program, or adopt a plan to use such tax credits in order to finance the completion of the cultural arts project.  A cultural arts institution receiving tax credits under the program shall use the proceeds derived from the sale or financing of the tax credits to make an equity investment in, or secure other financial support for, the cultural arts project that will permit the cultural arts institution to develop the cultural arts project and to attract tenants, owners, investors, lenders, partners, collaborators, and other beneficial parties to the cultural arts project.  The authority shall evaluate each proposed cultural arts project to determine the likelihood of the project's success.  A cultural arts institution shall submit to the authority an independent market study showing there is demand for a cultural arts institution facility at the proposed project site and that it is expected to be successful.  The authority may procure third party consultants to determine a project's likelihood of success.
 
	(b) Consistent with an applicable tax credit agreement, a tax credit awarded to a cultural arts institution may be applied against tax liability otherwise due pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), pursuant to sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or pursuant to N.J.S.17B:23-5.
 
L.2023, c.197, s.4; amended 2025, c.127, s.3.

34:1B-387  Cultural arts institution, tax credit eligibility.
	5. a. A cultural arts institution shall be eligible to receive a tax credit under the program only if the cultural arts institution is eligible pursuant to subsection b. of this section and submits a program application to the authority that results in completion of a cultural arts project.
 
	b.	At the time of application, a cultural arts institution seeking tax credits pursuant to the program shall demonstrate to the authority:
 
	(1) that the proposed cultural arts project will result in a capital investment of at least $5,000,000, which may include, for a project for which an applicant has commenced construction before the submission of an application, costs incurred before the date of application, provided that such costs would have otherwise qualified as project costs;
 
	(2) the structure and terms of the financial, corporate, and real estate instruments to be utilized to successfully complete the cultural arts project and then, unless the cultural arts institution facility is to be operated by the National Park Service, operate the cultural arts institution facility;
 
	(3) that construction has not commenced at the site of the cultural arts project prior to submitting an application, unless:
 
	(a)	the authority determines that the cultural arts project would not be completed without an award of tax credits under the program; or
 
	(b)	the construction activities are limited to general maintenance, demolition, environmental assessment, environmental investigation, and environmental remediation;
 
	(4) the value of the tax credit that is necessary in each year of the eligibility period, in order for the cultural arts institution to finance the establishment of the cultural arts project;
 
	(5) the total aggregate value of the tax credits for the entire eligibility period that is necessary in order for the cultural arts institution to finance the establishment of the cultural arts project;
 
	(6) that the cultural arts project shall comply with the standards established by the authority through regulation based on the green building manual prepared by the Commissioner of Community Affairs pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2007, c.132 (C.52:27D-130.6), regarding the use of renewable energy, energy-efficient technology, and non-renewable resources in order to reduce environmental degradation and encourage long-term cost reduction;
 
	(7) that the cultural arts project shall comply with the authority's affirmative action requirements, adopted pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1979, c.303 (C.34:1B-5.4);
 
	(8) a description of the significant economic, social, planning, employment, and other benefits that would accrue to the State, county, or municipality from the cultural arts project;
 
	(9) that during the eligibility period, each worker employed to perform construction work and building services work at the cultural arts project shall be paid not less than the prevailing wage rate for the worker's craft or trade, as determined by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) and P.L.2005, c.379 (C.34:11-56.58 et seq.).  In the event the cultural arts project constitutes a lease of more than 55 percent of a single facility, these requirements shall apply to construction work and building services work at the entire facility.  In the event the cultural arts project constitutes a lease of more than 35 percent of a single facility, these requirements shall apply to construction work at the entire facility;
 
	(10) that, unless the cultural arts institution facility is to be operated by the National Park Service, the cultural arts institution shall either:
 
	(a)	provide support and services to Work First New Jersey program recipients during the eligibility period; or
 
	(b)	have provided support and services to Work First New Jersey program recipients on or after December 21, 2023;
 
	(11) that the timing of the award of tax credits under the program shall allow for the successful completion and operation of the cultural arts project demonstrated through an independent market study submitted by the applicant showing there is demand for a cultural arts institution facility at the proposed project site and that it is expected to be successful; and that the cultural arts institution has a strong prior track record of success or an independent analysis demonstrates that a newly formed cultural arts institution will be successful;
 
	(12) a project financing gap exists, or the authority determines that the cultural arts project will generate a below market rate of return.  The authority shall evaluate past and projected fundraising efforts of the cultural arts institution to determine whether a project financing gap exists;
 
	(13) that, unless the cultural arts institution facility is to be operated by the National Park Service, the cultural arts institution will have ownership of, or lease space in, the cultural arts institution facility and operate or hold an operating agreement for at least the eligibility period; and
 
	(14) that the cultural arts institution will have at least 20 percent equity in the cultural arts project, which equity interest may include amounts contributed through government grants, not including economic subsidies provided by the authority, received by the cultural arts institution; provided, however, for a cultural arts project located in a government-restricted municipality, the equity required shall not be less than 10 percent.
 
	c.	Prior to the board considering an application submitted by a cultural arts institution, the authority shall confirm with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of the Treasury whether the cultural arts institution is in substantial good standing with the respective department, or has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan.  The cultural arts institution shall certify that any contractors or subcontractors that will perform work at the cultural arts project: (1) are registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); (2) have not been debarred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in the State; and (3) possess a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  The authority may also contract with an independent third party to perform a background check on a cultural arts institution.
 
L.2023, c.197, s.5; amended 2025, c.127, s.4.

34:1B-388  Cultural arts institution seeking tax credit, application, New Jersey State Council on the Arts, consultation.
	6.	a. Prior to March 1, 2029, a cultural arts institution seeking a tax credit pursuant to the program that satisfies the eligibility criteria set forth in section 5 of P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-387) shall submit an application to the authority in a form and manner prescribed in regulations adopted by the authority, in consultation with the New Jersey State Council on the Arts.  The authority shall accept and certify applications for tax credits during the award rounds established pursuant to section 7 of P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-389).
 
	b.	The authority shall not consider an application for a cultural arts project unless the cultural arts institution submits, with the application, a letter evidencing support for the cultural arts project from the chief executive or governing body of the municipality in which the cultural arts project is located.
 
	c.	The authority shall review the project costs for a proposed cultural arts project and evaluate and validate the underlying financial structure proposed by the cultural arts institution.  The authority shall review an independent market study submitted to the authority by the cultural arts institution showing there is demand for a cultural arts institution facility at the proposed project site and that it is expected to be successful.  The authority may procure third-party consultants to determine a project's likelihood of success.  The authority shall assess the cost of these reviews to the applicant.  A cultural arts institution shall pay to the authority the full amount of the direct costs of an analysis concerning the cultural arts institution's application for tax credits that a third party retained by the authority performs, if the authority deems such retention to be necessary.
 
	d.	If at any time during the eligibility period the authority determines that a cultural arts institution made a material misrepresentation on the program application, the cultural arts institution shall forfeit or repay to the authority the value of tax credits associated with that application.
 
L.2023, c.197, s.6.

34:1B-389  New Jersey Economic Development Authority, awarding tax credits, competitive application process, at least one award round each year.
	7. a. The authority shall conduct a review of applications on a rolling basis, unless the authority determines that demand is likely to exceed available tax credits, at which time the authority may implement a competitive application process whereby the authority shall evaluate all applications submitted by a date certain as if all were submitted on that date.
 
	b.	To receive a tax credit award, a cultural arts institution shall be required to meet a minimum score, as determined by the authority pursuant to this section.
 
	c.	The scoring system developed by the authority pursuant to this section shall assess applications for tax credits based on criteria, which shall include, but shall not be limited to:
 
	(1) the amount of tax credits requested by the cultural arts institution compared to the amount of tax credits required for the completion of the cultural arts project;
 
	(2) how the cultural arts project will advance State, regional, and local goals concerning the development of arts and cultural facilities in underserved communities;
 
	(3) the relationship of the cultural arts project to a comprehensive local development strategy, including its relation to other development and redevelopment projects in the municipality;
 
	(4) the degree to which the cultural arts project enhances and promotes job creation and economic development;
 
	(5) the extent of economic and related social distress in the municipality and the immediate area surrounding the cultural arts project, including whether the cultural arts project is located in a qualified incentive tract or other areas of the State identified from time to time by the authority in rules;
 
	(6) the quality and number of new full-time jobs that will be created by the cultural arts institution; and
 
	(7) if the cultural arts institution has a board of directors, the extent to which that board of directors is diverse and representative of the community in which the cultural arts project is located.
 
	d.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection c. of this section, the authority may adopt, pursuant to the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), rules and regulations adjusting the criteria required under the program when necessary to respond to conditions in the State.
 
	e.	Prior to the award of a tax credit, the authority shall confirm with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of the Treasury that the cultural arts institution is in substantial good standing with the respective department, or has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan for the cultural arts institution and the cultural arts institution shall confirm that any contractors and subcontractors performing work at the cultural arts project: (1) are registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); (2) have not been debarred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in the State; and (3) possess a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  Provided that all parties are in compliance with this subsection, the authority shall allocate tax credits to cultural arts projects according to the cultural arts projects' scores and until either the available tax credits are exhausted or all cultural arts projects obtaining the minimum score receive a tax credit, whichever occurs first.  If insufficient funding exists to fully fund all eligible cultural arts projects, a cultural arts project may be offered a partial tax credit valued at less than what is provided for in paragraph (1) of subsection b. of section 4 of P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-386).
 
	f.	Applications that do not receive the minimum score established by the authority shall not receive further consideration for a tax credit by the authority for that application; however, a cultural arts institution may submit a new application.
 
	g.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2025, c.127)
 
L.2023, c.197, s.7; amended 2025, c.127, s.5.

34:1B-390  New Jersey Economic Development Authority, cultural arts institution, tax credit agreement.
	8. a. Following approval and selection of an application pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-388 and 34:1B-389), the authority shall enter into a tax credit agreement with the cultural arts institution. 
 
	b. (1) A tax credit agreement shall specify the amount of the tax credit that the authority shall award to the cultural arts institution and specify the duration of the eligibility period, which shall be no less than five years and shall not exceed 10 years.  The tax credit agreement shall provide an estimated date of completion for the cultural arts project and include a requirement for periodic progress reports through completion, including the submittal of executed financing commitments and documents or agreements that evidence site control.
 
	(2) If, as a result of a default under the tax credit agreement, the authority rescinds a tax credit in the same calendar year in which the authority approved the tax credit, then the authority may assign the tax credit to another applicant that attained the minimum score determined pursuant to section 7 of P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-389).
 
	c.	The terms of the tax credit agreement shall:
 
	(1) provide for a verification of project financing at the time the cultural arts institution provides executed financing commitments to the authority and a verification of the cultural arts institution's projected cash flow at the time of certification that the project is completed;
 
	(2) specify that the authority or the State may purchase tax credits offered for sale by a cultural arts institution for 90 percent of the stated value of the tax credit before considering any further discounting to present value which shall be permitted;
 
	(3) at a minimum, require a cultural arts institution to provide oversight of the cultural arts project through ongoing reporting by the cultural arts institution to the authority;
 
	(4) specify other measures through which the authority shall ensure oversight of outstanding tax credits and, in the event that a cultural arts institution fails to meet its obligations under the tax credit agreement or any program requirement, including any representations made by the cultural arts institution during the application process, establish the right of the authority to reduce, rescind, or recapture tax credits in the authority's discretion; and
 
	(5) at a minimum, require that the cultural arts institution adopt specific nondiscrimination policies for the operation of a cultural arts project.
 
	d.	The tax credit agreement shall include a requirement that the chief executive officer of the authority receive annual reports from the cultural arts institution.  As part of the authority's review of the annual reports required from each cultural arts institution, the authority shall confirm with the Department of Environmental Protection, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, and the Department of the Treasury that the cultural arts institution is in substantial good standing with the respective department, or has entered into an agreement with such department that includes a practical corrective action plan for the cultural arts institution; and the cultural arts institution shall confirm that any contractors and subcontractors performing work at the cultural arts project: (1) are registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); (2) have not been debarred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in the State; and (3) possess a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  The tax credit agreement shall include a provision that the cultural arts institution shall forfeit the tax credit in any year in which an uncured default exists under the tax credit agreement, or the cultural arts institution is neither in substantial good standing with the Department of Environmental Protection, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, or the Department of the Treasury nor has entered into a practical corrective action plan.  The tax credit agreement shall, however, allow the authority to extend, in individual cases, the deadline for any annual reporting requirement.
 
	e.	A cultural arts institution shall, as required at the discretion of the authority, submit to the authority satisfactory evidence of actual project costs, as certified by a certified public accountant, evidence of a temporary certificate of occupancy, or other event evidencing project completion.  The cultural arts institution, or an authorized agent of the cultural arts institution, shall certify under the penalty of perjury that the information provided pursuant to this subsection is true.
 
L.2023, c.197, s.8; amended 2025, c.127, s.6.

34:1B-391  Cultural arts institution, approved cultural arts project, tax credit, awarded.
	9. a. Up to the limits established in paragraph (1) of subsection b. of section 4 of P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-386), and in accordance with a tax credit agreement, beginning upon the receipt of occupancy permits for any portion of the cultural arts project, or upon any other event evidencing project completion as set forth in the tax credit agreement, a cultural arts institution of such approved cultural arts project shall be awarded a tax credit.  No more than the amount of tax credits equal to the total credit amount awarded under the program divided by the duration of the eligibility period in years may be taken in any tax period.
 
	b.	A cultural arts institution that is awarded a tax credit under P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-383 et al.) shall, commencing in the year in which the tax credit is awarded, and each year thereafter for the remainder of the eligibility period, submit a report indicating whether the cultural arts institution is aware of any condition, event, or act that would cause the cultural arts institution not to be in compliance with the tax credit agreement, the representations made to the authority during the application process, or the provisions of P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-383 et al.) and any additional reporting requirements contained in the tax credit agreement or tax credit certificate.  The cultural arts institution or an authorized agent of the cultural arts institution shall certify under the penalty of perjury that the information provided pursuant to this subsection is true.
 
	c. (1) Upon receipt and review of each report submitted during the eligibility period, the authority shall provide to the cultural arts institution and the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury a certificate of compliance indicating the amount of tax credits awarded to the cultural arts institution, that the cultural arts institution may:
 
	(a) offer for sale through the provision of a tax credit transfer certificate pursuant to section 10 of P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-392); or
 
	(b) use as collateral or to secure any financial instrument approved by the authority to provide financing for the cultural arts project, if that use is in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the authority to govern the use of program tax credits.
 
	(2) Upon receipt by the director of the certificate of compliance, the director shall coordinate with the cultural arts institution and the authority to provide the cultural arts institution with a tax credit transfer certificate, as described in section 10 of P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-392), or a tax credit certificate for the value awarded by the authority for that year that the cultural arts institution may use as provided in paragraph (1) of this subsection and in accordance with the rules adopted pursuant to subparagraph (b) of paragraph (1) of this subsection.
 
L.2023, c.197, s.9; amended 2025, c.127, s.7.

34:1B-392  Cultural arts institution, tax credit transfer certificate, selling, assigning.
	10. a. A cultural arts institution may apply to the director and the chief executive officer of the authority for a tax credit transfer certificate, covering one or more years.  The tax credit transfer certificate, upon receipt thereof by the cultural arts institution from the director and the chief executive officer of the authority, may be sold or assigned, in full or in part in an amount not less than $25,000, in the privilege period during which the cultural arts institution receives the tax credit transfer certificate from the director, to another person who may apply the credit against a tax liability pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5.
 
	b.	The cultural arts institution shall not sell or assign, including a collateral assignment, a tax credit transfer certificate allowed under this section for consideration received by the cultural arts institution of less than 85 percent of the transferred credit amount before considering any further discounting to present value which shall be permitted.  The tax credit transfer certificate issued to a cultural arts institution by the director shall be subject to any limitations and conditions imposed on the application of State tax credits pursuant to P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-383 et al.) and any other terms and conditions that the director may prescribe, provided, however, that the holder of a tax credit certificate may transfer all or part of the tax credit amount, on or after the date of issuance of the tax credit transfer certificate, for use by the transferee in the tax period for which it was issued, in the tax period in which it was issued, or in any of the next three successive tax periods.  The transferee may first use the credit against tax liabilities in the tax period in which it was issued or in a succeeding tax period, as authorized in this subsection, without the need to amend the tax return for the tax period for which the credit was issued, subject to the provisions of this section.  A transferee may carry forward an unused credit for use in any of the next five successive tax periods, and the unused credit shall expire thereafter.  Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the amount of tax credits that may be claimed by the transferee in any tax period shall not exceed the total tax credit amount divided by the duration of the eligibility period in years.
 
	c.	A purchaser or assignee of a tax credit transfer certificate pursuant to this section shall not make any subsequent transfers, assignments, or sales of the tax credit transfer certificate.
 
	d.	The authority shall publish on its Internet website the following information concerning each tax credit transfer certificate approved by the authority and the director pursuant to this section:
 
	(1) the name of the transferor;
 
	(2) the name of the transferee;
 
	(3) the value of the tax credit transfer certificate;
 
	(4) the State tax against which the transferee may apply the tax credit; and
 
	(5) the consideration received by the transferor.
 
L.2023, c.197, s.10; amended 2025, c.127, s.8.

34:1B-393  Rules, regulations.
	11.	a. Notwithstanding the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) to the contrary, the chief executive officer of the authority shall, in consultation with the New Jersey State Council on the Arts, adopt, immediately upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, such rules and regulations as the chief executive officer deems necessary to implement the provisions of P.L.2023, c.197 (C.34:1B-383 et al.), which rules and regulations shall be effective for a period not to exceed 365 days after the date of the filing.  Before the expiration of the rules and regulations, the chief executive officer, in consultation with the New Jersey State Council on the Arts, shall amend, adopt, or readopt the rules and regulations in accordance with the requirements of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	b.	Notwithstanding the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) to the contrary, the chief executive officer of the authority shall, in consultation with the New Jersey State Council on the Arts, adopt, immediately upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, such rules and regulations as the chief executive officer deems necessary to implement the provisions of P.L.2025, c.127, which rules and regulations shall be effective for a period not to exceed 365 days after the date of the filing.  Before the expiration of the rules and regulations, the chief executive officer, in consultation with the New Jersey State Council on the Arts, shall amend, adopt, or readopt the rules and regulations in accordance with the requirements of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
L.2023, c.197, s.11; amended 2025, c.127, s.9.

34:1B-394  Short title.
	1.	P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-394 et al.) shall be known and may be cited as the  Next New Jersey Program Act. 
 
L.2024, c.49, s.1.

34:1B-395  Definitions.
	2.	As used in P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-394 et al.):
 
	 "Affiliate"  means an entity that directly or indirectly controls, is under common control with, or is controlled by an eligible business. Control exists in all cases in which the entity is a member of a controlled group of corporations as defined pursuant to section 1563 of the federal Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. s.1563) or the entity is an organization in a group of organizations under common control that is subject to the regulations applicable to organizations pursuant to subsection (b) or (c) of section 414 of the federal Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. s.414).  An eligible business may establish by clear and convincing evidence, as determined by the authority, that control exists in situations involving lesser percentages of ownership than required by the above referenced federal statutes if the eligible business shall have control, at a minimum, of all aspects of compliance with this program.  An affiliate of an eligible business may contribute towards the capital investment requirement and may satisfy the requirement for site control during construction and the eligibility period, but in no event shall the tax credit certificate be issued to any affiliate.
 
	 "AI data center"  means a facility specifically to handle the demanding computational needs of artificial intelligence applications, designed for tasks like machine learning training, deep learning algorithms, and complex data analysis, whose services are the storage, management, and processing of digital data; that is used to house: computer and network systems, including associated components such as servers, network equipment and appliances, telecommunications, and data storage systems; systems for monitoring and managing infrastructure performance; Internet-related equipment and services; data communications connections; environmental controls; fire protection systems; and security systems and services specifically for artificial intelligence applications.
 
	 "Artificial intelligence"  or  "AI"  means the development of software and hardware and the end-use application of technologies that are able to perform tasks normally requiring human intelligence, including, but not limited to, visual perception, speech recognition, decision-making, translation between languages, and generative artificial intelligence, which generates new content in response to user inputs of data.
 
	"Authority" means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	 "Board"  means the Board of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	 "Building services"  means any cleaning or routine building maintenance work, including, but not limited to, sweeping, vacuuming, floor cleaning, cleaning of rest rooms, collecting refuse or trash, window cleaning, securing, patrolling, or other work in connection with the care or securing of an existing building, including services typically provided by a door-attendant or concierge.  "Building services" shall not include any skilled maintenance work, professional services, or other public work for which a contractor is required to pay the "prevailing wage" as defined in section 2 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.26).
 
	 "Business"  means an applicant proposing to own or lease premises in a qualified business facility that is: a corporation that is subject to the tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5, or is a partnership, S corporation, limited liability company, or non-profit corporation.  A business shall include an affiliate of the business if that business applies for a credit based upon any capital investment made by or full-time employees of an affiliate. If the business or tenant is a cooperative or part of a cooperative, then the cooperative may qualify for credits by counting the full-time employees and capital investments of its member organizations and the cooperative may distribute credits to its member organizations. If the business or tenant is a cooperative that leases to its member organizations, the lease shall be treated as a lease to an affiliate or affiliates.
 
	 "Capital investment"  means expenses that a business or an affiliate of the business incurs, or is incurred on behalf of the business or affiliate by its landlord, following its submission of an application to the authority pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-398), but prior to the project completion date, as shall be defined in the project agreement, for: site preparation and construction, repair, renovation, improvement, equipping, or furnishing on real property or of a building, structure, facility, or improvement to real property; obtaining and installing furnishings and machinery, apparatus, or equipment, including, but not limited to, computer systems, hardware, software, and equipment and material goods subject to bonus depreciation under sections 168 and 179 of the federal Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. ss.168 and 179), for the operation of a business on real property or in a building, structure, facility, or improvement to real property; or any combination of the foregoing.
 
	 "Commitment period"  means a period that is no less than two times the eligibility period specified in the project agreement entered into pursuant to section 6 of P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-399).
 
	 "Eligibility" period  means the period in which an eligible business may claim a tax credit under the program, beginning with the tax period in which the authority accepts certification of the eligible business that it has met the capital investment and employment requirements of the program and extending thereafter for a term of five years.
 
	 "Eligible business"  means any business that satisfies the criteria set forth in section 4 of P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-397) at the time of application for tax credits under the program.
 
	 "Eligible position"  or  "full-time job"  means a full-time position in a business in this State which a business has filled with a full-time employee who is paid no less than 120 percent of the median salary for the county in which the project is located and for which the business provides employee health benefits under a group health plan as defined under section 14 of P.L.1997, c.146 (C.17B:27-54), a health benefits plan as defined under section 1 of P.L.1992, c.162 (C.17B:27A-17), or a policy or contract of health insurance covering more than one person issued pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 27 of Title 17B of the New Jersey Statutes, provided, however, the requirement that employee health benefits are to be provided shall be deemed to be satisfied if the benefits are provided by the business or pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement, no later than 90 days of employee start date, under a health benefits plan authorized pursuant to State or federal law.  An eligible position shall not include an independent contractor or a consultant.
 
	 "Full-time employee"  means a person:
 
	who is employed by a business for consideration for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment, and whose wages are subject to withholding as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq.;
 
	who is employed by a professional employer organization pursuant to an employee leasing agreement between the business and the professional employer organization, pursuant to P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.) for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment, and whose wages are subject to withholding as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq.; or
 
	who is a resident of another State, but whose income is not subject to the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq., due to a reciprocity agreement with the other state, or who is a partner of a business who works for the partnership for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment, and whose distributive share of income, gain, loss, or deduction, or whose guaranteed payments, or any combination thereof, is subject to the payment of estimated taxes, as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq., due to a reciprocity agreement with the other state.
 
	A  "full-time employee"  shall include, but shall not be limited to, an employee that has been hired by way of a labor union hiring hall or its equivalent. 35 hours of employment per week in the State shall constitute one "full-time employee," regardless of whether or not the hours of work were performed by one or more persons.
 
	 "Full-time employee"  shall not include any person who works as an independent contractor or on a consulting basis for the business or a contract worker.
 
	 "Minimum environmental and sustainability standards"  means standards established by the authority in accordance with the green building manual prepared by the Commissioner of Community Affairs pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2007, c.132 (C.52:27D-130.6), regarding the use of renewable energy, energy-efficient technology, and non-renewable resources to reduce environmental degradation and encourage long-term cost reduction.
 
	 "New full-time job"  means an eligible position created by a business, following approval of such business's application by the board, that did not previously exist in this State.  For the purposes of determining the number of new full-time jobs, the eligible positions of an affiliate shall be considered eligible positions of the business.
 
	 "Partnership"  means an entity classified as a partnership for federal income tax purposes.
 
	 "Professional employer organization"  means an employee leasing company registered with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.).
 
	 "Program"  means the Next New Jersey Program established by section 3 of P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-396).
 
	 "Project"  means the capital investment at a qualified business facility and the employment commitment pursuant to the project agreement.
 
	 "Project agreement"  means the contract executed between an eligible business and the authority pursuant to section 6 P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-399), which sets forth the terms and conditions under which the eligible business may receive the tax credits authorized pursuant to the program.
 
	 "Qualified business facility"  means any building, complex of buildings, or structural components of buildings, and all machinery and equipment located therein, used in connection with the operation of an eligible business.
 
	 "Technology startup company"  means a for-profit business located in the State that has been in operation fewer than seven years and is developing or possesses a proprietary technology or business method of a high technology or life science-related product, process, or service, which proprietary technology or business method the business intends to move to commercialization.  The business shall be deemed to have begun operation on the date that the business first hired at least one employee in a full-time position.
 
L.2024, c.49, s.2.

34:1B-396  "Next New Jersey Program" established.
	3. a. The Next New Jersey Program is hereby established as a program under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.  The authority shall administer the program to attract new investment to New Jersey in key industries, create new jobs and economic opportunities, and position New Jersey as a leader in the innovation economy.  The board may approve the award of tax credits to an eligible business upon application of the chief executive officer, or equivalent officer, of the eligible business and following the payment of fees, subject to the limitations set forth in subsection b. of this section.
 
	b.	The value of all tax credits approved by the authority for businesses eligible pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-397) shall be subject to the limitations set forth in section 98 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-362).
 
L.2024, c.49, s.3.

34:1B-397  Tax credit eligibility requirements, artificial intelligence.
	4. a. Beginning on the effective date of P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-394 et al.), but prior to March 1, 2029, to be eligible for tax credits under the program, a business's chief executive officer, or equivalent officer, shall demonstrate to the authority at the time of application that:
 
	(1)	the business will make, acquire, or lease a capital investment at the qualified business facility equal to or greater than the applicable amount set forth in subsection b. of this section;
 
	(2)	the business will create new full-time jobs in the State in an amount equal to or greater than the applicable number set forth in subsection c. of this section;
 
	(3)	the business or its division is primarily engaged in the artificial intelligence industry or the large-scale artificial intelligence data center industry.  A business or its division shall be considered to be primarily engaged in an industry set forth herein if more than 50 percent of the business's employees are engaged in AI-related activities or more than 50 percent of the business's revenue is generated from AI-related activities, or both, provided, however, the use of AI applications in the furtherance of a business's own operations shall not be considered in determining whether a business or division is primarily engaged in artificial intelligence or large-scale artificial intelligence data centers.  AI-related activities include, but are not limited to:  developing new AI algorithms and techniques, such as machine learning, natural language processing, and computer vision; creating AI-powered software and hardware products for various applications; medical AI modelling or programing; development of AI chatbots for customer service; AI development for vehicles; and collecting, storing, and managing the vast amount of data needed to train and use AI models;
 
	(4)	the business will enter into a collaborative relationship, evidenced by the provision of price concessions, artificial intelligence support services, or other measures determined appropriate by the authority, with New Jersey-based public or private research universities or technology startup companies, or both;
 
	(5)	the qualified business facility shall be in compliance with minimum environmental and sustainability standards;
 
	(6)	for construction contracts valued in excess of $2,000, the project shall comply with the authority's affirmative action requirements, adopted pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1979, c.303 (C.34:1B-5.4); and
 
	(7)	each worker employed to perform construction work in connection with a capital improvement or building services work at the qualified business facility shall be paid not less than the prevailing wage rate for the worker's craft or trade, as determined by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) and P.L.2005, c.379 (C.34:11-56.58 et seq.).
 
	b.	The minimum capital investment at the qualified business facility required to be eligible under the program shall be $100,000,000.
 
	c.	The minimum number of new full-time jobs in the State required to be eligible under the program shall be 100 new full-time jobs.
 
	d.	The chief executive officer of the business, or an equivalent officer, shall certify that all factual representations made by the business to the authority pursuant to subsection a. of this section are true under the penalty of perjury.
 
	e.	A business shall not be awarded a tax credit pursuant to the program if the business receives a tax credit pursuant to the  Emerge Program Act,  sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.), or section 6 of P.L.2010, c.57 (C.34:1B-209.4), relating to the same capital investment and employees that qualify the business for a tax credit under the program.
 
	f.	A business eligible pursuant to this section may submit an application to the authority in accordance with the provisions of section 5 of P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-398) on or after the effective date of P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-394 et al.) but prior to March 1, 2029.
 
L.2024, c.49, s.4.

34:1B-398  Tax credit eligibility, application, artificial intelligence.
	5. a. A business that meets the eligibility criteria in section 4 of P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-397) and is seeking tax credits for a project under the program shall submit an application for approval of the project to the authority in a form and manner prescribed by the authority.
 
	b. (1) Before the board may consider an eligible business's application for tax credits, the authority shall confirm with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of the Treasury whether the eligible business is in substantial good standing with the respective department, or, if necessary, has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan for the eligible business.  The business entity shall certify that contractors or subcontractors that will perform work at the qualified business facility:  are registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); have not been debarred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in the State; and possess a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  The authority may also contract with an independent third party to perform a background check on the eligible business.
 
	c.	An eligible business shall pay to the authority the full amount of the direct costs of an analysis concerning the eligible business's application for a tax credit, which a third party retained by the authority performs, if the authority deems such retention to be necessary.  The authority shall have the discretion to waive all or a portion of the costs of application for a small business.
 
	d.	If at any time during the eligibility period the authority determines that the eligible business made a material misrepresentation on the eligible business's application, the eligible business shall forfeit all tax credits awarded under the program, which shall be in addition to any other criminal or civil penalties to which the business and the officer may be subject.
 
	e.	If circumstances require an eligible business to amend its application to the authority, then the chief executive officer of the eligible business, or an equivalent officer, shall certify to the authority that the information provided in its amended application is true under the penalty of perjury.
 
	f.	Nothing shall preclude a business from applying for tax credits under the program for more than one project pursuant to one or more applications.
 
L.2024, c.49, s.5.

34:1B-399  Eligible business, tax credits, site plan approval, committed financing, control, facility.
	6. a. Following board approval, within a time established by the authority and prior to the authority and an eligible business executing a project agreement, the eligible business shall demonstrate that it has obtained site plan approval and has committed financing for, and established site control of, the qualified business facility.  The chief executive officer of the business, or an equivalent officer, shall certify that all factual representations made by the business to the authority pursuant to this subsection are true under the penalty of perjury.
 
	b.	Following approval by the board and compliance with the provisions of subsection a. of this section, but before the issuance of tax credits, the authority shall require an eligible business to enter into a project agreement.  The terms of the project agreement shall be consistent with the eligibility requirements of section 4 of P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-397), and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
 
	(1)	a detailed description of the proposed project that will result in job creation, and the number of new full-time jobs that are approved for tax credits;
 
	(2)	any personnel information that will enable the authority to administer the program;
 
	(3)	a requirement that the eligible business maintain the project at a location in New Jersey for the commitment period and a provision to permit the authority to recapture all or part of any tax credits awarded, at its discretion, if the eligible business does not maintain the project at a location in New Jersey for the commitment period;
 
	(4)	a requirement that the eligible business maintain the number of new full-time jobs, or the salaries thereof, to which the eligible business certified at the commencement of the eligibility period and a provision to permit the authority to proportionally reduce the tax credit award in any tax period in which the number of new full-time jobs, or the salaries thereof, is reduced below the new full-time jobs to which the eligible business certified at the commencement of the eligibility period;
 
	(5)	a method for the eligible business to certify that it has met the capital investment and employment requirements of the program set forth in subsections b. and c. of section 4 of P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-397) and to report annually to the authority the number of new full-time jobs, and the salaries thereof, for which the tax credits are to be allowed;
 
	(6)	representations that the eligible business is in substantial good standing with the Department of Environmental Protection, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, and the Department of the Treasury or has entered into an agreement with the departments that includes a practical corrective action plan, the project complies with all applicable laws, and, specifically, that the project does not violate any environmental law;
 
	(7)	a provision permitting an audit of the payroll records of the business from time to time, as the authority deems necessary;
 
	(8)	a provision that the chief executive officer of the authority receives annual reports from the eligible business and that allows the authority to confirm that the eligible business is in substantial good standing with the Department of Environmental Protection, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, and the Department of the Treasury or has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan.  As part of the annual reports required by this paragraph, the eligible business shall confirm that each contractor or subcontractor performing work at the qualified business facility:  is registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); has not been debarred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in the State; and possesses a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  If the eligible business does not submit the report required under this paragraph, if the Department of Environmental Protection, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, and the Department of the Treasury advise that the eligible business is neither in substantial good standing nor has entered into a practical corrective action plan, or if the eligible business fails to confirm that each contractor or subcontractor is in compliance with this paragraph, then the eligible business may forfeit the issuance of tax credits, pending resolution of the underlying violations or other issues;
 
	(9)	a requirement for the eligible business to engage in on-site consultations with the Division of Workplace Safety and Health in the Department of Health;
 
	(10)  a provision permitting the authority to amend the agreement; and
 
	(11)  a provision establishing the conditions under which the authority, the eligible business, or both, may terminate the agreement.
 
	c. (1) The authority may recapture all or part of a tax credit awarded if an eligible business does not remain in compliance with the requirements of a project agreement for the duration of the commitment period.  A recapture pursuant to this subsection may include interest on the recapture amount, at a rate equal to the statutory rate for corporate business or insurance premiums tax deficiencies, plus any statutory penalties, and all costs incurred by the authority and the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury in connection with the pursuit of the recapture, including, but not limited to, counsel fees, court costs, and other costs of collection.  Failure of the eligible business to meet any program criteria shall constitute a default and shall result in the recapture of all or part of the tax credit awarded.
 
	(2)	If all or part of a tax credit sold or assigned pursuant to section 8 of P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-401) is subject to recapture, then the authority shall pursue recapture from the eligible business and not from the purchaser or assignee of the tax credit transfer certificate.  The purchaser or assignee of a tax credit transfer certificate shall be subject to any limitations and conditions that apply to the use of the tax credits by the eligible business.
 
	(3)	Any funds recaptured pursuant to this subsection, including penalties and interest, shall be deposited into the General Fund.
 
	d.	A business may include an affiliate for any period, provided that the business provides a valid tax clearance certificate for the affiliate and a verification of the nature of the affiliate relationship during the relevant period and provided further that the affiliate provides acceptable responses to the authority's legal disclosures inquiries, as determined by the authority.  A formal modification of the authority's approval of the project agreement shall not be necessary to add or remove an affiliate after approval or execution of the project agreement.
 
	e.	A business may change its name filed with the authority by providing a copy of the filed amendment to the certificate of incorporation or formation, as the case may be, of the business and a valid tax clearance certificate with the business's new name.  A formal modification of the authority's approval shall not be necessary to change a business's name after approval or execution of the project agreement.
 
L.2024, c.49, s.6.

34:1B-400  Tax credit eligibility, certifications, capital investment, employment requirements.
	7. a. Upon completion of the capital investment and employment requirements of the program, an eligible business shall submit to the authority certifications evidencing that the eligible business has satisfied the conditions relating to the capital investment and employment requirements of the project agreement with supporting evidence satisfactory to the authority.  The chief executive officer of the business, or an equivalent officer, shall certify that all factual representations made by the business to the authority pursuant to this subsection are true under the penalty of perjury.
 
	b. (1) In accordance with the project agreement, beginning upon the receipt of occupancy permits for any portion of the project, or upon any other event evidencing project completion as set forth in the project agreement, an eligible business shall be allowed a tax credit in an amount determined pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection.  No more than the amount of tax credits equal to the total credit amount awarded under the program divided by the duration of the eligibility period in years may be taken in any tax period.
 
	(2)	The amount of the tax credit allowed under the program to an eligible business shall be the lesser of:
 
	(a)	the product of 0.1 percent of the eligible business's total capital investment multiplied by the number of new full-time jobs;
 
	(b)	25 percent of the eligible business's total capital investment; or
 
	(c)	$250,000,000.
 
	c. (1) An eligible business which is awarded tax credits under the program shall submit annually, no later than the date indicated in the project agreement, commencing in the year in which the grant of tax credits is issued and for the remainder of the commitment period, a report that indicates that the eligible business continues to maintain the number of new full-time jobs, and the salaries thereof, specified in the project agreement.  As part of the annual report required pursuant to this subsection, an eligible business shall provide to the authority a copy of its applicable New Jersey tax return showing business income and withholdings as a condition of its continuation in the program, and the quarterly wage report required under R.S.43:21-14 submitted to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, together with an annual payroll report showing:  the new full-time jobs which were created in accordance with the project agreement and the new full-time jobs created during each subsequent year of the commitment period.  The failure of an eligible business to submit to the authority a copy of its annual payroll report or submit the quarterly wage report in accordance with the provisions of this subsection during the eligibility period shall result in the forfeiture of the award for that year.  An eligible business shall explain, in the reports required by this subsection, the reason for any discrepancies between the annual payroll report submitted by the eligible business and the quarterly wage report.  The chief executive officer of the eligible business, or an equivalent officer, shall certify that the information provided pursuant to this paragraph is true under the penalty of perjury.  Claims, records, or statements submitted by an eligible business to the authority in order to receive tax credits shall not be considered claims, records, or statements made in connection with State tax laws.
 
	(2)	Upon receipt and review of each report submitted during the eligibility period, the authority shall provide to the eligible business and the director a certificate of compliance indicating the amount of tax credits that the eligible business may apply against its tax liability. The authority shall pro rate the tax credit for the first and last years of the eligibility period based on the number of full months the project was certified in the year the eligible business first certifies.
 
	d. (1) Upon receipt by the director of the certificate of compliance, the director shall allow the eligible business a tax credit.  The eligible business may apply the credit allowed by the director against the eligible business's tax liability for the tax period in which the director allowed the tax credit, or may carry forward the credit for use by the eligible business in any of the next 10 successive tax periods, which credit shall expire thereafter.
 
	(2)	The amount of credit allowed may be applied against the tax liability otherwise due pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5.
 
	(3)	The director shall prescribe the order of priority of the application of the credit allowed under this section and any other credits allowed by law against the tax imposed under section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5).  The amount of a credit applied under this section against the tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5) for a privilege period, together with any other credits allowed by law, shall not reduce the tax liability to an amount less than the statutory minimum provided in subsection (e) of section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5).
 
	e.	An eligible business shall forfeit the credit amount for any tax period for which the eligible business's documentation remains uncertified as of the date for certification indicated in the project agreement, although credit amounts for the remainder of the years of the eligibility period shall remain available to the eligible business.
 
	f.	If, in any tax period, the number of new employees in eligible positions, or the salaries thereof, drops below 80 percent of the number of new employees in eligible positions specified in the project agreement or required as a condition of program eligibility pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-397), whichever is greater, then the eligible business shall forfeit its tax credit amount for that tax period and each subsequent tax period, until the first tax period for which documentation demonstrating the restoration of the number of new employees in eligible positions, or the salaries thereof, to 80 percent of the number specified in the project agreement or required as a condition of program eligibility pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-397), whichever is greater, is reviewed and approved by the authority.
 
L.2024, c.49, s.7.

34:1B-401  Eligible business, tax credit transfer certificate.
	8. a. An eligible business may apply to the director and the chief executive officer of the authority for a tax credit transfer certificate, within three years of the tax period in which the director allows the eligible business a tax credit, in lieu of any amount of the tax credit against the eligible business's State tax liability.  The tax credit transfer certificate, upon receipt thereof by the eligible business from the director and the chief executive officer of the authority, may be sold or assigned, in an amount not less than $25,000, within three years of the tax period in which the eligible business receives the tax credit transfer certificate from the director, to another person that may have a tax liability pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and 54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5.  A purchaser or assignee of a tax credit transfer certificate pursuant to this section shall apply the transferred credit against the same tax for which the eligible business was approved a tax credit under the program.  The tax credit transfer certificate provided to the eligible business shall include a statement waiving the eligible business's right to claim the credit that the eligible business has elected to sell or assign.
 
	b.	The eligible business shall not sell or assign a tax credit transfer certificate allowed under this section for consideration received by the eligible business of less than 85 percent of the transferred credit amount before considering any further discounting to present value which shall be permitted.  The tax credit transfer certificate issued to the eligible business by the director shall be subject to any limitations and conditions imposed on the application of State tax credits pursuant to P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-394 et al.) and any other terms and conditions that the director may prescribe.
 
	c.	A purchaser or assignee of a tax credit transfer certificate pursuant to this section shall not make any subsequent transfers, assignments, or sales of the tax credit transfer certificate.
 
	d.	The authority shall publish on its Internet website the following information concerning each tax credit transfer certificate approved by the authority and the director pursuant to this section:
 
	(1)	the name of the transferrer;
 
	(2)	the name of the transferee;
 
	(3)	the value of the tax credit transfer certificate;
 
	(4)	the State tax against which the transferee may apply the tax credit; and
 
	(5)	the consideration received by the transferrer.
 
L.2024, c.49, s.8.

34:1B-402  Rules, regulations.
	9.	Notwithstanding the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) to the contrary, the chief executive officer of the authority shall adopt, immediately, upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, such rules and regulations as the chief executive officer deems necessary to implement the provisions of sections P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-394 et al.), which rules and regulations shall be effective for a period not to exceed 365 days after the date of the filing.  Before the expiration of the rules and regulations, the chief executive officer shall amend, adopt, or readopt the rules and regulations in accordance with the requirements of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
L.2024, c.49, s.9.

34:1B-403  Short title.
	1.	P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-403 et al.) shall be known and may be cited as the “Next New Jersey Manufacturing Program Act.”
 
L.2025, c.123, s.1.

34:1B-404  Findings, declarations.
	2.	The Legislature finds and declares that:
 
	a.	Manufacturers are vital contributors to the State's economic health and overall prosperity.  They serve as engines of growth, driving job creation, stimulating innovation, and fostering a robust and productive workforce. By producing goods and contributing to the supply chain, manufacturing facilities bolster the State's competitiveness in the global market. 
 
	b.	Projects involving manufacturing and manufacturers are inherently beneficial to the State because they provide vital contributions to the communities in which they are located, enhancing the quality of life for residents and producing immeasurable economic benefits to the State.
 
	c.	The Next New Jersey Manufacturing Program is a comprehensive tax credit program designed to drive substantial investment, foster the creation of new jobs, and position New Jersey as a leader in the manufacturing economy. The program will encourage a wide range of manufacturing activities benefitting various industries, including advanced manufacturing; non-retail food and beverage; life sciences; defense; and the production of components for clean energy technologies, such as offshore wind, solar, geothermal, green hydrogen, nuclear energy, fuel cells, battery storage, and other sustainable clean energy solutions.
 
	d.	By offering competitive incentives, the Next New Jersey Manufacturing Program encourages companies to allocate their capital investments to New Jersey while demonstrating a long-term commitment to the State’s economic growth. The program is designed for manufacturing facilities that establish or expand their physical presence in New Jersey.
 
L.2025, c.123, s.2.

34:1B-405  Definitions.
	3.	As used in P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-403 et al.):
 
	“Affiliate” means an entity that directly or indirectly controls, is under common control with, or is controlled by an eligible business. Control exists in all cases in which the entity is a member of a controlled group of corporations as defined pursuant to section 1563 of the federal Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. s.1563) or the entity is an organization in a group of organizations under common control that is subject to the regulations applicable to organizations pursuant to subsection (b) or (c) of section 414 of the federal Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. s.414).  A taxpayer may establish by clear and convincing evidence, as determined by the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, that control exists in situations involving lesser percentages of ownership than required by sections 1563 and 414 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. ss.1563 and 414). An affiliate of a business may contribute to meeting either the capital investment or full-time employee requirements of a business and new full-time job requirements and may satisfy the requirement for site control during construction and the eligibility period, but in no event shall the tax credit certificate be issued to any affiliate.
 
	“Authority” means the New Jersey Economic Development Authority established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	“Board” means the Board of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, established by section 4 of P.L.1974, c.80 (C.34:1B-4).
 
	“Building services” means any cleaning or routine building maintenance work, including, but not limited to, sweeping, vacuuming, floor cleaning, cleaning of rest rooms, collecting refuse or trash, window cleaning, securing, patrolling, or other work in connection with the care or securing of an existing building, including services typically provided by a door-attendant or concierge.  "Building services" shall not include any skilled maintenance work, professional services, or other public work for which a contractor is required to pay the "prevailing wage," as defined in section 2 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.26).
 
	“Business” means an applicant proposing to own or lease premises in a qualified business facility that is: a corporation subject to the tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5; or is a partnership, S corporation, limited liability company, or non-profit corporation.  A business shall include an affiliate of the business if that business applies for a tax credit based upon any capital investment made by an affiliate or full-time employees of an affiliate. 
 
	“Capital investment” means expenses that a business or an affiliate of the business incurred on behalf of the business or affiliate by its landlord, at the qualified business facility following its submission of a completed application to the authority pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-407), but prior to the project completion date, as shall be defined in the project agreement pursuant to section 7 of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-409), or until such other time specified by the authority, and which expenses are incurred for: 
 
	site preparation and construction, repair, renovation, improvement, equipping, or furnishing on real property or of a building, structure, facility, or improvement to real property;
 
	obtaining and installing furnishings and machinery, apparatus, or equipment, or obtaining and installing of parts in an existing facility for the operation of a business on real property or in a building, structure, facility, or improvement to real property; or any combination of the foregoing; 
 
	improvement to a site-related utility of the real property, including, but not limited to, water, electric, sewer, and stormwater, and transportation infrastructure improvements, plantings, solar panels and components, energy storage components, installation costs of solar energy systems, or other environmental components required to attain the level of silver rating and gold rating standards or above in the LEED building rating system, but only to the extent that such capital investments have not received any grant financial assistance from any other State funding source; 
 
	the value of a capital lease, as defined by generally accepted accounting practices (GAAP), of furnishings and machinery, apparatus, or equipment, based on the shorter of the useful life of the leased property or the commitment period; and 
 
	associated soft costs, which shall not exceed 20 percent of all capital investment. 
 
	“Capital investment” shall not include site acquisition vehicles and heavy equipment not permanently located in the building, structure, facility, or improvement. Landlord contributions for the purpose of eligibility of the program, are allowed.
 
	“Clean energy product manufacturer” means a business engaged in the production or assembly of goods by transforming raw materials or sub-components into components for renewable energy, such as offshore wind, solar, geothermal, green hydrogen, nuclear energy, fuel cells, battery storage, or other clean energy manufacturing. “Clean energy product manufacturer” does not include businesses engaged in retail, wholesale, packaging, software development, resource extraction, or waste incineration.
 
	“Commitment period” means a period that is no less than two times the eligibility period, as specified in the project agreement entered into pursuant to section 7 of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-409).
 
	"Director" means the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.
 
	“Eligibility period” means the period in which an eligible business may claim a tax credit under the program, beginning with the tax period in which the authority accepts certification of the eligible business that it has met the capital investment and employment requirements of the program and extending thereafter for a term of five years.
 
	“Eligible business” means any business that is a clean energy product manufacturer or manufacturer and that satisfies the criteria set forth in section 5 of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-407) at the time of application for tax credits under the program.
 
	“Eligible position” or “full-time job” means a position in a business in this State which the business has filled with a full-time employee who spends at least 80 percent of the employee’s work time in the State and at the qualified business facility, or spends any other period of work time generally accepted by custom or practice, as determined by the authority in its sole discretion based on the characteristics of the employee’s job and work time in the State and at the qualified business facility, and is offered employee health benefits under a group health plan as defined under section 14 of P.L.1997, c.146 (C.17B:27-54), a health benefits plan as defined under section 1 of P.L.1992, c.162 (C.17B:27A-17), or a policy or contract of health insurance covering more than one person issued pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 27 of Title 17B of the New Jersey Statutes, provided, however, that the requirement to offer employee health benefits shall be deemed to be satisfied if the benefits are provided by the business or pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement, no later than 90 days after the employee’s start date, under a health benefits plan authorized pursuant to State or federal law.  An eligible position shall not include an independent contractor or a consultant.
 
	“Full-time employee” means a person who is:
 
	employed by a business for consideration for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment, and whose wages are subject to withholding as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq.;
 
	employed by a professional employer organization pursuant to an employee leasing agreement between the business and the professional employer organization, pursuant to P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.), for at least 35 hours a week or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment and whose wages are subject to withholding as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq.; or
 
	a resident of another state whose income is not subject to the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq., due to a reciprocity agreement with the other state, or who is a partner of a business who works for the partnership for at least 35 hours a week, or who renders any other standard of service generally accepted by custom or practice as full-time employment, and whose distributive share of income, gain, loss, or deduction, or whose guaranteed payments, or any combination thereof, is subject to the payment of estimated taxes, as provided in the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq., due to a reciprocity agreement with the other state.
 
	A “full-time employee” includes, but shall not be limited to, an employee who has been hired by way of a labor union hiring hall or its equivalent.  Thirty-five hours of employment per week in the State shall constitute one "full-time employee," regardless of whether or not the hours of work were performed by one or more persons.
 
	“Full-time employee” shall not include any person who works as an independent contractor or on a consulting basis for the business or a contract worker.
 
	“Manufacturer” means a business engaged in the production or assembly of goods by transforming raw materials or sub-components into components or finished products through various industrial processes, including, but not limited to, fabrication, assembly, or chemical processes. “Manufacturer” does not include businesses engaged in retail, wholesale, packaging, software development, resource extraction, or waste incineration.
 
	“Minimum environmental and sustainability standards” means standards established by the authority in accordance with the green building manual prepared by the Commissioner of Community Affairs pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2007, c.132 (C.52:27D-130.6), regarding the use of renewable energy, energy-efficient technology, and non-renewable resources to reduce environmental degradation and encourage long-term cost reduction.
 
	“New full-time job” means an eligible position created by a business, following approval of the business’s application by the board, that did not previously exist in this State.  For the purposes of determining the number of new full-time jobs, the eligible positions of an affiliate shall be considered eligible positions of the business.  For the purpose of calculating the number of new full-time jobs, a position shall not be considered a new full-time job unless it is in addition to the number of full-time jobs in the business's Statewide workforce in the last tax accounting or privilege period prior to the tax credit amount approval.
 
	“Partnership” means an entity classified as a partnership for federal income tax purposes.
 
	“Professional employer organization” means an employee leasing company registered with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.).
 
	“Program” means the Next New Jersey Manufacturing Program established by section 4 of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-406).
 
	“Project” means the capital investment at a qualified business facility and the employment commitment required pursuant to the project agreement.
 
	“Project agreement” means the contract executed between an eligible business and the authority pursuant to section 7 of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-409), which sets forth the terms and conditions under which the eligible business may receive the tax credits authorized pursuant to the program.
 
	“Qualified business facility” means any building, complex of buildings, or structural components of buildings, and all machinery and equipment located therein, used in connection with the operation of an eligible business primarily for: (1) the production or assembly of goods by transforming raw materials into components for renewable energy, such as offshore wind, solar, geothermal, green hydrogen, fuel cells, or other clean energy; (2) producing or assembling of goods by transforming raw materials or components into finished products through various industrial processes; or (3) investigating, experimenting, and innovating to create new products or improve existing products.  Ancillary activities related to packaging and distribution at the qualified business facility are permitted.  
 
	“Soft costs” means all costs associated with financing, design, engineering, legal services, or real estate commissions, including, but not limited to, architect fees, permit fees, loan origination and closing costs, construction management, and freight and shipping delivery, but not including early lease termination costs, air fare, mileage, tolls, gas, meals, packing material, marketing, temporary signage, incentive consultant fees, authority fees, loan interest payments, escrows, or other similar costs.
 
	“Statewide workforce” means the total number of full-time employees in the Statewide workforce of the business and any affiliate of the business, if the affiliate contributes any capital investment or full-time employees. "Statewide workforce" shall not include full-time employees at any final point-of-sale retail facilities unless the project, as approved by the board, includes full-time employees engaged in final point-of-sale retail.
 
	“Targeted industry” means any industry identified from time to time by the authority which shall initially include advanced transportation and logistics, advanced manufacturing, aviation, autonomous vehicle and zero-emission vehicle research or development, clean energy, life sciences, hemp processing, information and high technology, finance and insurance, professional services, film and digital media, non-retail food and beverage businesses, including food innovation, and other innovative industries that disrupt current technologies or business models.
 
L.2025, c.123, s.3.

34:1B-406  Next New Jersey Manufacturing Program under the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.
	4. a. The Next New Jersey Manufacturing Program is hereby established as a program under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority.  The authority shall administer the program to attract new investment to New Jersey in key industries, create new jobs and economic opportunities, and position New Jersey as a leader in the manufacturing economy.  Subject to the limitations set forth in subsection b. of this section, the board may approve the award of tax credits to an eligible business upon application of the chief executive officer, or equivalent officer, of the eligible business and following the payment of fees.
 
	b.	The value of all tax credits approved by the authority for eligible businesses shall be subject to the limitations set forth in section 98 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-362).
 
L.2025, c.123, s.4.

34:1B-407  Tax credit eligibility, Next New Jersey Manufacturing Program.
	5. a. To be eligible for tax credits under the program, a business’s chief executive officer, or equivalent officer, shall demonstrate to the authority at the time of application that:
 
	(1)	the business shall make, acquire, or lease a capital investment at the qualified business facility not less than the applicable amount set forth in subsection b. of this section;
 
	(2)	the business shall create new full-time jobs in the State in an amount not less than the applicable number set forth in subsection c. of this section;
 
	(3)	the median salary of the full-time jobs at the qualified business facility by the business shall be not less than 120 percent of the median salary for manufacturing employees in the county in which the project is located;
 
	(4)	the business shall be primarily engaged in the activities of a manufacturer or a clean energy manufacturer at the qualified business facility;
 
	(5)	the business shall enter into a collaborative relationship, evidenced by the provision of opportunities for workforce hiring, training, apprenticeship, or other measures determined appropriate by the authority, with New Jersey public or private colleges or universities, public or private high schools, or workforce development organizations, or any combination thereof;
 
	(6)	the qualified business facility shall be in compliance with minimum environmental and sustainability standards;
 
	(7)	the project shall comply with the authority's affirmative action requirements, adopted pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1979, c.303 (C.34:1B-5.4); and
 
	(8)	each worker employed to perform construction work or building services work at the qualified business facility shall be paid not less than the prevailing wage rate for the worker's craft or trade, as determined by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.).
 
	b.	To be eligible under the program, the minimum capital investment at the qualified business facility shall be $10,000,000.
 
	c.	To be eligible under the program, the minimum number of new full-time jobs in the State shall be 20 new full-time jobs.
 
	d.	The chief executive officer of the business, or an equivalent officer, shall certify that all factual representations made by the business to the authority pursuant to subsection a. of this section are true under the penalty of perjury.
 
	e.	A business shall not be awarded a tax credit under the program if the business has received a tax credit under the “Business Retention and Relocation Assistance Act,” P.L.1996, c.25 (C.34:1B-112 et seq.), “Business Employment Incentive Program Act,” P.L.1996, c.26 (C.34:1B-124 et al.), section 6 of P.L.2010, c.57 (C.34:1B-209.4), “Grow New Jersey Assistance Act,” P.L.2011, c.149 (C.34:1B-242 et al.), “Emerge Program Act,” sections 68 through 81 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-336 et al.), section 4 of P.L.2023, c.125 (C.34:1B-139.4), or the “Next New Jersey Program Act,” P.L.2024, c.49 (C.34:1B-394 et seq.), relating to the same capital investment and employees that qualify the business for a tax credit under the program.
 
	f.	An eligible business may submit an application to the authority in accordance with the provisions of section 6 of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-408) on or after the effective date of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-403 et al.) but prior to March 1, 2029.
 
	g.	Beginning on the date that the authority begins accepting applications in accordance with section 6 of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-408) and continuing for two years thereafter, $100,000,000 of the tax credits made available to the program pursuant to subparagraph (l) of paragraph (1) of subsection b. of section 98 of P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-362) shall be reserved exclusively for eligible businesses that are clean energy product manufacturers.  If during that period, the authority awards less than $100,000,000 in tax credits to eligible businesses that are clean energy product manufacturers, the uncommitted portion shall be available to be deployed by the authority to any eligible business beginning in the third year next following the date that the authority begins accepting applications in accordance with section 6 of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-408).
 
L.2025, c.123, s.5.

34:1B-408  Tax credit application form, requirements, Next New Jersey Manufacturing Program.
	6. a. A business that meets the eligibility criteria in section 5 of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-407) and is seeking tax credits for a project under the program shall submit an application to the authority in a form and manner prescribed by the authority.
 
	b.	Before the board may consider an eligible business's application for tax credits, the authority shall confirm with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of the Treasury whether the eligible business is in substantial good standing with the respective department, or, if necessary, has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan for the eligible business.  The eligible business shall certify that the contractors or subcontractors that will perform work at the qualified business facility:  are registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); have not been debarred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in the State; and possess a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  The authority may also contract with an independent third party to perform a background check on the eligible business.
 
	c.	An eligible business shall pay to the authority the full amount of the direct costs of an analysis of the eligible business's application for a tax credit, which analysis shall be conducted by a third party retained by the authority if the authority deems such retention to be necessary.  
 
	d.	If, at any time during the eligibility period, the authority determines that the eligible business made a material misrepresentation on the eligible business's application, the eligible business shall forfeit all tax credits awarded under the program, which forfeiture shall be in addition to any other criminal or civil penalties for which the business and the certifying officer may be liable.
 
	e.	If circumstances require an eligible business to amend its application to the authority, then the chief executive officer of the eligible business, or an equivalent officer, shall certify to the authority that the information provided in its amended application is true under the penalty of perjury.
 
	f.	Nothing shall preclude a business from applying for tax credits under the program for more than one project through one or more applications.
 
L.2025, c.123, s.6.

34:1B-409  Site plan approval, committed financing, site control requirements, Next New Jersey Manufacturing Program.
	7. a. Following board approval of an application submitted pursuant to section 6 of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-408), within a time period established by the authority, but before the authority and an eligible business execute a project agreement pursuant to this section, the eligible business shall demonstrate, in a form and manner prescribed by the authority, that it has obtained site plan approval and has committed financing for, and established site control of, the qualified business facility.  The chief executive officer of the business, or an equivalent officer, shall certify that all factual representations made by the business to the authority pursuant to this subsection are true under the penalty of perjury.
 
	b.	Following approval by the board and compliance with the provisions of subsection a. of this section, but before the issuance of tax credits, the authority shall require an eligible business to enter into a project agreement.  The terms of the project agreement shall be consistent with the eligibility requirements set forth in section 5 of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-407) and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
 
	(1)	a detailed description of the proposed project that will result in job creation and the number of new full-time jobs that are approved for tax credits;
 
	(2)	any personnel information that will enable the authority to administer the program;
 
	(3)	a requirement that the eligible business shall maintain the project at a location in New Jersey for the commitment period and a provision that if the eligible business does not maintain the project at a location in New Jersey for the commitment period, the authority may recapture all or part of any tax credits awarded, at its discretion;
 
	(4)	a requirement that the eligible business shall maintain the number of new full-time jobs, and the salaries thereof, for which the eligible business certified at the commencement of the eligibility period; a requirement that if, in any tax period, the number of new employees in eligible positions falls below 80 percent of the number of new employees in eligible positions specified in the project agreement or the program minimum, the business shall forfeit any tax credits for which it would otherwise be eligible under the program for that tax period, and in any subsequent period until such time as the applicant restores the threshold minimum; and a provision to permit the authority to proportionally reduce the tax credit award for the business in any tax period in which the number of new full-time jobs, or the salaries thereof, is reduced below the new full-time jobs for which the business certified at the commencement of the eligibility period, as required pursuant to subsection f. of section 8 of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-410);
 
	(5)	a method for the eligible business to certify that it has met the capital investment and employment requirements of the program, as set forth in subsections b. and c. of section 5 of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-407), and to report annually to the authority the number of new full-time jobs, and the salaries thereof, for which the tax credits are to be allowed;
 
	(6) representations that the eligible business is in substantial good standing with the Department of Environmental Protection, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, and the Department of the Treasury, or has entered into an agreement with the departments that includes a practical corrective action plan, and that the project complies with all applicable laws and, specifically, that the project does not violate any environmental law;
 
	(7) a provision permitting the authority to require an audit of the payroll records of the eligible business to be conducted from time to time, as the authority deems necessary;
 
	(8) (a) a provision requiring the eligible business to submit an annual report to the chief executive officer of the authority, in a form and manner prescribed by the authority, for the purpose of allowing the authority to confirm that the eligible business is in substantial good standing with the Department of Environmental Protection, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, and the Department of the Treasury or has entered into an agreement with the respective department that includes a practical corrective action plan; 
 
	(b) a requirement that at certification of project completion, the eligible business shall confirm that each contractor or subcontractor performing work at the qualified business facility: is registered as required by "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.); has not been debarred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in or bidding on Public Works Contracts in the State; and possesses a tax clearance certificate issued by the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury.  
 
	(c) a provision that if the eligible business fails to submit any report required under this paragraph, if the Department of Environmental Protection, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, or the Department of the Treasury advises that the eligible business is neither in substantial good standing nor has entered into a practical corrective action plan, or if the eligible business fails to confirm that each contractor or subcontractor is in compliance with this paragraph, then the eligible business shall forfeit the issuance of tax credits, pending resolution of the underlying violations or other issues;
 
	(9) a requirement for the eligible business to submit evidence, as required by the authority, that it has entered into and maintained a collaborative relationship with a New Jersey public or private college or university, public or private high school, or workforce development organization, or any combination thereof;
 
	(10) a provision permitting the authority to amend the project agreement; and
 
	(11) a provision establishing the conditions under which the authority, the eligible business, or both may terminate the agreement.
 
	c. (1) The authority may recapture all or part of a tax credit awarded if an eligible business does not remain in compliance with the requirements of a project agreement for the duration of the commitment period.  A recapture of tax credits initiated pursuant to this subsection may include interest on the recapture amount, at a rate equal to the statutory rate for corporate business or insurance premiums tax deficiencies, plus any statutory penalties, and all costs incurred by the authority and the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury in connection with the pursuit of the recapture, including, but not limited to, counsel fees, court costs, and other costs of collection.  Failure of the eligible business to meet any program criteria shall constitute a default and shall result in the recapture of all or part of the tax credit awarded.
 
	(2) If all or part of a tax credit sold or assigned pursuant to section 9 of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-411) is subject to recapture, then the authority shall pursue recapture from the eligible business and not from the purchaser or assignee of the tax credit transfer certificate.  The purchaser or assignee of a tax credit transfer certificate shall be subject to any limitations and conditions that apply to the use of the tax credits by the eligible business.
 
	(3) Any funds recaptured pursuant to this subsection, including penalties and interest, shall be deposited into the General Fund.
 
	d.	A business may include an affiliate for any period, provided that the business provides a valid tax clearance certificate for the affiliate and a verification of the nature of the affiliate relationship during the relevant period and provided further that the affiliate provides acceptable responses to the authority’s legal disclosures inquiries, as determined by the authority.  A formal modification of the authority’s approval of the project agreement shall not be necessary to add or remove an affiliate after approval or execution of the project agreement.
 
	e.	A business may change its name filed with the authority by providing a copy of the filed amendment to the certificate of incorporation or formation, as the case may be, of the business and a valid tax clearance certificate with the business’s new name.  A formal modification of the authority’s approval shall not be necessary to change a business’s name after approval or execution of the project agreement. 
 
L.2025, c.123, s.7.

34:1B-410  Certifications evidencing capital investment, employment requirements were met, Next New Jersey Manufacturing Program.
	8. a. Upon completion of the capital investment and employment requirements of the program, an eligible business shall submit certifications to the authority, in a form and manner prescribed by the authority, evidencing that the eligible business has satisfied the conditions relating to the capital investment and employment requirements of the project agreement, and including such supporting evidence as the authority deems necessary.  The chief executive officer of the business, or an equivalent officer, shall certify that all factual representations made by the business to the authority pursuant to this subsection are true under the penalty of perjury.
 
	b. (1) In accordance with the project agreement, beginning upon the receipt of occupancy permits for any portion of the project, or upon any other event evidencing project completion as set forth in the project agreement, an eligible business shall be allowed a tax credit in an amount determined pursuant to this subsection.  No more than the amount of tax credits equal to the total credit amount awarded under the program divided by the duration of the eligibility period in years may be taken in any tax period.
 
	(2)	Not including any bonus awarded pursuant to paragraph (3) of this subsection, the amount of the tax credit awarded under the program to an eligible business shall be the lesser of:
 
	(a)	the product of 0.1 percent of the eligible business’s total capital investment, multiplied by the number of new full-time jobs;
 
	(b)	25 percent of the eligible business’s total capital investment; or
 
	(c)	$150,000,000.
 
	(3)	The authority may in its discretion establish one or more bonuses, not to exceed a total of five percent of the award approved by the authority pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection, for which an eligible business may apply in a form and manner prescribed by the authority.  Criteria related to the eligibility for, and approval of, such bonuses shall be established in rules and regulations adopted in accordance with section 10 of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-412), and may include, but shall not limited to, the following: the eligible business’s qualified business facility is located in an opportunity zone eligible census tract pursuant to 26 U.S.C. s.1400Z-1; the eligible business is certified as part of the Business Certification Program administered by the Division of Revenue and Enterprise Services in the Department of the Treasury; the eligible business has at least one active and executed collective bargaining agreement; the eligible business operates in a targeted industry or part of the supply chain for a targeted industry; and any other criteria as determined by the authority.
 
	c. (1) Commencing in the year in which the grant of tax credits is issued and for the remainder of the commitment period, an eligible business that is awarded tax credits under the program shall submit an annual report, no later than the date indicated in the project agreement, indicating whether the eligible business continues to maintain the number of new full-time jobs, and the salaries thereof, specified in the project agreement.  As part of the annual report, an eligible business shall provide to the authority a copy of its applicable New Jersey tax return and the quarterly wage report required under R.S.43:21-14 submitted to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, together with an annual payroll report showing the new full-time jobs that were created in accordance with the project agreement and the new full-time jobs created during each subsequent year of the commitment period.  In the annual report, an eligible business shall explain the reason, if applicable, for any discrepancies between the annual payroll report submitted by the eligible business and the quarterly wage report.  The failure of an eligible business to submit the information required pursuant to this paragraph shall result in the forfeiture of the award for that year.  The chief executive officer of the eligible business, or an equivalent officer, shall certify that the information provided pursuant to this paragraph is true under the penalty of perjury.  Claims, records, or statements submitted by an eligible business to the authority in order to receive tax credits shall not be considered claims, records, or statements made in connection with State tax laws.
 
	(2)	Upon receipt and review of each report submitted during the eligibility period, the authority shall provide to the eligible business and the director a certificate of compliance indicating the amount of tax credits that the eligible business may apply against its tax liability.  The authority shall pro rate the tax credit for the first and last years of the eligibility period based on the number of full months the project was certified in the year the eligible business first certifies.
 
	d. (1) Upon receipt by the director of the certificate of compliance, the director shall allow the eligible business a tax credit.  Notwithstanding the provisions of any law or regulation to the contrary, the credit amount may first be taken by the tax certificate holder for the tax period for which it was issued, for the tax period in which it was issued, or in any tax period during the time the business is required to maintain the project at a location in New Jersey, as set forth in the incentive agreement.  The tax certificate holder may transfer the tax credit amount on or after the date of issuance for use by the transferee in the tax period for which it was issued, for the tax period in which it was issued, or in any of the next three successive tax periods.  The tax certificate holder or transferee may first use the credit against tax liabilities in the tax period in which it was issued or in a succeeding tax period, as authorized in this subsection, without the need for amending the tax return for the tax period for which the credit was issued, subject to the provisions of this section.  The tax certificate holder or transferee may carry forward an unused credit resulting from the limitations of paragraph (3) of this subsection, if necessary, for use in any of the next 10 successive tax periods, which credit shall expire thereafter.
 
	(2)	The amount of credit allowed may be applied against the tax liability otherwise due pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and C.54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5.
 
	(3)	The director shall prescribe the order of priority of the application of the credit allowed under this section and any other credits allowed by law against the tax imposed under section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5).  The amount of a credit applied under this section against the tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5) for a privilege period, together with any other credits allowed by law, shall not reduce the tax liability to an amount less than the statutory minimum provided in subsection (e) of section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5).
 
	e.	An eligible business shall forfeit the credit amount for any tax period for which the eligible business's documentation remains uncertified as of the date for certification indicated in the project agreement, although credit amounts for the remainder of the years of the eligibility period shall remain available to the eligible business.
 
	f.	If, in any tax period, the number of new employees in eligible positions, or the salaries thereof, drops below 80 percent of the number of new employees in eligible positions specified in the project agreement or the amount required as a condition of program eligibility pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-406), whichever is greater, then the eligible business shall forfeit all tax credits allowed for that tax period and each subsequent tax period, until the first tax period in which the authority has reviewed and approved documentation, submitted by the eligible business, demonstrating that the number of new employees in eligible positions, or the salaries thereof, is not less than 80 percent of the number specified in the project agreement or the amount required as a condition of program eligibility pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-406), whichever is greater.
 
L.2025, c.123, s.8.

34:1B-411  Tax credit transfer certificate application, substitution, limitations.
	9. a. Within three years of the tax period in which the director first allows the eligible business a tax credit, an eligible business may apply to the director and the chief executive officer of the authority for a tax credit transfer certificate in lieu of the eligible business being allowed any amount of the tax credit against the State tax liability of the eligible business.  The tax credit transfer certificate, upon receipt thereof by the eligible business from the director and the chief executive officer of the authority, may be sold or assigned, in an amount not less than $25,000, within three years of the tax period in which the eligible business receives the tax credit transfer certificate from the director, to another person that may have a tax liability pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5), sections 2 and 3 of P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-2 and 54:18A-3), section 1 of P.L.1950, c.231 (C.17:32-15), or N.J.S.17B:23-5.  The tax credit transfer certificate provided to the eligible business shall include a statement waiving the eligible business’s right to claim the tax credit that the eligible business has elected to sell or assign.
 
	b.	The eligible business shall not sell or assign a tax credit transfer certificate allowed under this section for consideration received by the eligible business of less than 85 percent of the transferred credit amount before considering any further discounting to present value which shall be permitted.  The tax credit transfer certificate issued to the eligible business by the director shall be subject to any limitations and conditions imposed on the application of State tax credits pursuant to P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-403 et al.) and any other terms and conditions that the director may prescribe.
 
	c.	A purchaser or assignee of a tax credit transfer certificate pursuant to this section shall not make any subsequent transfers, assignments, or sales of the tax credit transfer certificate.
 
	d.	The authority shall publish on its Internet website the following information concerning each tax credit transfer certificate approved by the authority and the director pursuant to this section:
 
	(1)	the name of the  transferor;
 
	(2)	the name of the transferee;
 
	(3)	the value of the tax credit transfer certificate;
 
	(4)	the State tax against which the transferee may apply the tax credit; and
 
	(5)	the consideration received by the  transferor.
 
L.2025, c.123, s.9.

34:1B-412  Rules, regulations.
	10.	Notwithstanding the provisions of the “Administrative Procedure Act,” P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) to the contrary, the chief executive officer of the authority shall adopt, immediately, upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, such rules and regulations as the chief executive officer deems necessary to implement the provisions of P.L.2025, c.123 (C.34:1B-403 et al.), which rules and regulations shall be effective for a period not to exceed 365 days after the date of the filing.  Before the expiration of the rules and regulations, the chief executive officer shall amend, adopt, or readopt the rules and regulations in accordance with the requirements of the “Administrative Procedure Act,” P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
L.2025, c.123, s.10.

34:2-1.  Definitions
    As used in this chapter:

     "Bakery"  includes all buildings, rooms or places where biscuits, pies, bread, crackers, cakes and confectionery are made or manufactured for sale.

     "Custodian"  means any person, organization or society having the legal custody of a child.

     "Laundry"  means any place which laundry work is regularly carried on.

      "Manufacturing establishment"  means any place where articles for use or consumption are regularly made.

      "Mercantile establishment"  means any place where goods, wares, or merchandise are offered for sale.

      "Restaurant"  means any place where meals or refreshments, both food and drink, are served to the public.

34:2-21.1.   Definitions.
	1.  (a) (Deleted by amendment, P.L.2022, c.63.)
 
	(b) (Deleted by amendment, P.L.2022, c.63.)
 
	(c) (Deleted by amendment, P.L.2022, c.63.)
 
	(d) "School district" means any geographical area having authority over the public schools within that area.
 
	(e) "Agriculture" includes farming in all its branches and among other things includes the cultivation and tillage of the soil, dairying, the production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any agricultural or horticultural commodities (including commodities defined as agricultural commodities in subsection (g) of section 15 of the Agricultural Marketing Act, 46 Stat. 11 (12 U.S.C. s. 141 et seq.), as amended); the planting, transplanting, and care of trees, shrubs, and plants; the raising of livestock, bees, fur-bearing animals, or poultry; and any practices (including any forestry or lumbering operations) performed by a farmer or on a farm as an incident to or in conjunction with such farming operations, including preparation for market and delivery to storage, to market, or to carriers for transportation to market, provided that such practices shall be performed in connection with the handling of agricultural or horticultural commodities the major portion of which have been produced upon the premises of an owning or leasing employer.
 
	(f) "Newspaper carrier" means any minor between 12 and 18 years of age who engages in the occupation of delivering, soliciting, selling, and collecting for newspapers outside of school hours on residential routes.
 
	(g) "Restaurant" means any establishment or business primarily engaged in the preparation and serving of meals or refreshments, both food and drink, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following: dining establishments, catering establishments, industrial caterers, and drive-in restaurants.
 
	(h) "Theatrical production" means and includes stage, motion picture, and television performances and rehearsals therefor.
 
	(i) "Seasonal amusement" means any exclusively recreational or amusement establishment or business which does not operate more than seven months in any calendar year or which has received during any consecutive six months of the preceding calendar year average receipts equal to or less than 33 1/3% percent of its average receipts for the other six months of that year.  "Seasonal amusement" includes, but is not limited to, amusement rides and amusement device ticket sales, and operations of games.  However, "seasonal amusement" does not include retail, eating or drinking concessions, camps, beach and swimming facilities, movie theatres, theatrical productions, athletic events, professional entertainment, pool and billiard parlors, circuses and outdoor shows, sport activities or centers, country club athletic facilities, bowling alleys, race tracks, and like facilities which are not part of a diversified amusement enterprise.
 
	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	"Department" means the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	"Caregiver" means a person over 18 years of age who is the biological parent, adoptive parent, foster parent, resource family parent, step-parent, parent-in-law, or legal guardian, having a "parent-child relationship" with a child as defined by law, or having sole or joint legal or physical custody, care, guardianship, or visitation with a child, or who became the parent of the child pursuant to a valid written agreement between the parent and a gestational carrier.
 
	“Family member” means a person related by blood or marriage, including civil unions and domestic partnerships, or whose close relationship with each other is considered equivalent to a family relationship by the individuals.
 
	“Online platform” means any public-facing website, web application, or digital application, including a mobile application.  “Online platform” includes a social network, advertising network, mobile operating system, search engine, email service, and Internet access service.
 
	“Name” means the actual or assumed name, or nickname, of a living individual that is intended to identify that individual.
 
	“Recreational purposes” means an activity performed not for profit and for enjoyment or leisure, outside of work or business.
 
	“Vlog” means video content shared on an online platform in exchange for compensation.
 
	“Vlogger” means a person who creates video content for a business or other non-recreational purpose with the intent to generate income that employs a minor in exchange for compensation, that is performed in the State, and includes any proprietorship, partnership, company, or other corporate entity assuming the name or identity of a particular caregiver or family member for the purposes of that content creation.  “Vlogger” does not include any person under the age of 18 who produces that person’s own vlogs for solely recreational purposes. 

   L. 1940, c. 153, s. 1; amended by L. 1964, c. 288, s. 1; 1965, c. 3, s. 1; 1968, c. 61, s. 1; 1972, c. 196; 1981, c. 331, s. 1; 1987, c. 125, s. 1; 2022, c.63, s.1; 2025, c.355, s.1.

34:2-21.1a  Database created, maintained, employment of minors; employer registration, required; rules, regulations.
	6. a. The department shall create and maintain a database for the employment of minors that is accessible by the public and that displays each employer that is required to register under P.L.2022, c.63 (C.34:2-21.1a et al.).
 
	b.	The database shall include the name and email address of each employer registered under P.L.2022, c.63 (C.34:2-21.1a et al.).
 
	c.	Any minor under the age of 18 years who desires to work, including but not limited to work as a news carrier or work in agriculture, shall complete a one-time registration on the database, but all information pertaining to the minor shall be confidential and shall not be accessible by the public.  If the minor desires to work for a different employer or for an employer in addition to the employer for which the minor first registered, the minor shall update the minor's registration.  The minor shall be required to submit documentation, in the form and manner prescribed by the department, sufficient to adequately identify the minor, including but not limited to the social security number of the minor, and confirm the age of the minor, as well as identify the caregiver of the minor.  The minor shall provide contact information, including email, if available, for the minor's caregiver, as appropriate.  The registration shall provide any physical limitations of which employers should be aware.  Upon submission of documentation sufficient to meet the requirements of P.L.2022, c.63 (C.34:2-21.1a et al.), and the requirements of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.), the department shall maintain an employment certificate for the minor granting authorization for the minor to work in the occupation or field for which the minor has expressed an interest and provided documentation.  Except as provided by subsection e. of this section, a minor shall not commence work with an employer unless that employer has received confirmation from the department that the minor has authorization to work.
 
	d.	Each employer that hires, employs, or permits any minor under the age of 18 to work in a gainful occupation as permitted by P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.), shall register with the department, in the form and manner prescribed by the department, the following information:
 
	(1)	The name of the employer;
 
	(2)	The email address of the employer;
 
	(3)	Any location of the employer's business operations, including any location at which a minor will be working;
 
	(4)	The number and names of minors whom the employer has hired, employed, or permitted to work in a gainful occupation, or for seasonal employment, whom the employer expects to hire; and
 
	(5)	A certified statement from the employer that the employer is employing minors in only those positions permitted by law to ensure the health, safety and well-being of minors.
 
	An employer shall be required to update the employer's registration as to any minor employee who is changing a position from the position for which the minor employee was originally hired to perform to a new position.
 
	e.	Within three days of an employer's or a minor's registration, the department shall cross-check names submitted by employers with minors who are registered on the database and, upon authorization by the minor's caregiver in accordance with subsection f. of this section, send an electronic confirmation to employers of the minor's authorization to work.  If an employer does not receive confirmation from the department within one week of the employer's submission, employment of the minor may commence unless and until the employer receives notification from the department that the minor has not received authorization to work.
 
	f.	Notwithstanding the provisions of any law to the contrary, and except as provided in this subsection, the department shall not approve a minor's registration to work pursuant to subsection c. of this section without a caregiver's authorization for the minor to work as specified by the minor in the minor's registration.  The department shall provide notification to a caregiver of a minor who has registered with the database for the caregiver to provide an authorization or rejection of the minor's registration to work.  The department shall send the notice by email, to the extent possible, and by certified mail if email is not available, regarding this authorization or rejection within three days of the minor's registration.  The caregiver shall submit an authorization or rejection electronically through the registration system established pursuant to this section.  If a caregiver does not submit an authorization or rejection within two weeks of the department's notification, then the department shall approve a minor's registration for work unless and until a caregiver submits a rejection through the registration system.  If a minor updates the minor's registration to indicate a change in or addition of an employer, the department shall notify the caregiver by email, to the extent possible, and by certified mail if email is not available, of the change in registration.  The caregiver shall submit an updated authorization or rejection electronically through the registration system established pursuant to this section.  If a caregiver does not submit an authorization or rejection of the change within two weeks of the department's notification, then the department shall approve the minor's updated registration for work unless and until a caregiver submits a rejection through the registration system.
 
	g.	The Employment of Minors Advisory Council is established to consult with and provide recommendations to the department for the creation and administration of the database.  The council shall consist of five members:
 
	(1) One representative from the Department of Labor and Workforce Development to be appointed by the Governor;
 
	(2) One representative from the Department of Education to be appointed by the Governor;
 
	(3) Two members who are employers or who represent the interest of employers that employ a significant number of minors, one who shall be appointed by the Senate President and one who shall be appointed by the Speaker of the General Assembly; and
 
	(4) One public member to represent the interests of caregivers of minors, to be appointed by the Senate President and the Speaker of the General Assembly.
 
	Any vacancies occurring in the membership shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments.  The council shall hold at least two meetings per year to review the implementation and operations of the database.
 
	h.	The department, in consultation with the Employment of Minors Advisory Council and the Department of Education, shall promulgate rules and regulations necessary for the implementation of this act, P.L.2022, c.63 (C.34:2-21.1a et al.), including but not limited to developing a schedule for the registration of employers and minors in accordance with this act, P.L.2022, c.63 (C.34:2-21.1a et al.).

	L.2022, c.63, s.6.

34:2-21.2.  Minors under 16 not to be employed;  exceptions; nonresidents
	2.	No minor under 16 years of age shall be employed, permitted, or suffered to work in, about, or in connection with any gainful occupation at any time; provided, that minors between 14 and 16 years of age may be employed, permitted or suffered to work outside school hours and during school vacations but not in or for a factory or in any occupation otherwise prohibited by law or by order or regulation made in pursuance of law; and provided, further, that minors under 16 years of age may engage in professional employment in theatrical productions upon the obtaining of a permit therefor and may engage outside school hours and during school vacations in agricultural pursuits or in street trades and as newspaperboys as defined in this act, in accordance with the provisions of section 15 of this act.  Minors may also engage in employment in domestic service performed outside of school hours or during school vacations, in a residence other than the minor's own home.  Nothing in this act shall be construed to apply to the work of a minor engaged in domestic service or agricultural pursuits performed outside of school hours or during school vacations in connection with the minor's own home and directly for his parents or legal guardian.
 
	Except as to the employment of a minor for whom a theatrical employment permit has been issued, no minor under 16 years of age not a resident of this State shall be employed, permitted or suffered to work in any occupation or service whatsoever at any time during which the law of the state of his residence required his attendance at school, or at any time during the hours when the public schools in the district in which employment in such occupation or services may be available are in session.

     L.1940, c. 153, p. 332, s. 2.  Amended by L.1956, c. 127, p. 530, s. 1; L.1962, c. 91, s. 9;  L.1964, c. 288, s. 2;  L.1983, c. 196, s. 1, eff. May 27, 1983; amended 2022, c.63, s.2.

34:2-21.3.  Limitations on minors' working hours.
	3. a. Except as provided in section 15 of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.15) and except for domestic service or messengers employed by communications companies subject to the supervision and control of the Federal Communications Commission, no minor under 18 years of age shall be employed, permitted, or suffered to work in, about, or in connection with any gainful occupation more than six consecutive days in any one week, or more than 40 hours in any one week, or more than eight hours in any one day, nor shall any minor under 16 years of age be so employed, permitted, or suffered to work before 7 a.m. or after 7 p.m. of any day, except that during the school year, a minor who is at least 14 or 15 years of age may work during non-school hours, for no more than three hours on a school day and no more than 18 hours in a school week, and up to eight hours on a non-school day during a school week, and except a minor who is 14 or 15 years of age may work in a restaurant, supermarket or other retail establishment, or in any occupation not prohibited by the provisions of this act, P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.) or by regulations promulgated by the commissioner pursuant to this act, P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.), up to 40 hours in a week during the period beginning on the last day of a minor's school year and ending on Labor Day of each year until 9 p.m. of any day, and except a minor who is 14 or 15 years of age may be employed as a little league umpire for little leagues chartered by Little League Baseball, Incorporated, until 9 p.m. of any day; and except a minor who is 14 or 15 years of age may be employed as a professional athlete by a national sports association, league, or team until 11:30 p.m. of any day and following 11:30 p.m. of any day in the event that employment is a continuation of a workday which begins before 11:30 p.m. but ends later due to return travel or due to a match or game time delay, with a special written permit from the minor's parents or legal guardian stating the hours that the minor is permitted to work; nor shall any minor between 16 and 18 years of age be so employed, permitted, or suffered to work before 6 a.m. or after 11 p.m. of any day; provided that minors between 16 and 18 years of age may be employed after 11 p.m. during any regular vacation season, and on days which do not precede a regularly scheduled school day; provided that minors between 16 and 18 years of age may be employed in a seasonal amusement or restaurant occupation after 11 p.m. and following 12:01 a.m. of the next day, if that employment is a continuation of a workday which began before 11 p.m., either during any regular school vacation season, or on workdays which do not begin on a day which precedes a regularly scheduled school day, except that in no case shall minors between 16 and 18 years of age be employed after 3 a.m. or before 6 a.m. on a day which precedes a regularly scheduled school day; provided, further, that minors may be employed in a concert or a theatrical performance up to 11:30 p.m.; provided, further, that minors between 16 and 18 years of age may serve at an election pursuant to R.S.19:6-2, between the hours of 5:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on a day that the election is held; and provided, further, that minors not less than 16 years of age and who are attending school may be employed as pinsetters, lane attendants, or busboys in public bowling alleys up to 11:30 p.m.; and provided, further, that minors between 16 and 18 years of age may not be employed after 10 p.m. during the regular school vacation seasons in or for a factory or in any occupation otherwise prohibited by law or by order or regulation made in pursuance of law.  The hours of work of minors under 16 employed outside school hours shall not exceed three hours in any one day when school is in session and shall not exceed in any one week when school is in session the maximum number of hours permitted for that period under the federal "Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938," 29 U.S.C.s.201 et seq., and regulations promulgated pursuant to that federal act.
 
	b.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection a. of this section, a minor between 16 and 18 years of age may work up to 50 hours in one week and up to 10 hours in one day during the period beginning on the last day of the minor's school year and ending on Labor Day.  This subsection shall take effect immediately upon the date of enactment.
 
	c.	This section is not applicable to the employment of a minor between 16 and 18 years of age during the months of June, July, August or September by a summer resident camp, conference or retreat operated by a nonprofit or religious corporation or association, unless the employment is primarily general maintenance work or food service activities.

	L.1940,c.153,s.3; amended 1941, c.139, s.1; 1968, c.61, s.2; 1979, c.228; 1980, c.22; 1981, c.331, s.2; 1984, c.68; 1988, c.112, s.1; 1989, c.121, s.1; 1998, c.138; amended 2022, c.63, s.3; 2022, c.66; 2024, c.104; 2025, c.163.

34:2-21.4.  Lunch period for minors under 18
 	4.	No minor under eighteen years of age shall be employed or permitted to work for more than six hours continuously without an interval of at least thirty minutes for a lunch period, and no period of less than thirty minutes shall be deemed to interrupt a continuous period of work.

     L.1940, c. 153, p. 334, s. 4; amended 2022, c.63, s.4.

34:2-21.5.  Posting of law, list of prohibited occupations and schedule of hours of labor;  permitting minors to begin later or stop earlier than time stated in schedule
    Every employer shall post and keep conspicuously posted in the establishment  wherein any minor under 18 is employed, permitted, or suffered to work a  printed abstract of this act and a list of the occupations prohibited to such  minors, to be furnished by the Department of Labor, and a schedule of hours of  labor which shall contain the name of each minor under 18 the maximum number of  hours he shall be required or permitted to work during each day of the week,  the total hours per week, the time of commencing and stopping work each day,  and the time for the beginning and ending of the daily meal period.  An  employer may permit such minor to begin work after the time for beginning, and  stop before the time for ending work stated in the schedule;  but he shall not  otherwise employ or permit him to work except as stated in the schedule.  This  schedule shall be on a form provided by the Department of Labor and shall  remain the property of that department. Nothing in this section shall apply to  the employment of minors in agricultural pursuits or in domestic service in private homes, or as newspaperboys as provided in this act.

     L.1940, c. 153, p. 334, s. 5.  Amended by L.1964, c. 288, s. 3.

34:2-21.6.  Record of employment of minors under 19
    Every employer shall keep a record, in a form approved by the Department of  Labor, which shall state the name, date of birth and address of each person  under 19 years of age employed, the number of hours worked by said person on  each day of the week, the hours of beginning and ending such work, the hours of  beginning and ending meal periods, the amount of wages paid, and such other  information as the department shall by regulation require.  Such record shall  be kept on file for at least 1 year after the entry of the record and shall be  open to the inspection of the Department of Labor, of attendance officers and  of police officers.  Nothing in this section shall apply to the employment of  minors in agricultural pursuits, or in domestic service in private homes, or as  newspaperboys as provided in this act.

     L.1940, c. 153, p. 334, s. 6.  Amended by L.1964, c. 288, s. 4.

34:2-21.15.  Street trade;  agricultural pursuits;  ages when permitted; special permits;  newspaper carriers
	15.	Except as hereinafter provided as to newspaper carriers, no minor under 14 years of age may engage in any street trade, which term, for the purpose of this section shall include the selling, offering for sale, soliciting for, collecting for, displaying, or distributing any articles, goods, merchandise, commercial service, posters, circulars, newspapers or magazines or in blacking shoes on any street or other public place or from house to house.  No minor under 12 years of age may be employed in agricultural pursuits.
 
	Whenever a minor has graduated from vocational school, approved by the Commissioner of Education and is 17 years of age, the minor's diploma or certified copy thereof and an employment certificate provided by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development shall be deemed authorization to engage in those pursuits in which the minor majored in said vocational school during those hours permitted for persons 18 years of age and over.
 
	Except as hereinafter provided as to newspaper carriers, whenever a minor under 16 years of age desires to work during such times as the schools of the district in which the minor resides are not in session in any street trade or in agricultural pursuits, the minor may register with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development an application for authorization to work.  Such registration shall show the exact character of the work the minor is to do, and the hours and wages and special conditions under which said work is to be performed.
 
	If upon investigation it is found that the facts set forth in the application are true and that the work will not interfere with the minor's health or standing in school, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development shall issue authorization allowing the minor to work at such times as the public schools in the district are not in session, but such work except in agricultural pursuits, and as newspaper carriers, to be otherwise subject to the maximum hours of labor provisions set for minors under 16 years of age in section 3 of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.3); provided, that nothing in P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.) shall prevent newspaper carriers as defined in P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.), between 11 and 14 years of age, from delivering, soliciting, selling and collecting for newspapers on routes in residential neighborhoods between the hours of 6:00 o'clock in the morning and 7:00 o'clock in the evening of any day; and newspaper carriers 14 years of age and older from delivering, soliciting, selling and collecting for newspapers on routes in residential neighborhoods between the hours of 5:30 o'clock in the morning and 8:00 o'clock in the evening of any day; and provided further that no newspaper carrier under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to engage in such occupation beyond the period of time wherein the combined hours devoted to said occupation as a newspaper carrier and the hours in school shall exceed a total of 40 hours per week and not more than 8 hours in any 1 day; and provided, further, that minors engaged in agricultural pursuits may be employed no more than 10 hours per day.
 
	Such authorization shall show the name, address, and date of birth of the minor for whom it is issued, the kind of proof of age submitted, the nature of the occupation in which the minor is to engage, and such other information as the Department of Labor and Workforce Development may require.
 
	Any authorization for work in agriculture shall be issued and active until the minor is 18 years of age.
 
	Upon application by the minor who desires to work as a newspaper carrier as defined in P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.), who is between the ages of 11 and 18 years of age, to the publisher of any newspaper in this State and upon receiving authorization from the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, such publisher may employ such newspaper carrier to deliver, solicit, sell and collect for newspapers outside of the newspaper carrier's school hours on residential routes, and on Sundays and during school vacations.
 
	The authorization shall show the name, address and date of birth of the newspaper carrier for whom it is issued, and such other information as the Department of Labor and Workforce Development may require.
 
	The authorization shall remain in full force and effect unless and until the minor is 18 years of age.
 
	The publisher shall keep a record of the name, address and birth date of each newspaper carrier who is a minor.  Such records shall be kept on file by said publisher for a period of two years after the newspaper carrier has ceased delivering newspapers published by said publisher.

     L.1940, c. 153, p. 341, s. 15.  Amended by L.1964, c. 288, s. 5;  L.1965, c. 3, s. 2;  L.1970, c. 115, s. 1, eff. June 26, 1970;  L.1980, c. 90, s. 1; L.1981, c. 490, s. 1, eff. Jan. 12, 1982; amended 2022, c.63, s.5.

34:2-21.16.  Fees or expenses not to be paid by child, parent or guardian
    No fees or expenses incurred in obtaining any certificates under this act shall be charged to or paid by any child, parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of such a child for any service had under this act.

     L.1940, c. 153, p. 343, s. 16.

34:2-21.17  Prohibited employment.
  	17.	No minor under 16 years of age shall be employed, permitted or suffered to work in, about, or in connection with power-driven machinery.  
 
	No minor under 18 years of age shall be employed, permitted or suffered to work in, about, or in connection with the following:  
 
	The manufacture or packing of paints, colors, white lead, or red lead;
 
	The handling of dangerous or poisonous acids or dyes; injurious quantities of toxic or noxious dust, gases, vapors or fumes;  
 
	Work involving exposure to benzol or any benzol compound which is volatile or which can penetrate the skin;  
 
	The manufacture, transportation or use of explosives or highly inflammable substances;  
 
	Oiling, wiping, or cleaning machinery in motion or assisting therein;
 
	Operation or helping in the operation of power-driven woodworking machinery; provided, that apprentices operating under conditions of bona fide apprenticeship may operate such machines under competent instruction and supervision;  
 
	Grinding, abrasive, polishing or buffing machines; provided, that apprentices operating under conditions of bona fide apprenticeship may grind their own tools;  
 
	Punch presses or stamping machines if the clearance between the ram and the dye or the stripper exceeds 1/4 inch;  
 
	Cutting machines having a guillotine action;
 
	Corrugating, crimping or embossing machines;
 
	Paper lace machines;
 
	Dough brakes or mixing machines in bakeries or cracker machinery;
 
	Calender rolls or mixing rolls in rubber manufacturing;
 
	Centrifugal extractors, or mangles in laundries or dry cleaning establishments;  
 
	Ore reduction works, smelters, hot rolling mills, furnaces, foundries, forging shops, or any other place in which the heating, melting, or heat treatment of metals is carried on;  
 
	Mines or quarries;
 
	Steam boilers carrying a pressure in excess of 15 pounds;
 
	Construction work of any kind, except in the construction of affordable housing as a volunteer for a nonprofit organization as provided in section 1 of P.L.1994, c.82 (C.34:2-21.17d);  
 
	Fabrication or assembly of ships;
 
	Operation or repair of elevators or other hoisting apparatus;
 
	The transportation of payrolls other than within the premises of the employer.  
 
	No minor under 18 years of age shall be employed, permitted, or suffered to work in, about, or in connection with any establishment where alcoholic liquors are distilled, rectified, compounded, brewed, manufactured, bottled, or are sold for consumption on the premises, or in a pool or billiard room; provided, however, this paragraph shall not apply to minors 16 years of age or over, employed as pinsetters, lane attendants, or busboys in public bowling alleys as provided in section 3 of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.3) or to minors employed in theatrical productions where alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises.  
 
	Minors 14 years of age or over may be employed as golf course caddies and pool attendants.  
 
	No minor under 18 years of age shall be employed, permitted, or suffered to work in any place of employment, or at any occupation hazardous or injurious to the life, health, safety, or welfare of such minor, as such occupation shall, from time to time, be determined and declared by the Commissioner of Labor to be hazardous or injurious to the life, health, safety, or welfare of such minor, after a public hearing thereon and after such notice as the commissioner may by regulation prescribe.  
 
	None of the provisions of this section regarding employment in connection with alcoholic liquors shall be construed to prevent the employment of minors 16 years of age or more in a restaurant as defined in section 1 of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1) and as provided for in section 3 of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.3), in a public bowling alley as provided in this section, or in the executive offices, maintenance departments, or pool or beach areas of a hotel, motel or guesthouse; provided, however, that no minor shall engage in the preparation, sale or serving of alcoholic beverages, nor in the preparation of photographs, nor in any dancing or theatrical exhibition or performance which is not part of a theatrical production where alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises, while so employed; and provided, further, that any minor so employed shall be closely supervised while engaged in the clearing of alcoholic beverages.  
 
	Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to the work done by pupils in public or private schools of New Jersey, under the supervision and instruction of officers or teachers of such organizations or schools, or to a minor who is 17 years of age employed in the type of work in which such minor majored under the conditions of the special vocational school graduate permit provided in section 15 of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.15).  
 
	Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent minors 14 years of age or older who are members of a Junior Firefighters' Auxiliary, created pursuant to N.J.S.40A:14-95, from engaging in any activities authorized by N.J.S.40A:14-98. 
 
	Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, a minor who is 15 years of age or older may work as a cashier or bagger on or near a supermarket or retail establishment cash register conveyor belt. 
 
	L.1940, c.153, s.17; amended 1941, c.139, s.2; 1957, c.131; 1968, c.61, s.3; 1970, c.115, s.2; 1973, c.204; 1979, c.202; 1980, c.90, s.2; 1981, c.83, s.1; 1981, c.331, s.3; 1981, c.511, s.18; 1988, c.112, s.2; 1989, c.121, s.2;  1994, c.82, s.3; 2020, c.126, s.5.

34:2-21.17a.  Inapplicability of s. 34:2-21.17 to participants in junior achievement program
    Section 17 to P.L. 1940, c. 153 (C. 34:2-21.17) shall not apply to minors under the age of 18 years who participate or work in any junior achievement program.  As used in this act  "junior achievement program" means any program under which minors under the age of 18 engage in business enterprises or activities pursuant to an economics education program conducted under the guidance of adult sponsors from private business and industry.

     L.1982, c. 170, s. 1, eff. Nov. 5, 1982.

34:2-21.17b.   Provisions for minors as volunteers at recycling centers 
    Concurrent with all other provisions of P.L. 1940, c. 153 (C. 34:2-21.1 et seq.), minors who are 12 through 17 years of age shall be permitted to work as volunteers at community operated noncommercial recycling centers operated by a municipality or a community service organization authorized by a municipality to operate a recycling center subject to the following provisions: 

   a.   That these recycling centers handle only those waste products normally included in the municipal waste stream such as newspapers and glass and metal beverage containers; 

   b.   That under no circumstances shall a minor be permitted to work in a community recycling center that is in any way associated with a profit making commercial enterprise other than to sell the recyclable products referred to in subsection a.; 

   c.   That no minor shall operate, perform maintenance, clean, inspect or work in, about, or in connection with any power driven machinery involved in the recycling process; 

   d.   That no minor shall work in a community recycling center without the safety equipment required by law; 

   e.   That no minor shall be permitted to work as a volunteer at a recycling center except under the direct supervision of an adult; 

   f.   That no minor shall handle or be exposed to hazardous waste products or other hazardous substances; and 

   g.   That the municipality which operates the center or authorizes the operation of the center by a community service organization has secured adequate liability insurance to provide compensation for all injuries sustained by minors working voluntarily at the center. 

   For the purposes of this section, "community operated noncommercial recycling center" means any recycling center that is sponsored by a municipality and is engaged in the recycling activity as a community service. 

   L. 1987, c. 249, s. 1. 

34:2-21.17c.   Not considered employee. 
    A minor working voluntarily at a recycling center shall not be deemed an employee under R.S. 34:15-36.  A municipality or community service organization which uses the services of a minor under this act shall not be subject to R.S. 34:15-10, provided that the municipality or organization has fully complied with P.L. 1940, c. 153 (C. 34:2-21.1 et seq.) and the provisions of this act. 

   L. 1987, c. 249, s. 2. 

34:2-21.17d. Employment of minors as volunteers for certain nonprofit organizations  
    1.   Concurrent with all other provisions of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.), minors who are 14 through 17 years of age shall be permitted to work as volunteers for nonprofit organizations engaged in the construction of affordable housing as determined by the Commissioner of Labor subject to the following provisions:  

   a.   That under no circumstances shall a minor be permitted to work in a project involving the construction of affordable housing that is in any way associated with a profit-making commercial enterprise;  

   b.   That no minor shall operate, perform maintenance, clean, inspect or work in, about, or in connection with any power-driven machinery involved in the construction of affordable housing;  

   c.   That no minor shall engage in the construction of affordable housing without the safety equipment required by law;  

   d.   That no minor shall be permitted to work as a volunteer in the construction of affordable housing except under the direct supervision of an adult;  

   e.   That no minor shall be exposed to hazardous waste products or other hazardous substances;  

   f.   That no minor shall be permitted to work on any excavation, scaffolding or roofing;  

   g.   That no minor shall be permitted to work:

  

   (1)  during school hours;

  

   (2)  before 7 a.m.;

  

   (3)  after 7 p.m.; except that minors may work until 9 p.m. between Memorial Day and Labor Day;  

   (4)  for more than five consecutive hours without a half-hour break; and  

   (5)  for more than 18 hours per week when school is in session; and

  

   h.   That the nonprofit organization engaged in the construction of affordable housing has secured liability insurance to provide compensation for all injuries, including, but not limited to, occupational illness, sustained by minors working voluntarily in the construction of affordable housing.  The insurance required by this section shall have coverage limits of at least $2,500,000 per occurrence, at least $2,500,000 aggregate per year and $250,000 for property damage, or such higher amounts as the Commissioner of Insurance may promulgate from time to time to adjust for inflation.  

   L.1994,c.82,s.1.  

34:2-21.17e. Minor working voluntarily not deemed employee  
    2.   A minor working voluntarily in the construction of affordable housing pursuant to section 1 of this act shall not be deemed an employee under R.S.34:15-36.  A nonprofit organization which uses the services of a minor under this act shall not be subject to R.S.34:15-10, provided that the nonprofit organization has fully complied with P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.) and the provisions of this act.  

   L.1994,c.82,s.2.  

34:2-21.17f  Inapplicability of C.34:2-21.17 under certain circumstances; "educational program in science" defined.

	1.	Section 17 of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.17) shall not apply to minors under the age of 18 who have successfully reached the ninth or higher grade level and who have the approval of a parent or guardian to participate or work in any educational program in science. A school student shall not participate or work in the program more than 20 hours per week during the school year.

	As used in this act "educational program in science " means a program in which any minor under the age of 18 who has successfully reached the ninth or higher grade level participates in a scientific project or activity located in a research facility pursuant to an educational program under the supervision of the minor's school and adult sponsors from private business and industry, provided that no supervision by a school shall be required if the minor is a high school graduate.

	L.2000,c.31,s.1.

34:2-21.17g  Rules, regulations.

	2.	The Commissioner of Labor, in consultation with the Commissioner of Education, shall, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), adopt rules and regulations necessary to implement the provisions of this act.

	L.2000,c.31,s.2.

34:2-21.18.  Enforcement of act;  inspection of places and certificates
    It shall be the duty of the Department of Labor and its inspectors and agents, acting under the Commissioner of Labor, to enforce the provisions of this act, to make complaints against persons violating its provisions, and to prosecute violations of the same.  The Commissioner of Labor and any inspector or other authorized person acting under him, attendance officers and other persons employed by law to compel the attendance of children at school, and officers and agents of any duly incorporated society for the protection of children from cruelty and neglect, shall have authority to enter and inspect at  any time any place or establishment covered by this act, and to have access to  employment or age certificates or special permits kept on file by the employers  and such other records as may aid in the enforcement of this act.

     L.1940, c. 153, p. 345, s. 18.

34:2-21.19  Penalty, Child Labor Law Enforcement Trust Fund, Advisory Board; annual report.

	19. a. Whoever employs or permits or suffers any minor to be employed or to work in violation of this act, or of any order or ruling issued under the provisions of this act, or obstructs the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, its officers or agents, or any other person authorized to inspect places of employment under this act, and whoever, having under his control or custody any minor, permits or suffers him to be employed or to work in violation of this act, shall be guilty of an offense.  If a defendant acts knowingly, an offense under this section shall be a crime of the fourth degree.  Otherwise it shall be a disorderly persons offense and the defendant shall, upon conviction for a violation, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $2,000 for an initial violation and not less than $200 nor more than $4,000 for each subsequent violation.  Each day during which any violation of this act continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense, and the employment of any minor in violation of the act shall with respect to each minor so employed, constitute a separate and distinct offense.

	b.	As an alternative to or in addition to any other sanctions provided by law for violations of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.), when the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development finds that an individual has violated that act, the commissioner is authorized to assess and collect administrative penalties of not more than $500 for a first violation, not more than $1,000 for a second violation, and not more than $2,500 for each subsequent violation, specified in a schedule of penalties to be promulgated as a rule or regulation by the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.). When determining the amount of the penalty imposed because of a violation, the commissioner shall consider factors which include the history of previous violations by the employer, the seriousness of the violation, the good faith of the employer, and the size of the employer's business.  No administrative penalty shall be levied pursuant to this section unless the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development provides the alleged violator with notification of the violation and of the amount of the penalty by certified mail and an opportunity to request a hearing before the commissioner or his designee within 15 days following the receipt of the notice.  If a hearing is requested, the commissioner shall issue a final order upon such hearing and a finding that a violation has occurred.  If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order upon expiration of the 15-day period.  Payment of the penalty is due when a final order is issued or when the notice becomes a final order.  Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding commenced by the commissioner pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c. 274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).  Any sum collected as a fine or penalty pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the Child Labor Law Enforcement Trust Fund established pursuant to subsection c. of this section.

	c.	There is established in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development the Child Labor Law Enforcement Trust Fund.  All moneys in the fund shall be applied by the department toward the enforcement of the provisions of P.L.l940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.) and to disseminate information and publicity regarding those provisions to employers, employer organizations, employees, unions, and teachers, counselors, social workers and other professionals engaged in work involving the welfare of children.

	d.	There is established a Child Labor Law Enforcement Advisory Board to advise the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, and issue an annual report, regarding the use of moneys from the Child Labor Law Enforcement Trust Fund and other issues the board deems appropriate concerning child labor, including the impact of excessive or hazardous work on the educational success, health and general well-being of children.  The board shall consist of the commissioner or his designee, who shall serve as the chair, and seven members appointed by the commissioner as follows: two members representing organizations of employers in industries with significant numbers of employees who are minors, two members representing labor unions in industries with significant numbers of employees who are minors, one member representing an organization of school administrators, one member representing an organization of school employees, and one member who is an individual with expertise on the impact of excessive or hazardous work on the educational success, health, and general well-being of children.  Members appointed by the commissioner shall be appointed for two-year terms and may be appointed for any number of terms.  Members shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.  Action may be taken by the board by an affirmative vote of a majority of its members.  The first annual report shall be issued not later than 12 months after the effective date of this act.  Each annual report may include recommendations to enhance the enforcement and publicizing of the provisions of P.L.l940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.).  The advisory board shall have access to reports, data and other information regarding child labor in the possession of the department and assistance from department personnel as required to perform its duties.

	L.1940,c.153,s.19; amended 1981, c.331, s.9; 1991, c.205, s.6; 2005, c.167.

34:2-21.20.  Partial invalidity
    If any provisions of this act or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the act and the application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

     L.1940, c. 153, p. 346, s. 20.

34:2-21.21.  Repeals
    The provisions of article two, chapter two, of Title 34, Revised Statutes [s.s. 34:2-2 to 34:2-21], and of sections 18:14-15 to 18:14-33, inclusive, of the  Revised Statutes, are hereby repealed.

     L.1940, c. 153, p. 346, s. 21.

34:2-21.22.  Effective date
    This act shall take effect September first, one thousand nine hundred and forty.

     L.1940, c. 153, p. 346, s. 22.

34:2-21.22a.  Newspaperboys;  effect of act upon rights under Workmen's Compensation Act
    Nothing in this act shall be construed to affect adversely any right or rights of newspaperboys under the provisions of chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey.

     L.1965, c. 3, s. 3.

34:2-21.57  Definitions.
	1.	As used in P.L.1962, c.91 (C.34:2-21.57 et seq.):
 
	"Professional employment" means employment for pay as an actor or performer in a theatrical production.
 
	"Theatrical production" means and includes stage, motion picture, and television performances and rehearsals therefor.
 
	"Prohibited performance" means and includes appearances as a rope or wire walker or rider, gymnast, wrestler, boxer, contortionist, acrobat, rider of a horse or other animal unless the minor is trained to safely ride such horse or animal, or rider of any vehicle other than that generally used by a minor of the same age, or appearance in any illegal, indecent, or immoral exhibition, practice, or theatrical production or in any practice, exhibition, or theatrical production dangerous to the life, limb, health, or morals of a minor, or appearance or exhibition of a minor with a physical or mental disability.  “Prohibited performance” also means and includes, but is not limited to, the following:
 
	The exposure of a minor between 15 days of age to six months of age to light exceeding 100 foot-candles for more than 30 seconds at a time;
 
	The exposure of a minor between 15 days and two years of age to atmospheric smoke;
 
	Requiring, coercing, or otherwise permitting a minor to pose nude or perform acts which are sexually explicit; and
 
	A minor’s presence on a set while adults are posing nude or performing acts which are sexually explicit.
 
	L.1962, c.91, s.1; amended 1981, c.147, s.1; 1981, c.331, s.4; 2017, c.131, s.132; 2025, c.382, s.1.

34:2-21.58.  Theatrical productions;  employment of minors under 16.
	2. a. Notwithstanding any provision of the child labor laws of this State, the professional employment of minors under the age of 18 years in theatrical productions is authorized upon compliance with the conditions in P.L.1962, c.91 (C.34:2-21.57 et seq.) set forth.
 
	b.	(1) If a minor is guaranteed three or more days of employment, the employer shall provide time during the workday for the minor to fulfill the minor’s educational requirements. 
 
	(2)	This instructional time shall average at least three hours per missed day of school day, calculated on a weekly basis. 
 
	(3)	Extra teaching time above three hours per day provided to the child performer may be carried over to another day in the same week or another week, subject to the following limit: no more than 10 hours of teaching time may be carried over from week to week.
 
	(4)	Any hours carried over from week to week shall be subject to the discretion of the teacher who has been provided by the employer. 
 
	(5)	The minor shall receive equivalent instruction approved by the Department of Education or by the state or county of the minor’s residence if the minor is not a resident of New Jersey. 
 
	(6)	The employer shall provide a teacher who is credentialed for the level of education required by State law or regulation for the minor from the third missed day of school through the remainder of the minor's employment in the theatrical production.  
 
	c.	The daily working hours of minors shall be as follows: 
 
	(1) infants between 15 days and six months of age may work up to 20 minutes, and time on set shall not exceed two hours;
 
	(2) infants and minors between six months and under two years of age may work up to two hours, and time on set shall not exceed four hours;
 
	(3) minors between two years old and under six years old may work up to three hours, and time on set shall not exceed six hours;
 
	(4) minors between six years old and under nine years old, up to four hours on a school day and up to six hours on a non-school day, and time on set shall not exceed eight hours;
 
	(5) minors between nine years old and under 16 years old, up to five hours on a school day and up to seven hours on a non-school day, and time on set shall not exceed nine hours; and
 
	(6) minors between 16 years old and under 18 years old to work on set for up to six hours on a school day and up to nine hours on a non-school day, and time on set shall not exceed 10 hours. 
 
	d.	The minor shall be under the direct care and supervision of an adult who is a parent, guardian, or a designated representative at all times during the minor’s employment or while living away from home when required as an incident of the employment. 
 
	e.	Employment of a minor shall not be for more than six days in any seven-day period.  The minor shall not be employed before 5:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on any day preceding a school day.  A minor may be employed between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 12:30 a.m. on any day preceding a non-school day.
 
	f.	Nothing in P.L.1962, c.91 (C.34:2-21.57 et seq.) shall prevent the employer of a minor in a theatrical production from complying with a collective bargaining agreement or other contract that establishes more stringent standards than those contained in P.L.1962, c.91 (C.34:2-21.57 et seq.), and nothing in P.L.1962, c.91 (C.34:2-21.57 et seq.) shall be construed as reducing, limiting, or curtailing the rights of a minor employed in a theatrical production.

     L.1962, c. 91, s. 2.  Amended by L.1977, c. 430, s. 1, eff. Feb. 28, 1978; 2025, c.382, s.2.

34:2-21.59  Permit; grounds for issuance.
	3. a. (1) Prior to employing any minor in any work or activity, an employer in the entertainment industry shall apply to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development for a permit to employ minors in that work or activity.  
 
	Upon application of the employer, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development shall issue a permit to employ minors valid for a period of one year if the conditions as to permissible work or activity, as prescribed in P.L.1962, c.91 (C.34:2-21.57 et seq.), are met, and the employment does not involve a type of prohibited performance as defined in section 1 of P.L.1962, c.91 (C.34:2-21.57) or any work or activity which is not hazardous or detrimental to the health, safety, morals, or education of the minors. 
 
	(2)	Prior to a minor commencing employment in the entertainment industry, the parent or guardian of the minor shall submit an application to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development to obtain an entertainment work permit for the minor.  
 
	The application shall include, but not be limited to: 
 
	(1) the minor’s name, age, birth date, and address, and the parent or guardian’s name, age, birth date, and address;
 
	(2) written verification from the appropriate school district to confirm the minor's school record, attendance, and compliance with the district’s standards for age, academic performance, attendance, and health;
 
	(3) for minors who are not yet of age for mandatory school attendance and in other circumstances in which the department’s review of school records warrants additional information, the department may require a physical examination to ensure the minor is physically able to perform the work specified in the permit; and
 
	(4) any additional information as deemed necessary and appropriate by the commissioner.
 
	Upon the filing of an application and a determination that all requirements have been met, the department shall issue an entertainment work permit.  The permit shall authorize the minor to work only under the conditions specified by P.L.1962, c.91 (C.34:2-21.57 et seq.) and in accordance with all applicable laws regarding the working hours, health, safety, and welfare of minors.  
 
	An application for a permit authorizing employment of a minor in a theatrical production made by a parent or guardian of the minor under this section shall be valid for a period of one year that shall permit a minor to work for multiple employers or on multiple productions in accordance with the requirements of P.L.1962, c.91 (C.34:2-21.57 et seq.).  
 
	b.	A waiver to the requirements for a permit may be issued by the issuing officer or by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development in cases involving a significant contribution to the development of the motion picture industry in the State, as determined by the Motion Picture and Television Development Commission, or for good cause shown, as determined by the issuing officer or the commissioner.  In such cases, the commissioner shall also have the authority to alter or amend the hours of the day but not the total hours in the day during which a minor may work if the waiver will not foreseeably impair the educational instruction, supervision, health, and welfare of the minor, and the waiver is necessary for good reasons shown by the employer.  The commissioner shall set forth the terms of any waiver in the permit.  The department may issue a waiver to an employer electronically, and the employer shall maintain a copy of the waiver at the place of employment.  The employer shall make the waiver available to the department for inspection upon request.
 
	c.	During a state of emergency or public health emergency, any aspect of the permit authorization process requiring the personal appearance of the minor or the minor's parent or guardian may be satisfied through the use of audio-visual technology in a manner consistent with the provisions of subsection b. of section 8 of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.8).
 
	d.	  The Department of Labor and Workforce Development shall establish and maintain a registration system for authorizing permits to an employer to employ a minor or to a minor to authorize the minor to work in a theatrical production that is independent from the registration database for minors established in section 6 of P.L.2022, c.63 (C.34:2-21.1a).  The registration system for employment of a minor in accordance with this section shall require the creation of a registration account for the purpose of obtaining a permit for employment of a minor in a theatrical production by:
 
	(1) the parent or guardian of the minor seeking authorization for the minor to work; and
 
	(2) the employer seeking to employ a minor. 
 
	The registration system shall provide for a minor to create an account that is linked to the account of the parent or guardian of the minor.
 
	Any person applying for a permit pursuant to this section shall not also be required to register in the database established in section 6 of P.L.2022, c.63 (C.34:2-21.1a) if the sole purpose for the registration is for the permit authorizing the employment of the minor in a theatrical production because the registration system created by P.L.2025, c.382 shall be the exclusive process for obtaining that permit. 
 
	e.	Upon application by a parent or guardian, and prior to the first employment of a minor in a theatrical production, the commissioner may issue a temporary child performer permit in order to give the parent or guardian of the minor time to:
 
	(1) establish a trust account for the minor as required by law; or 
 
	(2) produce all documentation required by the department for the issuance of a permit authorizing the employment of a minor in a theatrical production. 
 
	f.	A temporary child performer permit issued in accordance with subsection e. of this section shall be valid for 15 days from the date of issuance and may be issued only once for a specified minor.
 
	g.	(1) In accordance with subsection b. of this section, an employer may apply for a waiver of any permit requirement for the employment of a minor when compliance would be impracticable due to production-specific circumstances, provided that the health, safety, and welfare of the minor are maintained. An employer shall submit a request for a waiver of a permit requirement for the employment of a minor in writing, which may include electronic communication and shall include a summary of:
 
	(a) any provision for which a waiver is requested;
 
	(b) the circumstances necessitating the request;
 
	(c) the anticipated duration of the waiver; and
 
	(d) the minor impacted by the waiver.
 
	(2)	An employer shall submit a request for a waiver under this subsection as far in advance as is reasonable and practical under the circumstances.  The department may consider and approve a request for a waiver on an expedited basis, including, but not limited to, a request made on short notice, when deemed necessary and appropriate.

 	L.1962, c.91, s.3; amended 1977, c.430, s.2; 1981, c.147, s.2; 1981, c.331, s.5; 2021, c.162, s.3; 2025, c.382, s.3.

34:2-21.60.  Refusal to grant permit or certificate;  grounds;  record
    The issuing officer or the Commissioner of Labor, pursuant to section 3b. of  P.L.1962, c. 91 (C. 34:2-21.59), may refuse to grant a permit or certificate  if, in his judgment, the best interests of the minor would be served by such  refusal and he shall keep a record of such refusals, and the reasons therefor.   A refusal by the issuing officer shall not preclude a contrary decision by the  commissioner.

     L.1962, c. 91, s. 4.  Amended by L.1981, c. 147, s. 3, eff. May 14, 1981; L.1981, c. 331, s. 6, eff. Dec. 14, 1981.

34:2-21.61.  Renewal of permits;  inspection
    Permits may be renewed upon application.  A separate permit shall be required for each employee.  The employer shall have the permit available for inspection at all times at the place of employment.

     L.1962, c. 91, s. 5.

34:2-21.62.  Delivery of application to department of labor
    The Department of Education shall deliver a copy of each application to the  Department of Labor.

     L.1962, c. 91, s. 6.  Amended by L.1981, c. 147, s. 4, eff. May 14, 1981.

34:2-21.63a.  Employment of minor under 16 to perform indecent or immoral exhibition;  high misdemeanor
    Any person who obtains a permit under this act and employs a minor under the  age of 16 to perform an indecent or immoral exhibition, which exhibition is a  prohibited performance under this act, shall be guilty of a high misdemeanor.   For the purpose of this act, indecent or immoral exhibition means (1) sexual  intercourse, or (2) anal intercourse, or (3) masturbation, or (4) bestiality,  or (5) sadism, or (6) masochism, or (7) fellatio, or (8) cunnilingus, or (9)  any other sexual activity, or (10) nudity, if such nudity is to be depicted for  the purpose of sexual stimulation or gratification of any person who may view  such depiction.

     L.1977, c. 430, s. 3, eff. Feb. 28, 1978.

34:2-21.63b.  Violations;  penalty
    Whoever obtains any permit under this act (P.L.1962, c. 91;  C. 34:2-21.57 et seq.) upon any false statement made in applying therefor, or employs or permits or suffers any minor to be employed or to work in violation of this act  or of the terms of any permit issued under this act or of any order or ruling  issued under the provisions of this act, or obstructs the Departments of Labor  and Education, their officers or agents, or any other person authorized to  inspect places of employment under this act, and whoever, having under his  control or custody any minor, permits or suffers him to be employed or to work  in violation of this act is guilty of an offense.  Where a defendant acts  knowingly, an offense under this section shall be a crime of the fourth degree.   Otherwise, it shall be a disorderly persons offense. Each day during which  any violation of this act continues shall constitute a separate and distinct  offense, and the employment of any minor in violation of the act shall with  respect to each minor so employed, constitute a separate and distinct offense.

     L.1981, c. 147, s. 6, eff. May 14, 1981.  Amended by L.1981, c. 331, s. 7, eff. Dec. 14, 1981.

34:2-21.64.  Forms and regulations;  safeguards governing working conditions, supervision and education
    The Department of Education and the Department of Labor shall prescribe forms and regulations concerning applications for and issuance of permits and certificates and the Department of Labor may issue regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of this act and, notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, after consultation with the Department of Education, shall prescribe special safeguards governing the working conditions, supervision and education of minors under the age of 16, with particular attention to minors under the age of 6 years not inconsistent with the purposes  of this act.

     L.1962, c. 91, s. 8.  Amended by L.1977, c. 430, s. 4, eff. Feb. 28, 1978; L.1981, c. 147, s. 5, eff. May 14, 1981;  L.1981, c. 331, s. 8, eff. Dec. 14, 1981.

34:2-21.65  Minor employed by vlogger, conditions.
	2. a. A minor shall be considered employed by a vlogger, whether the minor is actively participating in content or is passively featured in content, when the following criteria are met at any time during the previous 12-month period:
 
	(1) at least 30 percent of the vlogger's compensated video content produced within a 30-day period includes or features the likeness, name, or photograph of the minor.  Content percentage is measured by the percentage of time the likeness, name, or photograph of the minor visually appears or is the subject of an oral narrative in a video segment, as compared to the total length of the segment; and
 
	(2) the number of views received per video segment on any online platform meets the online platform's threshold for the generation of compensation or the vlogger receives actual compensation for video content equal to or greater than $0.10 per view.
 
	b.	Any vlogger who employs a minor shall maintain the following records and shall provide them to the minor on an ongoing basis:
 
	(1) the name and documentary proof of the age of the minor engaged in work as a vlogger and of producing a vlog;
 
	(2) the number of vlogs that generated compensation as described in subsection a. of this section during the reporting period;
 
	(3) the total number of minutes of the vlogs that the vlogger received compensation for during the reporting period;
 
	(4) the total number of minutes each minor was featured in vlogs during the reporting period;
 
	(5) the total compensation generated from vlogs featuring a minor during the reporting period; and 
 
	(6) the amount deposited into the trust account for the benefit of the minor engaged in work as a vlogger or in the work of producing a vlog, as required by section 3 of P.L.2025, c.355 (C.34:2-21.66).
 
	c.	If a vlogger who employs a minor fails to maintain the records as provided in subsection b. of this section, the minor may commence a civil action to enforce the provisions of this section.
 
	d.	A vlogger who employs a minor and who is not the caregiver or a family member of the minor shall be responsible for ensuring that the employment of the minor adheres to all applicable State wage, benefit, and tax laws, as defined in section 1 of P.L.2009, c.194 (C.34:1A-1.11).
 
	e.	A vlogger who employs a minor shall be subject to all requirements pertaining to the employment of minors in P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.) and all acts supplementing that act, as appropriate.
 
L.2025, c.355, s.2.

34:2-21.66  Compensation, minor employed in vlogging.
	3. a. A minor who is employed pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2025, c.355 (C.34:2-21.65) by a vlogger who is a family member or caregiver of the minor shall be compensated by the vlogger in accordance with this section.  The vlogger shall set aside gross earnings on the video content including the likeness, name, or photograph of the minor in a trust account to be preserved for the benefit of the minor upon reaching the age of majority, according to the following distribution: 
 
	(1) where only one minor meets the content threshold described in subsection a. of section 2 of P.L.2025, c.355 (C.34:2-21.65), the percentage of total gross earnings on any video segment including the likeness, name, or photograph of the minor that is equal to or greater than half of the content percentage that includes the minor as described in subsection a. of section 2 of P.L.2025, c.355 (C.34:2-21.65); or 
 
	(2) where more than one minor meets the content threshold described in subsection a. of section 2 of P.L.2025, c.355 (C.34:2-21.65), and a video segment includes more than one of those minors, the percentage described in paragraph (1) of subsection a. of this section for all minors in any segment shall be equally divided between the minors, regardless of differences in percentage of content provided by the individual minors.
 
	b.	A trust account required under this section shall provide, at a minimum, the following: 
 
	(1) that the funds in the account shall be available only to the minor engaged in work as a vlogger and of producing a vlog; 
 
	(2) that the account shall be held by a bank, fiduciary, or trust business, as those terms are defined in the Banking Act of 1948, P.L.1948, c.67 (C.17:9A-1 et seq.);
 
	(3) that the funds in the account shall become available to the minor engaged in work as a vlogger and of producing a vlog upon the minor attaining the age of 18 years or until the minor is declared emancipated; and 
 
	(4) that the account meets the requirements of the "New Jersey Uniform Transfers to Minors Act," R.S.46:38A-1 et seq.
 
	c.	If a vlogger knowingly or recklessly violates this section, a minor satisfying the criteria described in subsection a. of section 2 of P.L.2025, c.355 (C.34:2-21.65), may commence an action to enforce the provisions of this section regarding the trust account. The court may award, to a minor who prevails in any action brought in accordance with this section, the following damages: 
 
	(1) actual damages; 
 
	(2) punitive damages; and 
 
	(3) the costs of the action, including attorney's fees and litigation costs.
 
	d.	This section shall not affect a right or remedy available under any other law of the State.
 
	e.	Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to have any effect on a party that is not the vlogger and is not the minor engaged in work as a vlogger and of producing a vlog.

L.2025, c.355, s.3.

34:2-29.  Seats to be provided
    Every employer of one or more employees in any manufacturing, mechanical or  mercantile establishment or in the services and operations incident to any commercial employment shall provide and maintain suitable seats conveniently situated and shall permit the use of such seats by employees at all times except when necessarily engaged in the discharge of duties that cannot properly  be performed in a sitting position.

     Amended by L.1980, c. 90, s. 3.

34:2-30.  Inspections
    The commissioner shall see that the provisions of R.S. 34:2-29 of this title  are carried out in all mercantile establishments, and shall, at reasonable  intervals, examine and inspect all such mercantile establishments to see that  the seats required to be provided by R.S. 34:2-29 are fully maintained and that  employees are permitted to use them freely and without hindrance.

     Amended by L.1980, c. 90, s. 4.

34:2-30.1.  Penalty;  notice to offender
    Any individual, firm or corporation owning or managing an establishment of the kind mentioned in section 34:2-29 of this title, who shall fail to comply with the requirements of said section 34:2-29 within ten days after the date on  which notice to do so has been served by the commissioner or one of his deputies shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five dollars for each offense, and a failure to comply within the period of ten days, with such repetition of such notice as may be necessary, shall each constitute a separate offense.

34:2-31.  Protection of openings in floor
    The openings of all hoistways, hatchways, elevators and wellholes on every floor of any mercantile establishment shall be protected by good and sufficient  trapdoors or self-closing hatches and safety catches, or strong guard rails at  least three feet high, and shall be kept closed and protected at all times  except when in actual use by the occupant of the building having the use and  control of the same.

34:2-32.  Ventilation
    Every mercantile establishment shall be provided with proper and sufficient  means of ventilation.  Any owner, agent, lessee or employer failing to provide  suitable ventilation within twenty days after service upon him of a written  order signed by the commissioner so to do, shall be subject to a penalty of ten  dollars for each day such failure continues after the expiration of the time  given by such order to make the change.

34:2-33.  Toilet facilities
    Every mercantile establishment shall maintain sufficient, suitable, clean, convenient and separate water-closets for each sex which shall be properly screened and ventilated.  The water-closets for each sex shall have separate approaches.  A suitable and convenient wash room for each sex shall be provided  if ordered by the commissioner.

    A dressing room shall be provided for each sex when the commissioner shall so order.

     Amended by L.1980, c. 90, s. 5.

34:2-34.  Abstract of law;  posting
    An abstract of this article shall be prepared and furnished upon request by  the commissioner to every employer affected thereby, and every employer to whom  such abstract is sent or delivered shall post it and keep it posted in plain  view, in such place that it can be easily read by the employees or operatives  in going into or coming out of said mercantile establishment.

34:2-35.  Orders for enforcement of article;  penalty
    The commissioner, to carry into effect the provisions of sections 34:2-31, 34:2-33 and 34:2-34 of this title shall have authority to make such orders in writing for the protection and safety of employees and operatives and the enforcement of said sections in places coming under the provisions thereof, as shall, in his judgment, seem necessary to carry into effect the provisions of said sections.  Such orders shall be signed by the commissioner and shall specify what shall be necessary to be done and within what time.  Any corporation, firm or person violating any of the provisions of said sections 34:2-31, 34:2-33 or 34:2-34 shall be liable to a penalty of fifty dollars.

34:3A-4.     Findings, declarations  
     The Legislature finds and declares that:

  

    a.   Because of the fire hazards directly associated with dispensing fuel, it is in the public interest that gasoline station operators have the control needed over that activity to ensure compliance with appropriate safety procedures, including turning off vehicle engines and refraining from smoking while fuel is dispensed;  

    b.   At self-service gasoline stations in other states, cashiers are often unable to maintain a clear view of the activities of customers dispensing gasoline, or to give their undivided attention to observing customers; therefore, when customers, rather than attendants, are permitted to dispense fuel, it is far more difficult to enforce compliance with safety procedures;  

    c.   The State needs stronger measures to enforce both compliance by customers with the ban on self-service and compliance by attendants with safety procedures;

  

    d.   The higher general liability insurance premium rates charged to self-service stations reflect the fact that customers who leave their vehicles to dispense gasoline or other inflammable liquids face significant inconveniences and dangers, including the risks of crime and fall-related personal injury, which are a special burden to drivers with physical infirmities, such as the handicapped and some senior citizens;  

    e.   Exposure to toxic gasoline fumes represents a health hazard when customers dispense their own gasoline, particularly in the case of pregnant women;

  

    f.   The significantly higher prices usually charged for full-service gasoline in states where self-service is permitted results in discrimination against low income individuals, who are under greater economic pressure to undergo the inconvenience and hazards of dispensing their own gasoline;  

    g.   The increasing use of self-service has contributed to the diminished availability of repair facilities and maintenance services at gasoline stations;

  

    h.   Even in filling stations which offer both self-service and full-service gasoline, customers are less likely, because of the much higher price usually charged for full service, to have attendants make needed maintenance checks, thus causing significant neglect of maintenance and danger both to the customers and to other motorists, as well as the unneeded costly repairs which often result from deferred maintenance;  

    i.   The prohibition of customer self-service does not constitute a restraint of trade in derogation of the general public interest because the Legislature finds no conclusive evidence that self-service gasoline provides a sustained reduction in gasoline prices charged to customers; and  

    j.   A prohibition of self-service gasoline will therefore promote the common welfare by providing increased safety and convenience without causing economic harm to the public in general.

  

    L.1989, c.263, s.1.  

34:3A-5.     Definitions  
     As used in this act:

  

    "Attendant" means a retail dealer or employee of a retail dealer.

  

    "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor.

  

    "Fuel" means any liquid commonly or commercially known or sold as gasoline, or other inflammable liquid, which is sold for use as fuel in the internal combustion engines of motor vehicles.

  

    "Gasoline station" or "station" means a place of business located in the State and used for the retail sale and dispensing of fuel into the tanks of motor vehicles.

  

    "Retail dealer" means a person operating a gasoline station.

  

    L.1989, c.263, s.2.  

34:3A-6.     Dispensing of fuel; regulations  
     It shall be unlawful for any attendant to:

  

    a.   Dispense fuel into the tank of a motor vehicle while the vehicle's engine is in operation;

  

    b.   Dispense fuel into any portable container not in compliance with regulations adopted pursuant to section 8 of this act;

  

    c.   Dispense fuel while smoking; or

  

    d.   Permit any person who is not an attendant to dispense fuel into the tank of a motor vehicle or any container.

  

    L.1989, c.263, s.3.  

34:3A-7.     Training, supervision of attendants  
     No person shall dispense fuel at a gasoline station, unless the person is an attendant who has received instructions regarding the dispensing of fuel, had practical experience dispensing fuel under the direct supervision of an experienced operator for a period of not less than one full working day, and, upon examination at the end of that period, demonstrated his understanding of those instructions.  The instructions shall include a full explanation of the prohibitions of section 3 of this act and any emergency procedures established pursuant to section 8 of this act.  

    L.1989, c.263, s.4.  

34:3A-8.     Certification of attendants  
     There shall be available at each station for inspection by the commissioner a certificate for each person who dispenses fuel at the station certifying that the person meets the requirements of section 4 of this act. The certificate shall be signed by the person and the retail dealer who operates the station.  

    L.1989, c.263, s.5.  

34:3A-9.     Pump shutoff switch; required  
     Each gasoline station shall be equipped, at a location remote from the dispensing pumps, with a clearly identified and easily accessible switch or circuit breaker to shut off the power to all dispensing pumps in the event of an emergency or of a customer or other unauthorized person operating or attempting to operate the pump.  

    L.1989, c.263, s.6.  

34:3A-10.    Penalties for violations; Retail Gasoline Dispensing Safety Account; established  
     A violator of any provision of this act shall be liable for a penalty of not less than $50.00 and not more than $250.00 for a first offense and not more than $500.00 for each subsequent offense.  Each day that a gasoline station operates in violation of the provisions of section 5 or 6 of this act is a separate violation by the retail dealer who operates the station.  The penalties shall be sued for and recovered by the commissioner, in summary proceedings pursuant to "the penalty enforcement law," N.J.S.2A:58-1 et seq., in the county or municipality where the offense occurred.  

    There is established a nonlapsing dedicated account to be known as the Retail Gasoline Dispensing Safety Account.  Penalties collected pursuant to this section shall be credited to the account and appropriated to fund expenses of effectuating the purposes of this act.  If, at the close of a fiscal year, moneys are available beyond the funds necessary to meet those expenses, the commissioner shall determine an appropriate amount to be returned to the General Fund for general State purposes.  

    L.1989, c.263, s.7.  

34:3A-11.    Rules, regulations  
     The commissioner shall, in accordance with the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), adopt rules and regulations as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act, including regulations establishing emergency procedures and standards concerning pump shutoff switches and other safety equipment to be used at gasoline stations, and standards for portable containers for fuel dispensed at gasoline stations, which standards shall be consistent with other State and federal regulations.  

    L.1989, c.263, s.8.  

34:4-1.  Device to prevent moving until door closed
    Every elevator moving in a vertical shaft, used for carrying passengers, shall have some interlocking device that will automatically prevent the elevator car from being moved in either direction until the shaft door or gate at which the elevator car is standing is closed and securely fastened.

34:4-2.  Approval of device
    Every device, before being used or installed as required by section 34:4-1 of this title in any building within the jurisdiction of the department of labor, under the labor laws, shall have the approval of the commissioner.

    Every such device before being used or installed in any other building shall  have the approval of the commissioner, except in municipalities having a  regularly appointed building inspector, in which case the approval of the building inspector shall be sufficient.

34:4-3.  Enforcement;  penalty for noncompliance
    The commissioner or the building inspector, as the case may be, shall enforce the provisions of this chapter by order in writing served upon the owner, tenant or lessee, specifying the directions to be executed and the time limited for the completion thereof.

    A person neglecting to comply with the terms of such order within the time limited, or any extension thereof granted by the commissioner or building inspector shall be liable to a penalty of one hundred dollars and to a further penalty of ten dollars for each day that shall elapse after the expiration of the time limit until compliance is made with the terms of such order.  Such penalties shall be cumulative, and more than one penalty may be recovered in the same action.

34:4-4.  Who shall sue for penalties
    All penalties under this chapter arising in municipalities having a building  inspector as mentioned in sections 34:4-2 and 34:4-3 of this title shall be  sued for by the building inspector for the benefit of the municipality, and the  moneys collected shall be paid into the treasury of the municipality.

    All penalties under this chapter arising in municipalities having no building inspector and such as shall come within the jurisdiction of the department of labor shall be sued for by the commissioner and the moneys shall be paid into the state treasury.

34:4-5.      Action for penalty; jurisdiction  
     34:4-5. All proceedings brought under the provisions of this chapter shall be by a civil action in the name of the commissioner or building inspector, to be instituted in the Superior Court or municipal court of the municipality, where the offense occurs.  

    Amended 1953,c.33,s.5; 1991,c.91,s.344.  

34:4-6.  Service, on whom made
    Service shall be made on the owner or owners, person or persons or any of them, owning the place or operating the business wherein the offense is committed, if he or they reside in the county where such offense is committed; and if he or they do not reside therein, then on the superintendent, foreman or person in charge of such business or place, or in case of a building, upon the agent in charge of the building, or if there be no such agent, by affixing a copy thereof to the main outer door of such building.

    If a corporation commits an offense and no officer or director thereof resides in the county where such offense is committed, service may be made upon  the superintendent, foreman or person in charge of the business or place where  the offense was committed.

     Amended by L.1953, c. 33, p. 584, s. 6.

34:4-9.  Existing regulations not nullified
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to nullify any ordinance, rule or  regulation not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, which may have  been passed or promulgated by any board, commission or department of the state,  or any municipality in this state or by any committee, board or officer of any  such municipality authorized to promulgate rules and regulations governing the  use and control of elevators.

34:4A-1.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the  "Ski Lift Safety Act."

     L.1975, c. 226, s. 1, eff. Oct. 15, 1975.

34:4A-2.  Public policy
    It shall be the policy of the State of New Jersey to protect its citizens and visitors from unnecessary mechanical hazards in the operation of ski tows, lifts and tramways, to ensure that proper design and construction are used, that accepted safety devices and sufficient personnel are provided for, and that periodic inspections and adjustments are made which are deemed essential to the safe operation of ski tows, ski lifts and tramways.  The primary responsibility for design, construction, maintenance and inspection rests with the operators of such passenger tramway devices.  The State, through the Department of Labor and Industry, as hereinafter provided, shall register all ski lift devices, establish reasonable standards of design and operational practices and make such independent inspections as may be necessary in carrying  out this policy.

     L.1975, c. 226, s. 2, eff. Oct. 15, 1975.

34:4A-3.  Definitions
    As used in this act, except where otherwise clearly required by the context,

    a.   "Passenger tramway"  means a device used to transport passengers uphill, on skis or in cars on tracks or suspended in the air, by the use of steel cables, chains or belts or by ropes, and usually supported by trestles or  towers with one or more spans, and includes

    (1)  "aerial passenger tramway,"  a device used to transport passengers in two open or enclosed cars attached to and suspended from a moving wire rope, or  attached to a moving wire rope and supported on a standing wire rope, or similar devices;

    (2)  "multicar aerial passenger tramway,"  a device used to transport passengers in several open or enclosed cars attached to and suspended from a moving wire rope, or attached to a moving wire rope and supported on a standing  wire rope, or similar devices;

    (3)  "skimobile,"  a device in which a passenger car running on steel or wooden tracks is attached to and pulled by a steel cable, or similar devices;

    (4)  "chairlift,"  a type of transportation on which passengers are carried  on chairs suspended in the air and attached to a moving cable, chain or link  belt supported by trestles or towers with one or more spans, or similar  devices;

    (5)  "J-bar,"   "T-bar,"   "poma lift"  or  "platter pull,"  so called and similar types of devices, being means of transportation which pull skiers riding on skis by means of an attachment to a main overhead cable supported by trestles or towers with one or more spans;

    (6)  "rope tow,"  a type of transportation which pulls the skiers riding on  skis as the skier grasps the rope manually, or similar devices;

    b.   "Operator"  means a person who owns, manages or directs the operation of a passenger tramway, and includes the State or any political subdivision or instrumentality thereof;

    c.   "Commissioner"  means the Commissioner of the Department of Labor and Industry, or any officer or employee of the department assigned by him to carry  out any of the functions, duties and powers conferred or imposed upon him by  this act.

     L.1975, c. 226, s. 3, eff. Oct. 15, 1975.

34:4A-4.  Rules, regulations and codes;  publication;  furnishing to registered operators
    The commissioner may adopt and from time to time supplement, alter or repeal  reasonable rules, regulations and codes relating to public safety in the  construction, operation and maintenance of passenger tramways.  Such rules,  regulations and codes shall conform as nearly as practicable to established  standards, if any, and shall not be discriminatory in their application to  operators of passenger tramways.  The procedures regarding such adoption,  supplement, alteration or repeal shall conform to the applicable provisions of  the  "Administrative Procedure Act"  (P.L.1968, c. 410;  C. 52:14B-1 et seq.).   The commissioner shall cause the text of such rules, regulations and codes and  of any changes therein resulting from supplement, alteration or repeal from  time to time to be published in pamphlet form and a copy thereof furnished  without charge to each registered operator.  Rules, regulations or codes  adopted by the commissioner shall in no way reduce or diminish the standard of  care imposed upon passenger tramway operators under existing law.

     L.1975, c. 226, s. 4, eff. Oct. 15, 1975.

34:4A-5.  Passenger tramway;  registration;  application;  issuance; inspections;  supplemental application;  expiration;  display
    a.  A passenger tramway shall not be operated in this State unless it has been registered by the commissioner, in the manner provided in this section.

    b.  On or before October 1 in 1974 and each year thereafter, every operator  of a passenger tramway shall apply to the commissioner, on forms supplied by  him, for registration of the passenger tramway or tramways which such operator  owns or manages or the operation of which he directs. The application shall  contain such information as the commissioner may reasonably require in order  for him to determine whether the passenger tramways sought to be registered  comply with the intent of this act and the rules, regulations and codes adopted  pursuant to this act.

    c.  The commissioner shall issue to the applying operator without delay registration certificates for each passenger tramway for which such registration is sought when he is satisfied.

    (1) that the facts in the application are sufficient to enable him to fulfill his duties under this act;  and

    (2) that each such passenger tramway sought to be registered complies with the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this act.

    d.  In order to satisfy himself that the conditions described in paragraphs  (1) and (2) of subsection c. of this section have been fulfilled, the  commissioner may cause to be made such inspections described in section 7 of  this act as he may reasonably deem necessary.

    e.  When an operator installs a passenger tramway subsequent to October 1 of  any year, such operator shall file a supplemental application for registration  of such passenger tramway.  Upon receipt of such supplemental application the  commissioner shall proceed immediately to initiate proceedings leading to the  registration or rejection of registration of such passenger tramway pursuant to  the provisions of this act.

    f.  Each registration shall expire on September 30 next following the day of  issue.

    g.  Each operator shall cause the registration certificate for each passenger tramway thus registered to be displayed prominently at the place where passengers are loaded thereon.

     L.1975, c. 226, s. 5, eff. Oct. 15, 1975.

34:4A-6.  Construction of new or alteration of passenger tramway; submission of plans and specifications
    Before constructing a new or altering an existing passenger tramway the operator or prospective operator shall submit plans and specifications to the commissioner.  The commissioner may make recommendations relative to the safety  of the layout and equipment, but such recommendations shall not relieve the  operator or prospective operator of his primary responsibility as set forth in  section 2 of this act.

     L.1975, c. 226, s. 6, eff. Oct. 15, 1975.

34:4A-7.  Inspection by commissioner or certification of compliance by qualified inspector
    The commissioner may cause to be made such inspection of the construction, operation and maintenance of passenger tramways as he may reasonably require for the purpose of assuring compliance with the codes, rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this act.  Certification of compliance by a qualified inspector who has been approved by the commissioner may be accepted instead of other inspection.  In any legal proceedings, a certificate of compliance issued  pursuant to this section shall be competent evidence only for the purpose of  establishing the fact of issuance of said certificate, and for no other  purpose.

     L.1975, c. 226, s. 7, eff. Oct. 15, 1975.

34:4A-8.  Violation of rules, regulations or code;  report;  complaint by any person;  forwarding to operator;  investigation;  order;  service; emergency order to stop operation
    a.  If as a result of an inspection it is found that there exists any violation of the rules, regulations or codes, adopted under this act, or that there exists a condition in passenger tramway construction, operation or maintenance endangering the safety of the public, an immediate report shall be made to the commissioner for appropriate investigation and order.

    b.  Any person may make written complaint to the commissioner setting forth  any thing or act claimed to be done or omitted to be done by any registered  operator which is alleged to be in violation of any rule, regulation or code  adopted under this act, or setting forth any condition in passenger tramway  construction, operation or maintenance which is alleged to endanger the safety  of the public.  Thereupon the commissioner shall cause a copy of said complaint  to be forwarded to the registered operator complained of, which may be  accompanied by an order requiring that the matters complained of be answered in  writing within a time to be specified by the commissioner.  The commissioner  may investigate the matter complained of if it shall appear that there are  reasonable grounds therefor.

    c.  If after investigation the commissioner finds that such a violation of rules, regulations or codes exists, or that there is a condition in passenger tramway construction, operation or maintenance endangering the safety of the public, he shall forthwith issue a written order setting forth his findings, the corrective action to be taken, and fixing a reasonable time for compliance therewith.  Such order shall be served upon the operator involved by registered  mail, and shall become final, unless the operator shall apply to the  commissioner for a hearing in the manner provided in this section.

    d.  When facts are presented to the commissioner tending to show that an unreasonable hazard exists in the continued operation of a tramway, he may, after such verification of the facts as is practical under the circumstances and consistent with the public safety, issue an emergency order requiring the operator of said tramway forthwith to cease using the same for the transportation of passengers.  Such emergency order shall be in writing and notice thereof may be served by any person upon the operator or his agent immediately in control of said tramway by a true and attested copy of such order, the return of such service to be shown by an affidavit on the back thereof.  Such emergency order shall be effective for a period not to exceed 48  hours from the time of service.  Immediately after the issuance of an emergency  order hereunder, the commissioner shall conduct an investigation into the facts  of the case as contemplated in subsection c. of this section and shall take  such action under subsection c. as may be appropriate.

     L.1975, c. 226, s. 8, eff. Oct. 15, 1975.

34:4A-9.  Operator aggrieved by order;  application for review; hearing; decision;  appeal
    a.  Any operator who is aggrieved by an order issued pursuant to subsection  c. of section 8 of this act may, within 10 days after the service of such  order, apply to the commissioner for a review of such order.  It shall be the  duty of the commissioner to provide such hearing at the earliest convenient  day.  At such hearing the operator shall have the right to be heard personally  or by counsel, to cross-examine witnesses appearing against him and to produce  evidence in his own behalf.  After such hearing the commissioner shall report  his findings in writing and make such order as the facts may require.  Such  hearing and decision shall conform to the applicable provisions of the   "Administrative Procedure Act" (P.L.1968, c. 410;  C. 52:14B-1 et seq.).

    b.  Any operator aggrieved by a decision of the commissioner after such hearing may, within 45 days after the effective date thereof, appeal therefrom to the Superior Court.  No such appeal shall suspend the operation of an order made by the commissioner;  but the court may suspend such order pending determination of the appeal whenever in the opinion of the court justice may require such suspension.  The Superior Court shall hear the appeal at the earliest convenient day and shall make such decree as justice may require.

     L.1975, c. 226, s. 9, eff. Oct. 15, 1975.

34:4A-10.  Illegal operation;  penalty
    Any operator who operates a passenger tramway which has not been registered  by the commissioner as provided in this act, or after its registration has been  suspended or its operation forbidden by a lawful order of the commissioner  under this act, is a disorderly person and shall be subject to a fine of not  more than $50.00 or imprisonment for not more than 10 days, or both;  and each  day during which such illegal operation of a passenger tramway continues shall  constitute a separate offense.

     L.1975, c. 226, s. 10, eff. Oct. 15, 1975.

34:4A-11.  Failure of operator to comply with order;  order for cessation of  operation
    If any operator fails to comply with a lawful order issued by the commissioner pursuant to the provisions of this act, the commissioner may order  the operator to cease operations for such time as the commissioner considers  necessary for the protection of the safety of the public.

     L.1975, c. 226, s. 11, eff. Oct. 15, 1975.

34:4A-12.  Injunctions to compel compliance
    The commissioner shall have the power to bring injunctive proceedings in any  court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with any lawful order made  by him pursuant to the provisions of this act.

     L.1975, c. 226, s. 12, eff. Oct. 15, 1975.

34:4A-13.  Discharge or discrimination against employee due to actions to help enforce this act;  penalties
    Any operator who discharges or in any other manner discriminates against any  employee because such employee has made any complaint to the commissioner regarding a violation of this act or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, or because such employee has caused to be instituted or is about to cause to be instituted any proceeding under or related to this act or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, or because such employee has testified or is about to testify in any such proceeding, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction therefor, be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00.  Such operator shall be required, as a condition of such judgment  of conviction, to offer reinstatement in employment to any such discharged  employee and to correct any such discriminatory action, and also to pay to any  such employee, in full, all wages lost as a result of such discharge or  discriminatory action.

     L.1975, c. 226, s. 13, eff. Oct. 15, 1975.

34:4A-14.  Violations;  penalty
    In addition to any other sanctions herein or otherwise provided by law, the  commissioner, upon notice and hearing, may impose a penalty not exceeding $500.00 for any violation of this act or of any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder.  Unsatisfied penalties shall be recovered by and in the name of the commissioner in a civil action by a summary proceeding under the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S. 2A:58-1).  Where any violation of this act or of any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder is of a continuing nature, each day during which such violation continues after the date fixed by the commissioner in any order or notice for the correction or termination of such violation, shall constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense.

     L.1975, c. 226, s. 14, eff. Oct. 15, 1975.

34:4A-15.  Fees
    The commissioner shall charge operators a reasonable fee for conducting inspections, processing applications, and meeting all other responsibilities under this act.

     L.1975, c. 226, s. 15, eff. Oct. 15, 1975.

34:5-166.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the  "Construction Safety Act."

     L.1962, c. 45, s. 1.

34:5-167  Definitions.
 
 	2.	The following terms wherever used or referred to in this act shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context;
 
	a.	"Act" means this act and rules and regulations promulgated and adopted hereunder.
 
	b.	"Approved" means approved by the commissioner.
 
	c.	"Bureau" means Bureau of Engineering and Safety in the Division of Labor, Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	d.	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, or his authorized representative.
 
	e.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2007, c.39).
 
	f.	"Department" means the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	g.	"Employee" means any person suffered or permitted to work by an employer, having a specific regard to any of the activities included in section 3 of this act.
 
	h.	"Employer" means any corporation, partnership, individual proprietorship, joint venture, firm, company or other similar legal entity engaged in activities included in section 3 of this act or any person acting in the direct interest of any of the foregoing in relation to any employee or place of employment, having specific regard to any of the activities included in section 3 of this act.
 
	i.	"Place of employment" means any place in or about which an employee is suffered or permitted to work having specific regard to any of the activities included in section 3 of this act.
 
	L.1962, c.45, s.2; amended 2007, c.39, s.17.

34:5-168.  Construction Safety Act;  compliance by employers in construction  industry;  certificate of registration;  fees
    Any employer engaging in any activity related to the erection, construction,  alteration, demolition, repair or maintenance of buildings, structures,  bridges, highways, roadways, dams, tunnels, sewers, underground buildings or  structures, pipelines or ducts and all other construction projects or  facilities, shall comply with all requirements reasonably necessary for the  health and safety of employees and the general public. Such requirements shall  be set forth in rules and regulations adopted under the Construction Safety  Act.  The application and certificate forms shall be prescribed by the  commissioner.

    A certificate of registration shall expire 1 year from its effective date, unless sooner revoked or suspended by the commissioner.  A certificate of registration may be renewed upon the filing of an application for renewal on a form prescribed by the commissioner.  A certificate of registration shall at all times be prominently displayed at each place of business of the employer.

    The commissioner shall have the power and authority to charge an annual registration fee of not less than $15.00 nor more than $50.00 for each certificate of registration issued.

     L.1962, c. 45, s. 3.  Amended by L.1971, c. 154, s. 2, eff. May 20, 1971.

34:5-169  Rules and regulations; promulgation by commissioner.
 
	4.	The commissioner shall make and promulgate rules and regulations reasonably necessary to implement the purposes of this act.  Such rules and regulations shall go into effect 90 days following promulgation or at such later date as the rules and regulations shall provide.  The commissioner shall consult and seek the advice of interested and qualified associations, agencies and persons.  A notice of intent to promulgate proposed rules and regulations shall be published by the commissioner at least 30 days prior to the promulgation of such rules and regulations.  This notice of intent shall state briefly the purpose of the proposed rules and regulations and shall state that a copy of the proposed rules and regulations may be obtained by any person upon written request to the department. 
 
	L.1962, c.45, s.4; amended 2007, c.39, s.18.

34:5-170.  Enforcement of act by commissioner;  powers and duties; violations;  prosecutions
    The commissioner shall enforce the provisions of this act, make complaints against persons violating its provisions and prosecute violations of the same.

    The commissioner shall have the power and authority to examine and inspect any part of any project or facility included in section 3 of this act, and to make such investigation as is reasonably necessary to carry out the provisions of this act.

    No person shall obstruct, hinder or delay or interfere with by force or otherwise the performance by the commissioner of any duty under the provisions of this act.

    If upon inspection the commissioner discovers a condition which exists in violation of the provisions of this act he shall be authorized to order such violation to cease and to take such steps necessary to enforce such an order. Said order shall state the items which are in violation of the provisions of this act and shall provide a reasonable specified time within which the violations must cease.  The person responsible shall make the corrections necessary to comply with the requirements of this act within the time specified  in the order.

    If the violation constitutes an imminent hazard and the commissioner's order  is not obeyed, he shall forthwith order the cessation of work and shall prohibit the employment of any persons within the hazardous area except for the  purpose of eliminating the imminent hazard.  Upon notice received from the  person responsible that the imminent hazard has been eliminated, a reinspection  shall be made within 1 working day.  If upon reinspection the commissioner  determines that the imminent hazard has been eliminated, work may be resumed  immediately.  If the reinspection is not made within 1 working day following  said notice, work may be resumed. Where the person responsible denies that a  violation constituting an imminent hazard exists, he shall have the right to  apply to the commissioner for a hearing which must be afforded and a decision  rendered within 48 hours of the request for a hearing.  If the commissioner  rules against the petitioning party, he shall have the right to apply for injunctive relief against the order to cease work.  Jurisdiction for such injunctive relief shall be in the Law Division of the Superior Court of New Jersey, but the only issue to be determined shall be the existence of a violation constituting an imminent hazard.  Such relief may be sought by an Order to Show Cause and may be granted ex parte pending a hearing of the matter.

    Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the commissioner from prosecuting  any violation of this act, notwithstanding that such violations are corrected  in accordance with his order.

     L.1962, c. 45, s. 5.

34:5-171.  Exceptions to rules and regulations;  authority to grant
    The commissioner shall have the power and authority to grant exceptions from  the literal requirements of rules and regulations promulgated under this act.   Such exception shall be granted in any particular case only where it is clearly evident that it is necessary to prevent undue hardship or where existing conditions prevent compliance.  In no case shall any exception be granted unless in the opinion of the commissioner reasonable protection of the health and safety of workers and the public will be maintained thereby.  An application for an exception shall be filed in writing with the commissioner, setting forth specifically the requirements of the rules and regulations from which an exception is desired and the reason why enforcement of the applicable provisions of the rules and regulations is unreasonable.  The commissioner shall grant or deny the exception within 30 days from the date of receipt by him of the application.  The commissioner shall maintain a record of all exceptions granted and shall make such record reasonably available for public examination and shall mail a copy of all rulings granting exceptions to the members of the council.

     L.1962, c. 45, s. 6.

34:5-173.  Construction Safety Section in Bureau of Engineering and Safety;   functions
    There is hereby created a Construction Safety Section in the Bureau of Engineering and Safety in the Division of Labor, Department of Labor and Industry, the function of which shall be, under the direction of the commissioner, to administer and enforce the provisions of this act, and to perform such other duties as the commissioner may direct or as may be provided by law.

     L.1962, c. 45, s. 8.

34:5-174.  Chief engineer and safety inspectors;  appointment; qualifications
    The commissioner shall appoint a licensed professional engineer of this State who has had 5 years experience in any of the construction activities listed in section 3 of this act as chief engineer in charge of the Construction  Safety Section established in this act.  Construction safety inspectors shall  have a minimum of 5 years experience in construction work. All such  appointments shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Title 11 of the  Revised Statutes, Civil Service.

     L.1962, c. 45, s. 9.

34:5-175.  Report of loss of life or serious accident
    Whenever loss of life or serious accident shall occur at a place of employment covered by this act, the commissioner may require the person in charge to report such loss of life or serious accident to the department in the  quickest manner possible, and, in addition, to report in writing the pertinent  facts concerning the accident and the injured or deceased persons within 24  hours after such occurrence in a manner prescribed by the commissioner.

     L.1962, c. 45, s. 10.

34:5-176.  Privileged records;  inadmissibility as evidence;  exception
    The record or determination of any proceeding under this act or any statement or report of any kind whatsoever obtained or received in connection with the administration or enforcement of the provisions of this act shall be privileged and not admissible as evidence in a court of law in a civil action for any purpose whatsoever, except such actions that may be brought for the enforcement of this act.

     L.1962, c. 45, s. 11.

34:5-177.  Burden of care
    This act shall not in any way increase the burden of care ordinarily imposed  by the common law of the State upon those within its jurisdiction.

     L.1962, c. 45, s. 12.

34:5-178.  Violations;  penalties;  compromise of claims
    Any employer or any officer, agent or employee thereof who violates any of the provisions of this act shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $25.00  nor more than $500.00 to be collected in a civil action by a summary proceeding  under the penalty enforcement law (N.J.S. 2A:58-1 et seq.).  Any violation of  the act by an officer, agent or employee shall also be a violation of the act  by his employer if he had actual control over the cause of such violation.   Where the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it  continues after the date given by which the violation must be eliminated in  accordance with the order of the commissioner shall constitute an additional  separate and distinct offense, except during the time an appeal from said order  may be taken or is pending.

    The commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered to compromise and settle  any claim for a penalty under this section in such amount in the discretion of  the commissioner as may appear appropriate and equitable under all of the  circumstances.

     L.1962, c. 45, s. 13.

34:5-179.  Duties of persons near high voltage lines
    This act is not intended to alter in any way the duties of persons to take precautions in the proximity of high voltage lines imposed by P.L.1948, c. 249.

     L.1962, c. 45, s. 14.

34:5-180.  Exempt employers
    This act shall not apply to any employer subject to the provisions of section 34:6-141 of the Revised Statutes, to any employer subject to the provisions of chapter 197 of the laws of 1954, to any public utility subject to  the jurisdiction of, control, supervision and regulation by the Board of Public  Utility Commissioners in the Department of Public Utilities of this State, to  any public utility subject to the jurisdiction of, control, supervision and  regulation by a Federal regulatory body, or to natural gas pipeline utilities  subject to the provisions of the New Jersey Natural Gas Safety Act (chapter 166  of the laws of 1952).

     L.1962, c. 45, s. 15.

34:5-181.  Repeals
    Sections 34:3-1 to 34:3-20, inclusive, section 34:3-23, sections 34:5-1 to 34:5-23, inclusive, sections 34:5-33 to 34:5-162, inclusive, sections 34:5-164 and 34:5-165 of the Revised Statutes are hereby repealed; provided, however, that any rules and regulations adopted pursuant to the provisions of any section repealed herein shall remain in force and effect until 6 months following the effective date of this act or until sooner replaced by rules and regulations adopted under the provisions of this act.

     L.1962, c. 45, s. 16.

34:5-182  Dry cutting, grinding of masonry, certain circumstances; prohibited.

	1.	In order to protect the health and safety of employees against the effects of silicosis and other respiratory diseases, the dry cutting of masonry units by means of hand-held, gas-powered or electrical, portable chop saws or skill saws and the dry grinding of masonry materials shall be prohibited, except in instances in which it is determined, in a manner consistent with all applicable standards promulgated pursuant to the federal Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C.s.651 et seq.), that the use of water in the cutting or grinding is not feasible.  In any instance in which it is determined pursuant to this section that the use of water in the cutting or grinding is not feasible:

	a.	The employer shall use engineering and work practice controls to control the dust, such as a vacuum with high efficiency particulate air filter, or other dust control system;

	b.	Any dry cutting which occurs shall be done in a designated area away from craftworkers if possible; and

	c.	The employer shall provide workers with full face respirators as part of a complete respiratory program which includes training, the proper selection of respiratory cartridges and fit-testing to ensure that the workers are able to wear the respirators.

	The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency service personnel responding to emergency situations.

	L.2004,c.172,s.1.

34:5A-1.   Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the  "Worker and Community Right  to Know Act."

     L.1983, c. 315, s. 1, eff. Aug. 29, 1984.

34:5A-2.   Legislative findings and declarations
    The Legislature finds and declares that the proliferation of hazardous substances in the environment poses a growing threat to the public health, safety, and welfare;  that the constantly increasing number and variety of hazardous substances, and the many routes of exposure to them make it difficult  and expensive to adequately monitor and detect any adverse health effects  attributable thereto;  that individuals themselves are often able to detect and  thus minimize effects of exposure to hazardous substances if they are aware of  the identity of the substances and the early symptoms of unsafe exposure;  and  that individuals have an inherent right to know the full range of the risks  they face so that they can make reasoned decisions and take informed action  concerning their employment and their living conditions.

    The Legislature further declares that local health, fire, police, safety and  other government officials require detained information about the identity,  characteristics, and quantities of hazardous substances used and stored in  communities within their jurisdictions, in order to adequately plan for, and  respond to, emergencies, and enforce compliance with applicable laws and  regulations concerning these substances.

    The Legislature further declares that the extent of the toxic contamination  of the air, water, and land in this State has caused a high degree of concern  among its residents;  and that much of this concern is needlessly aggravated by  the unfamiliarity of these substances to residents.

    The Legislature therefore determines that it is in the public interest to establish a comprehensive program for the disclosure of information about hazardous substances in the workplace and the community, and to provide a procedure whereby residents of this State may gain access to this information.

     L.1983, c. 315, s. 2, eff. Aug. 29, 1984.

34:5A-3.   Definitions  
     3.   As used in this act:

  

    a.   "Chemical Abstracts Service number" means the unique identification number assigned by the Chemical Abstracts Service to chemicals.  

    b.   "Chemical name" means the scientific designation of a chemical in accordance with the nomenclature system developed by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry or the Chemical Abstracts Service rules of nomenclature.  

    c.   "Common name" means any designation or identification such as a code name, code number, trade name, brand name or generic name used to identify a chemical other than by its chemical name.  

    d.   "Container" means a receptacle used to hold a liquid, solid, or gaseous substance, including, but not limited to, bottles, pipelines, bags, barrels, boxes, cans, cylinders, drums, cartons, vessels, vats, and stationary or mobile storage tanks.  "Container" shall not include process containers.  

    e.   "Council" means the Right to Know Advisory Council created pursuant to section 18 of this act.  

    f.   "County health department" means a county health agency established pursuant to P.L.1975, c.329 (C.26:3A2-1 et seq.), or the office of a county clerk in a county which has not established a department.  

    g.   "Employee representative" means a certified collective bargaining agent or an attorney whom an employee authorizes to exercise his rights to request information pursuant to the provisions of this act, or a parent or legal guardian of a minor employee.  

    h.   "Employer" means any person or corporation in the State engaged in business operations which has a Standard Industrial Classification, as designated in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual prepared by the federal Office of Management and Budget, within the following Major Group Numbers, Group Numbers, or Industry Numbers, as the case may be, except as otherwise provided herein:  Major Group Number 07 (Agricultural Services), only Industry Number 0782--Lawn and garden services; Major Group Numbers 20 through 39 inclusive (manufacturing industries); Major Group Number 45 (Transportation by Air), only Industry Number 4511--Air Transportation, certified carriers, and Group Number 458--Air Transportation Services; Major Group Number 46 (Pipelines, Except Natural Gas); Major Group Number 47 (Transportation Services), only Group Numbers 471--Freight Forwarding, 474--Rental of Railroad Cars, and 478--Miscellaneous Services Incidental to Transportation; Major Group Number 48 (Communication), only Group Numbers 481--Telephone Communication, and 482--Telegraph Communication; Major Group Number 49 (Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services); Major Group Number 50 (Wholesale Trade--Durable Goods), only Industry Numbers 5085--Industrial Supplies, 5087--Service Establishment Equipment and Supplies, and 5093--Scrap and Waste Materials; Major Group Number 51 (Wholesale trade, nondurable goods), only Group Numbers 512--Drugs, Drug Proprietaries and Druggist's Sundries, 516--Chemicals and Allied Products, 517--Petroleum and petroleum products, 518--Beer, Wine and Distilled Alcoholic Beverages, and 519--Miscellaneous Nondurable Goods; Major Group Number 55 (Automobile Dealers and Gasoline Service Stations), only Group Numbers 551--Motor Vehicle Dealers (New and Used), 552--Motor Vehicle Dealers (Used only), and 554--Gasoline Service Stations; Major Group Number 72 (Personal Services), only Industry Numbers 7216--Dry Cleaning Plants, Except Rug Cleaning, 7217--Carpet and Upholstery Cleaning, and 7218--Industrial Launderers; Major Group Number 73 (Business Services), only Industry Number 7397 Commercial testing laboratories; Major Group Number 75 (automotive repair, services, and garages), only Group Number 753--Automotive Repair Shops; Major Group Number 76 (miscellaneous repair services), only Industry Number 7692--Welding Repair; Major Group Number 80 (health services), only Group Number 806--Hospitals; and Major Group Number 82 (educational services), only Group Numbers 821--Elementary and Secondary Schools and 822--Colleges and Universities, and Industry Number 8249--Vocational Schools. Except for the purposes of section 26 of this act, "employer" means the State and local governments, or any agency, authority, department, bureau, or instrumentality thereof, or any non-profit, non-public school, college or university.  

    i.   "Environmental hazardous substance" means any substance on the environmental hazardous substance list.  

    j.   "Environmental hazardous substance list" means the list of environmental hazardous substances developed by the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to section 4 of this act.  

    k.   "Environmental survey" means a written form prepared by the Department of Environmental Protection and transmitted to an employer, on which the employer shall provide certain information concerning each of the environmental hazardous substances at his facility, including, but not limited to, the following:  

    (1)  The chemical name and Chemical Abstracts Service number of the environmental hazardous substance;  

    (2)  A description of the use of the environmental hazardous substance at the facility;

  

    (3)  The quantity of the environmental hazardous substance produced at the facility;

  

    (4)  The quantity of the environmental hazardous substance brought into the facility;

  

    (5)  The quantity of the environmental hazardous substance consumed at the facility;

  

    (6)  The quantity of the environmental hazardous substance shipped out of the facility as or in products;  

    (7)  The maximum inventory of the environmental hazardous substance stored at the facility, the method of storage, and the frequency and methods of transfer;  

    (8)  The total stack or point-source emissions of the environmental hazardous substance;

  

    (9)  The total estimated fugitive or nonpoint-source emissions of the environmental hazardous substance;  

    (10)  The total discharge of the environmental hazardous substance into the surface or groundwater, the treatment methods, and the raw wastewater volume and loadings;  

    (11)  The total discharge of the environmental hazardous substance into publicly owned treatment works;  

    (12)  The quantity, and methods of disposal, of any wastes containing an environmental hazardous substance, the method of on-site storage of these wastes, the location or locations of the final disposal site for these wastes, and the identity of the hauler of the wastes;  

    (13)  The total quantity of environmental hazardous substances generated at the facility, including hazardous substances generated as nonproduct output;  

    (14)  The quantity of environmental hazardous substances recycled on-site and off-site; and  

    (15)  Information pertaining to pollution prevention activities at the facility.

  

    As used in this subsection, "pollution prevention" and "nonproduct output" shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 3 of P.L.1991, c.235 (C.13:1D-37).  

    l.   "Facility" means the building, equipment and contiguous area at a single location used for the conduct of business.  Except for the purposes of subsection c. of section 13, section 14, and subsection b. of section 25 of this act, "facility" shall not include a research and development laboratory. 

    m.   "Hazardous substance" means any substance, or substance contained in a mixture, included on the workplace hazardous substance list developed by the Department of Health pursuant to section 5 of this act, introduced by an employer to be used, studied, produced, or otherwise handled at a facility. "Hazardous substance" shall not include:  

    (1)  Any article containing a hazardous substance if the hazardous substance is present in a solid form which does not pose any acute or chronic health hazard to an employee exposed to it;  

    (2)  Any hazardous substance constituting less than 1% of a mixture unless the hazardous substance is present in an aggregate amount of 500 pounds or more at a facility;  

    (3)  Any hazardous substance which is a special health hazard substance constituting less than the threshold percentage established by the Department of Health for that special health hazard substance when present in a mixture; or  

    (4)  Any hazardous substance present in the same form and concentration as a product packaged for distribution and use by the general public to which an employee's exposure during handling is not significantly greater than a consumer's exposure during the principal use of the toxic substance.  

    n.   "Hazardous substance fact sheet" means a written document prepared by the Department of Health for each hazardous substance and transmitted by the department to employers pursuant to the provisions of this act, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:  

    (1)  The chemical name, the Chemical Abstracts Service number, the trade name, and common names of the hazardous substance;  

    (2)  A reference to all relevant information on the hazardous substance from the most recent edition of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health's Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances;  

    (3)  The hazardous substance's solubility in water, vapor pressure at standard conditions of temperature and pressure, and flash point;  

    (4)  The hazard posed by the hazardous substance, including its toxicity, carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, teratogenicity, flammability, explosiveness, corrosivity and reactivity, including specific information on its reactivity with water;  

    (5)  A description, in nontechnical language, of the acute and chronic health effects of exposure to the hazardous substance, including the medical conditions that might be aggravated by exposure, and any permissible exposure limits established by the federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration;  

    (6)  The potential routes and symptoms of exposure to the hazardous substance;

  

    (7)  The proper precautions, practices, necessary personal protective equipment, recommended engineering controls, and any other necessary and appropriate measures for the safe handling of the hazardous substance, including specific information on how to extinguish or control a fire that involves the hazardous substance; and  

    (8)  The appropriate emergency and first aid procedures for spills, fires, potential explosions, and accidental or unplanned emissions involving the hazardous substance.  

    o.   "Label" means a sign, emblem, sticker, or marker affixed to or stenciled onto a container listing the information required pursuant to section 14 of this act.  

    p.   "Mixture" means a combination of two or more substances not involving a chemical reaction.  

    q.   "Process container" means a container, excluding a pipeline, the content of which is changed frequently; a container of 10 gallons or less in capacity, into which substances are transferred from labeled containers, and which is intended only for the immediate use of the employee who performs the transfer; a container on which a label would be obscured by heat, spillage or other factors; or a test tube, beaker, vial, or other container which is routinely used and reused.  

    r.   "Research and development laboratory" means a specially designated area used primarily for research, development, and testing activity, and not primarily involved in the production of goods for commercial sale, in which hazardous substances or environmental hazardous substances are used by or under the direct supervision of a technically qualified person.  

    s.   "Special health hazard substance" means any hazardous substance on the special health hazard substance list.  

    t.   "Special health hazard substance list" means the list of special health hazard substances developed by the Department of Health pursuant to section 5 of this act for which an employer may not make a trade secret claim.

    u.   "Trade secret" means any formula, plan, pattern, process, production data, information, or compilation of information, which is not patented, which is known only to an employer and certain other individuals, and which is used in the fabrication and production of an article of trade or service, and which gives the employer possessing it a competitive advantage over businesses who do not possess it, or the secrecy of which is certified by an appropriate official of the federal government as necessary for national defense purposes. The chemical name and Chemical Abstracts Service number of a substance shall be considered a trade secret only if the employer can establish that the substance is unknown to competitors.  In determining whether a trade secret is valid pursuant to section 15 of this act, the Department of Health, or the Department of Environmental Protection, as the case may be, shall consider material provided by the employer concerning (1) the extent to which the information for which the trade secret claim is made is known outside the employer's business; (2) the extent to which the information is known by employees and others involved in the employer's business; (3) the extent of measures taken by the employer to guard the secrecy of the information; (4) the value of the information, to the employer or the employer's competitor; (5) the amount of effort or money expended by the employer in developing the information; and (6) the ease or difficulty with which the information could be disclosed by analytical techniques, laboratory procedures, or other means. 

    v.   "Trade secret registry number" means a code number temporarily or permanently assigned to the identity of a substance in a container by the Department of Health pursuant to section 15 of this act.  

    w.   "Trade secret claim" means a written request, made by an employer pursuant to section 15 of this act, to withhold the public disclosure of information on the grounds that the disclosure would reveal a trade secret.  

    x.   "Workplace hazardous substance list" means the list of hazardous substances developed by the Department of Health pursuant to section 5 of this act.  

    y.   "Workplace survey" means a written document, prepared by the Department of Health and completed by an employer pursuant to this act, on which the employer shall report each hazardous substance present at his facility.  

    L.1983,c.315,s.3; amended 1985,c.543; 1991,c.25; 1991,c.235,s.17.  

34:5A-4.   Development of environmental hazardous substance list  
     4. a. The Department of Environmental Protection shall develop an environmental hazardous substance list which shall include the list of substances developed and used by the department for the purposes of the Industrial Survey Project, established pursuant to P.L.1970, c.33 (C.13:1D-1 et seq.), and any substance on the list established by the United States Environmental Protection Agency for reporting pursuant to 42 U.S.C. s.11023 and may include other substances which the department, based on documented scientific evidence, determines pose a threat to the public health and safety.

    b.   The department shall develop an environmental survey, which shall be designed to enable employers to report information about environmental hazardous substances at their facilities.  

    c.   The department shall prepare and, upon request, make available to employers, county health departments, or the public a Spanish translation of the environmental survey.  The department shall also prepare and make available a Spanish translation of any written material prepared by the department to inform the public of the information available pursuant to the provisions of this act.  

    d.   Three months prior to the effective date of this act the department shall adopt, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), the environmental hazardous substance list.  

    L.1983,c.315,s.4; amended 1991,c.235,s.18.  

34:5A-5.   Workplace hazardous substance list;  special health hazard substance list;  workplace survey;  hazardous substance fact sheet;  Spanish translation
    a.  The Department of Health shall develop a workplace hazardous substance list which shall include:

    (1) Any substance or substance contained in a mixture regulated by the federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration under Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 1910, subpart z;

    (2) Any environmental hazardous substance;  and

     (3) Any other substance which the department, based on documented scientific  evidence, determines poses a threat to the health or safety of an employee.

     b.  The department shall develop a special health hazard substance list comprising hazardous substances which, because of their known carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, teratogenicity, flammability, explosiveness, corrosivity, or reactivity pose a special hazard to health and safety, and for which an employer shall not be permitted to make a trade secret claim.

    c.  The department shall develop a workplace survey designed to facilitate the reporting by employers of those hazardous substances present at their facilities.  The workplace survey shall include a copy of the special health hazard substance list.

    d.  The department shall develop a hazardous substance fact sheet for each hazardous substance on the workplace hazardous substance list.

    e.  The department shall prepare and, upon request, make available to employers, county health departments, and the public a Spanish translation of the workplace survey and each hazardous substance fact sheet.  The department shall also prepare and make available a Spanish translation of any written material prepared by the department to inform employees of their rights under this act.

    f.  Three months prior to the effective date of this act, the department shall adopt, pursuant to the  "Administrative Procedure Act,"  P.L. 1968, c. 410 (C. 52:14B-1 et seq.), a workplace hazardous substance list.

     L.1983, c. 315, s. 5, eff. Aug. 29, 1984.

34:5A-6.   Distribution of workplace and environmental surveys to employer
    a.  Within five days of the effective date of this act, the Department of Health shall transmit copies of the workplace survey to the Department of Labor.  Upon receipt of the workplace survey, the Department of Labor shall transmit the workplace survey to each employer in the State.

    b.  Within five days of the effective date of this act, the Department of Environmental Protection shall transmit an environmental survey to each employer whose business activities, according to criteria developed by the department, warrant the reporting of the information required on the environmental survey.  The department may transmit an environmental survey to every employer.

     L.1983, c. 315, s. 6, eff. Aug. 29, 1984.

34:5A-7.   Completion, transmittal of workplace survey  
     7. a. Except as otherwise provided in section 15 of this act, an employer shall have until October 30, 1985, or within 90 days of the employer's receipt of the workplace survey, whichever is later, to complete the survey and transmit a copy of the completed survey to the Department of Health, the health department of the county in which the employer's facility is located, the local fire department, and the local police department.  If an employer has reason to believe that a mixture present at his facility contains a hazardous substance as a component, but is unable to obtain from the manufacturer or supplier of the mixture the chemical names and Chemical Abstracts Service numbers of the components of the mixture, he shall list the mixture by its common name in the space provided on the survey.  The department shall have the responsibility to obtain the chemical names and Chemical Abstracts Service numbers of the components of the mixture so listed, and, upon obtaining this information, shall transmit it to the employer along with any appropriate hazardous substance fact sheet or sheets and directions to the employer on how to communicate this information to his employees.  

    b.   Except as otherwise provided in section 15 of this act, an employer shall transmit a copy of the completed environmental survey to the Department of Environmental Protection and the health department of the county in which the employer's facility is located, and pertinent sections of the survey to the local fire department and the local police department on the date on which Toxic Chemical Release Forms are due to be transmitted to the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to 42 U.S.C. s.11023.  

    L.1983,c.315,s.7; amended 1985,c.64,s.1; l985,c.2l6,s.l; 1991,c.235,s.19.

34:5A-8.   Hazardous substance fact sheets 
    a.   Upon receipt of a completed workplace survey from an employer, the Department of Health shall transmit to that employer a hazardous substance fact sheet for each hazardous substance reported by the employer on the workplace survey.  If an employer makes a trade secret claim for information on the workplace survey pursuant to section 15 of this act, the department shall transmit a hazardous substance fact sheet for that substance with the identity of the substance concealed. 

   b.   Any employer whose workplace survey transmitted to the Department of Health pursuant to section 7 of this act indicates that no hazardous substances are present at the facility shall be exempt from the provisions of this act for that facility, except for the requirement to annually update the workplace survey pursuant to section 10 of this act, and except for the provisions of section 33 of this act.  Any employer exempted from the provisions of this act pursuant to this subsection who transmits to the Department of Health an update of the workplace survey which indicates that a hazardous substance is present at the employer's facility shall immediately be subject to the provisions of this act. 

   L.  1983, c. 315, s. 8, eff. Aug. 29, 1984.  Amended by L.  1985, c. 534, s. 1, eff. Jan. 21, 1986. 

34:5A-9.  Environmental surveys;  file;  clarifying information; update; request for copy
    a.  The Department of Environmental Protection shall maintain a file of all  completed environmental surveys received from employers.  Each environmental  survey received by the department shall be retained by the department for 30  years.

    b.  The department may require an employer to submit information clarifying  any statement made on the environmental survey.  The department, subject to the  provisions of section 15 of this act if applicable, shall transmit this  clarifying information to the appropriate county health department, local fire  department, and local police department as it deems necessary.

    c.  The department shall require every employer to update the environmental  survey for his facility every other year.  If there is any significant change  during a nonreporting year in the information reported on his environmental  survey, the employer shall inform the department of the change.  The department  may require an employer to update the environmental survey for his facility  every year.

    d.  Any person may request in writing from the department a copy of an environmental survey for a facility, and the department shall transmit any survey so requested within 30 days of the request therefor.

     L.1983, c. 315, s. 9, eff. Aug. 29, 1984.

34:5A-10.  Retention of workplace surveys
	10. a.  The Department of Health shall maintain a file of all completed workplace surveys received from employers.  Each workplace survey received shall be retained by the department for 30 years.  The department shall also retain for 30 years each hazardous substance fact sheet.

	b. 	The department shall require every employer to update the workplace survey for his facility every five years, and shall supply each employer with any necessary additional hazardous substance fact sheets.  If any additional workplace hazardous substance is present at the employer's facility during a non-reporting year that had not been previously reported, the employer shall inform the department and all other appropriate departments or entities which receive a copy of the completed survey as required pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1983, c.315 (C.34:5A-7) of the change no later than the July 15 following the change.

	c. 	Upon request by the department, an employer shall provide the department with copies of employee health and exposure records, including those maintained for, and supplied to, the federal government.

	d. 	Any person may request in writing from the department a copy of a workplace survey for a facility, together with the appropriate hazardous substance fact sheets, and the department shall transmit any material so requested within 30 days of the request therefor.  Any request by an employee for material pertaining to the facility where he is employed made pursuant to this subsection shall be treated by the department as confidential.

	L.1983,c.315,s.10; amended 1995,c.259,s.4.

34:5A-10.1  Definitions relative to use, storage of hazardous substances in schools, child care centers.
 
 	1.	As used in this act:

	"Child care center" means a child care center licensed pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1983, c.492 (C.30:5B-1 et seq.);
 
	"Hazardous substance" means any substance, or substance in a mixture, included on the hazardous substance list developed by the Department of Health pursuant to the "Worker and Community Right to Know Act," P.L.1983, c.315 (C.34:5A-1 et seq.).
 
	"Hazardous substance" shall not include:
 
	(1)	Any article containing a hazardous substance if the hazardous substance is present in a solid form which does not pose any acute or chronic health hazard to any person exposed to it;
 
	(2)	Any hazardous substance constituting less than one percent of a mixture unless the hazardous substance is present in an aggregate amount of 500 pounds or more in a container in a public or private school or child care center building;
 
	(3)	Any hazardous substance which is a special health hazardous substance constituting less than the threshold percentage established by the Department of Health pursuant to P.L.1983, c.315 (C.34:5A-1 et seq.), for that special health hazardous substance when present in a mixture;
 
	(4)	Any hazardous substance present in the same form and concentration as a product packaged for distribution and use by consumers and which is not a product intended primarily for commercial use;
 
	(5)	Any fuel in a motor vehicle;
 
	(6)	Tobacco or tobacco products;
 
	(7)	Wood or wood products;
 
	(8)	Foods, drugs, or cosmetics;
 
	(9)	Hazardous substances which are an integral part of a building's structure or furnishings;
 
	(10) Products which are personal property and are intended for personal use; and
 
	(11) Any substance used in the routine maintenance of a public or private school or child care center building or its grounds, any substance used in a classroom science laboratory, any substance used in a school occupational training facility, including laboratories and shops, and any substance used in the normal operation of the classrooms or administrative offices of a public or private school or child care center, including any substance used in the heating or cooling of the school or child care center;
 
	"Hazardous substance fact sheet" means the hazardous substance fact sheets prepared by the Department of Health pursuant to the "Worker and Community Right to Know Act," P.L.1983, c.315 (C.34:5A-1 et seq.);
 
	"Public school or private school" has the same meaning as set forth in N.J.S.18A:1-1.
 
	L.1997, c.364, s.1; amended 2012, c.17, s.399.

34:5A-10.2  Use of hazardous substance prohibited when children are expected to be present; exceptions.
  
	2. a. No person shall use or allow the use of any hazardous substance in or on any building or grounds used as a public school, a private school, or child care center at any time when children are expected to be present in the building.  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply when an emergency condition, as deemed by the Board of Education or the chief school administrator in the case of any public school, or the person having responsibility for the operation of any private school or child care center, necessitates the use of a hazardous substance when children are present.
 
	b.	Any person who uses or stores, or causes or allows the use or storage of any hazardous substance in or on any building or grounds used as a public school, a private school, or child care center shall ensure that the use or storage of that hazardous substance is in compliance with the regulations adopted by the Department of Health pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1997, c.364 (C.34:5A-10.5).
 
	L.1997, c.364, s.2; amended 2012, c.17, s.400.

34:5A-10.3.  Posting of notice of construction, activity involving hazardous substance
	3.  a. The Board of Education or the chief school administrator in the case of any public school, or the person having responsibility for the operation of any private school or child care center, shall post on a bulletin board located in the public or private school or child care center a notice of any construction or other activity to take place at that school or child care center that will involve the use of a hazardous substance.  The notice shall state the activity to be conducted and the hazardous substances to be used.  The notice shall be posted at least two days prior to the construction or other activity except where an emergency condition, as deemed by the Board of Education or the chief school administrator  in the case of any public school, or the person having responsibility for the operation of any private school or child care center, prevents the two-day notice in which case the notice shall be posted as soon as practicable.

	b.	The Board of Education or the chief school administrator in the case of any public school, or the person having responsibility for the operation of any private school or child care center shall make available to any person who requests it, the hazardous substance fact sheet for any hazardous substance being stored on site or that is being used in or on the school or center building or grounds during any construction or other activity.

	c.	The Board of Education or the chief school administrator in the case of any public school, or the person having responsibility for the operation of any private school or child care center shall, at least once per year, send a notice to a parent or guardian of each child attending the school or child care center, which notice may be contained in the school's or center's annual handbook, stating that notice of any construction or other activities involving the use of any hazardous substances will be posted on a bulletin board in the school or child care center, that hazardous substances may be stored at the school or child care center at various times throughout the year,  and that hazardous substance fact sheets for any of the hazardous substances being used or stored are available at the school or child care center.

	L.1997,c.364,s.3.

34:5A-10.4.  Responsibility for enforcement; violations, penalties
	4.	The local health agency for the jurisdiction in which the public or private school or child care center is located shall enforce the provisions of this act.  Whenever, on the basis of information available, a local health agency finds that a person has violated any of the provisions of P.L.1997, c.364 (C.34:5A-10.1 et seq.), the local health agency may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to impose a civil penalty for that violation.  Any person who violates any provision of this act shall be subject, upon order of a court, to a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500 for each day during which the violation continues.  Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be collected, and any costs incurred in connection therewith may be recovered, in a summary proceeding pursuant to "the penalty enforcement law" (N.J.S. 2A:58-1 et seq.).  The Superior Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce "the penalty enforcement law."

	L.1997,c.364,s.4.

34:5A-10.5  Regulations.
	5.	The Department of Health, in consultation with the Departments of Education, Human Services, Children and Families and Environmental Protection, and within 180 days of the enactment of P.L.1997, c.364 (C.34:5A-10.1 et seq.), shall adopt, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), regulations necessary to implement  the provisions of this act which are consistent with federal and State indoor air quality standards and standards governing the exposure of children to hazardous substances as they are adopted by the federal government.
 
	L.1997, c.364, s.5; amended 2006, c.47, s.183; 2012, c.17, s.401.

34:5A-11.  Request for Spanish translation
    a.  An employer shall, upon request, provide an employee whose native language is Spanish with a Spanish translation of a workplace survey, hazardous  substance fact sheet, and, if applicable, an environmental survey obtained from  the Department of Health or the Department of Environmental Protection, as the  case may be.  An employer shall, upon request, provide employees whose native  language is Spanish with the education and training program required pursuant  to section 13 of this act in Spanish.

    b.  A county health department shall, upon request, provide copies of the environmental survey and the workplace survey in a Spanish translation provided  by the Department of Health and Department of Environmental Protection.

     L.1983, c. 315, s. 11, eff. Aug. 29, 1984.

34:5A-12.  Employer's central file;  posting of notice;  distribution of literature on employee rights;  employee access to information
    Every employer shall establish and maintain a central file at his facility in which he shall retain a workplace survey for the facility, appropriate hazardous substance fact sheets, and, if applicable, a copy of the environmental survey for the facility.  Every employer shall post on bulletin boards readily accessible to employees a notice of the availability of the information in the file.  Every employer employing employees whose native language is Spanish shall also post the notice in Spanish.  Every employer shall supply employees with any material designed and provided by the Department of Health, the Department of Environmental Protection, or the Department of Labor to inform employees of their rights under this act.  An employer shall provide an employee with access to a workplace survey, appropriate hazardous substance fact sheets, and, if applicable, an environmental survey, within five working days of a request therefor.

     L.1983, c. 315, s. 12, eff. Aug. 29, 1984.

34:5A-13.  Employee education, training program; certification of instructors 
	13.  a.  Every employer shall have until October 30, 1985 to establish an education and training program for his employees, which shall be designed to inform employees in writing and orally of the nature of the hazardous substances to which they are exposed in the course of their employment and the potential health risks which the hazardous substances pose, and to train them in the proper and safe procedures for handling the hazardous substances under all circumstances.  An employer shall provide his employees with the program not later than December 31, 1985, and every two years thereafter. Any person who becomes an employee after the conclusion of the initial program shall be provided with the program within the first month of employment. Prior to entering an employment agreement with a prospective employee an employer shall notify a prospective employee of the availability of workplace surveys and appropriate hazardous substance fact sheets for the facility at which the prospective employee will be employed; except that this notification requirement shall not be applicable to employers before December 31, 1985.

	b. 	Any employer who has established an employee education and training program for hazardous substances prior to the effective date of this act may request the Department of Health to certify that education and training program, which certification shall constitute compliance with subsection a. of this section.

	c. 	Every employer shall establish an education and training program for his employees who work in a research and development laboratory, which shall be designed to inform employees in writing and orally of the nature of the hazardous substances to which they are exposed in the course of their employment and the potential health risks which the hazardous substances pose, and to train them in the proper and safe procedures for handling the hazardous substances under all circumstances.  An employer shall provide his employees with the program not later than December 31, 1985, and every two years thereafter. Any person who becomes an employee after the conclusion of the initial program shall be provided with the program within the first month of employment.

	d. 	The Department of Health shall establish a program for the certification of education and training programs provided to employers, for remuneration, for purposes of compliance with P.L.1983, c.315. The certification shall be valid for at least 12 months, shall provide for provisional and permanent certification, and shall be renewable.

	e. 	The Department of Health shall establish a program for the certification of persons who are paid pursuant to the terms of a contract by employers to conduct education and training programs for purposes of compliance with P.L.1983, c.315.  The certification shall be valid for at least 12 months, shall provide for provisional and permanent certification, and shall be renewable.

	f. 	A person paid pursuant to the terms of a contract by an employer to conduct or provide an education and training program for purposes of compliance with P.L.1983, c.315 shall be required to be certified pursuant to subsection d. or e. of this section, as appropriate, prior to conducting or providing the program.
 
	g. 	The fee for certification for a 12-month period and the fee for a renewal of a certification each shall not exceed $500.00.  The fee for the certification and renewal shall be established pursuant to rules and regulations adopted by the Department of Health.  All revenues from fees for the issuance or renewal of certifications shall be credited to the "Worker and Community Right to Know Fund" created pursuant to section 26 of P.L.1983, c.315.  Applications for certification shall be made to the Commissioner of Health in the manner and on a form as the commissioner shall prescribe by rule or regulation.

	h. 	The Department of Health shall adopt, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this section.  

	i. 	Any person required to be certified by the Department of Health pursuant to this section who violates the provisions of subsection f. of this section, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense.

	j. 	The Commissioner of Health, upon making a finding that a person granted certification has violated any provision of this section or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto, may revoke, suspend, or modify any certification issued pursuant to subsection d. or e. of this section.  A person whose certification is to be revoked, suspended, or modified pursuant to this subsection shall be entitled to a hearing, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), to contest that action.

L.1983,c.315,s.13; amended 1985,c.64,s.2; l985,c.2l6,s.2; 1989,c.155,s.1; 1995,c.259,s.5.

34:5A-14  Labeling of containers.
  
	14. a. Every employer shall have until October 30, 1985 to take any action necessary to assure that every container at the employer's facility containing a hazardous substance shall bear a label indicating the chemical name and Chemical Abstracts Service number of the hazardous substance or the trade secret registry number assigned to the hazardous substance.  The labels on all containers except pipelines and underground storage tanks shall be designed and affixed in such a manner to ensure that if there is a flood or other natural disaster when the container is transported or stored, the label shall remain in place and visible.  Employers may label containers in a research and development laboratory by means of a code or number system, if the code or number system will enable an employee to readily make a cross-reference to a hazardous substance fact sheet which will provide the employee with the chemical name and Chemical Abstracts Service number of the hazardous substance contained in the container, or the trade secret registry number assigned to the hazardous substance.  The code or number system shall be designed to allow the employee free and ready access at all times to the chemical name and Chemical Abstracts Service number of the hazardous substance in the container, shall be designed to allow the employee access to this information without the permission or assistance of management, and shall be available to the employee at close proximity to the employee's specific job location or locations.  Employers shall be required to label pipelines only at the valve or valves located at the point at which a hazardous substance enters a facility's pipeline system, and at normally operated valves, outlets, vents, drains, and sample connections designed to allow the release of a hazardous substance from the pipeline.
 
	b.	Within two years of the effective date of this act, every employer shall take any action necessary to assure that every container at the employer's facility bears a label indicating the chemical name and Chemical Abstracts Service number of the substance in the container, except as provided in subsection d. of this section, or the trade secret registry number assigned to the substance.  Employers may label containers in a research and development laboratory by means of a code or number system, if the code or number system will enable an employee to readily make a cross-reference to documentary material retained on file by the employer at the facility which will provide the employee with the chemical name and Chemical Abstracts Service number of the substance contained in the container, except as provided in subsection d. of this section, or the trade secret registry number assigned to the substance.  The code or number system shall be designed to allow the employee free and ready access at all times to the chemical name and Chemical Abstracts Service number of the substance in the container, shall be designed to allow the employee access to this information without the permission or assistance of management, and shall be available to the employee at close proximity to the employee's specific job location or locations. If a container contains a mixture, an employer shall be required to insure that the label identify the chemical names and Chemical Abstracts Service numbers, except as provided in subsection d. of this section, or the trade secret registry numbers, of the five most predominant substances contained in the mixture.  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any substance constituting less than 1% of a mixture unless the substance is present at the facility in an aggregate amount of 500 pounds or more.  Employers shall be required to label pipelines only at the valve or valves located at the point at which a substance enters a facility's pipeline system, and at normally operated valves, outlets, vents, drains, and sample connections designed to allow the release of a substance from the pipeline.  One year after the effective date of this act the Department of Health shall establish criteria for containers which, because of the finished and durable characteristics of their contents, shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection.  These standards shall be consistent with the intent of this subsection to provide for the labeling of every container which may contain a substance which is potentially hazardous.
 
	c.	The labeling requirements of subsections a. and b. of this section shall not apply to containers labeled pursuant to the "Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act," 61 Stat. 163 (7 U.S.C. s.121 et al.), except that the label for any such container except pipelines and underground storage tanks shall be designed and affixed in such a manner to ensure that if there is a flood or other natural disaster when the container is transported or stored, the label shall remain in place and visible.  The Department of Health may, by rule and regulation, certify containers labeled pursuant to any other federal act as labeled in compliance with the provisions of this section.
 
	d.	One year after the effective date of this act the Department of Health shall adopt, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), a list of substances the containers of which may be labeled with the common names and Chemical Abstracts Service numbers of their contents.  The department shall include on the list adopted pursuant to this subsection only substances which are widely recognized by their common names.  An employer shall provide the chemical name of a substance in a container labeled pursuant to this subsection within five working days of the request therefor.
 
	L.1983, c.315, s.14; amended 1985, c.64, s.3; 1985, c.216, s.3; 2007, c.190, s.1; 2012, c.17, s.402.

34:5A-15.  Trade secret claim
    a.  If an employer believes that disclosing information required by this act  will reveal a trade secret, he may file with the appropriate department a trade  secret claim as herein provided.  As used in this section, "department" means  either the Department of Health or Department of Environmental Protection, as  the case may be.

    b.  If an employer claims that disclosing information on either the workplace survey or the environmental survey would reveal a trade secret, he shall file with the appropriate department a trade secret claim within 90 days of receipt of the survey.  An employer making a trade secret claim shall submit  two copies of the survey to the department, one with the information for which  a trade secret claim is being made concealed, and one in an envelope marked   "Confidential"  containing the information for which a trade secret claim is  being made, which the department, during the pendency of the trade secret  claim, shall keep in a locked file or room. On the copies of the survey sent  to the county health department, local fire department, and local police  department, and retained on file at the facility, the employer shall conceal  the information for which he is making a trade secret claim.

    c.  If an employer claims that labeling a container pursuant to the provisions of section 14 of this act would reveal a trade secret, he shall file  a trade secret claim with the Department of Health.  Upon receipt of the trade  secret claim, the department shall assign a trade secret registry number to the  claim, and transmit the trade secret registry number to the employer.  Upon  receipt of the trade secret registry number, the employer shall affix the trade  secret registry number to each container containing a substance for which the  trade secret claim was made.

    d.  The department shall act to make a determination on the validity of a trade secret claim when a request is made pursuant to the provisions of this act for the disclosure of the information for which the trade secret claim was made, or at any time that the department deems appropriate.  Upon making a determination on the validity of a trade secret claim, the department shall inform the employer of the determination by certified mail.  If the department determines that the employer's trade secret claim is not valid, the employer shall have 45 days from the receipt of the department's determination to file with the department a written request for an administrative hearing on the determination.  If the employer does not file such a request within 45 days, the department shall take action to provide that the information for which the trade secret claim was made be disclosed pursuant to the provisions of this act.  If an employer requests an administrative hearing pursuant to the provisions of this subsection, the department shall refer the matter to the Office of Administrative Law, for a hearing thereon.  At the hearing the employer shall have the burden to show that the trade secret claim is valid. Within 45 days of receipt of the administrative law judge's recommendation, the department shall affirm, reject, or modify the recommendation.  The department's action shall be considered the final agency action for the purposes of the  "Administrative Procedure Act,"  P.L. 1968, c. 410 (C. 52:14B-1 et seq.), and shall be subject only to judicial review as provided in the Rules of Court.  The department shall inform the employer of its decision on the administrative law judge's recommendation by certified mail.  If the department determines that the trade secret claim is not valid, the employer shall have 45 days to notify the department in writing that he has filed to appeal the department's decision in the courts.  If the employer does not so notify the department, the department shall take action to provide that the information for which the trade secret claim was made be disclosed pursuant to the provisions of this act.

    e.  The department shall provide any information for which a trade secret claim is pending or has been approved pursuant to this section to a physician or osteopath when such information is needed for medical diagnosis or treatment.  The department shall require the physician or osteopath to sign an agreement protecting the confidentiality of information disclosed pursuant to this subsection.

    f.  Any workplace survey or environmental survey containing information for  which a trade secret claim is pending or has been approved shall be made available to the public with that information concealed.

    g.  The subject of any trade secret claim pending or approved shall be treated as confidential information.  Except as provided in subsection e. of this section, the department shall not disclose any confidential information to  any person except an officer or employee of the State in connection with the  official duties of the officer or employee under any law for the protection of  public health, or to the contractors of the State and their employees if in the  opinion of the department the disclosure is necessary for the completion of any  work contracted for in connection with the implementation of this act.  Any  officer or employee of the State, contractor of the State, physician or  osteopath, or employee of a county health department, local fire department, or  local police department who has access to any confidential information, and who  willingly and knowingly discloses the confidential information to any person  not authorized to receive it, is guilty of a crime of the third degree.

    h.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the disclosure of information concerning emissions, and shall not apply to the disclosure of any information required pursuant to any other act.

    i.  The Department of Health and the Department of Environmental Protection  shall jointly adopt rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this  section.

     L.1983, c. 315, s. 15, eff. Aug. 29, 1984.

34:5A-16.  Employee requests for information;  refusal to work; complaint; civil actions;  penalty
    a.  Any employee or employee representative may request, in writing, from his employer, a copy of a workplace survey, hazardous substance fact sheet, or,  where applicable, an environmental survey filed pursuant to the provisions of  this act for the facility at which he is employed.  The employer shall supply  this material within five working days of the request. Any employee or  employee representative may request, in writing, the chemical name and Chemical  Abstracts Service number of the substance contained in any container which is  not labeled pursuant to the provisions of section 14 of this act, and the  employer shall supply the employee or employee representative with this  information within five working days of the request. An employee shall have  the right to refuse to work with a hazardous substance for which a request was  made and not honored without loss of pay or forfeit of any other privilege  until the request is honored.

    b.  Any employee or employee representative who believes that an employer has not complied with the provisions of subsection a. of this section may file a complaint with the Commissioner of the Department of Labor.  Upon receipt of the complaint, the commissioner shall investigate the allegations contained in the complaint.  If the commissioner, following an administrative hearing conducted pursuant to the  "Administrative Procedure Act,"  P.L. 1968, c. 410 (C. 52:14B-1 et seq.), finds that the employer has violated the provisions of subsection a. of this section, he shall initiate a civil action by summary proceeding pursuant to  "the penalty enforcement law"  (N.J.S. 2A:58-1 et seq.).  Any employer violating the provisions of subsection a. of this section is liable to a penalty of not less than $2,500.00 for each offense.

     L.1983, c. 315, s. 16, eff. Aug. 29, 1984.

34:5A-17.  Discharge or penalizing of employee for exercising rights; complaint;  adjudication
    a.  No employer shall discharge, cause to be discharged, or otherwise discipline, penalize, or discriminate against any employee because the employee  or his employee representative has exercised any right established in this  act.

    b.  Any employee who believes that he has been discharged, or otherwise disciplined, penalized, or discriminated against by an employer in violation of  subsection a. of this section may, within 30 days of the violation, or within  30 days of obtaining knowledge that a violation occurred, file a complaint with  the Commissioner of the Department of Labor alleging the violation.  Within 30  days of the receipt of a complaint, the commissioner shall conduct an  investigation of the complaint.  If after the investigation the commissioner  determines that there is probable cause that the complaint is valid, he may  refer the complaint to the Office of Administrative Law, which, upon the  referral, shall commence an adjudicatory proceeding on the complaint, to be  conducted as a contested case pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act,"  P.L. 1968, c. 410 (C. 52:14B-1 et seq.), and P.L. 1978, c. 67 (C. 52:14F-1 et  seq.).  If the Commissioner of Labor or the employee introduces evidence that  prior to the alleged violation the employee exercised any right provided in  this act, the employer shall have the burden to show just cause for his action  by clear and convincing evidence.  Within 45 days of the receipt of the recommendations of the administrative law judge, the commissioner shall adopt,  reject, or modify the recommendations.  The final decision of the commissioner  shall be considered the final agency action thereon for the purposes of the   "Administrative Procedure Act"  and shall be subject only to judicial review  as provided in the Rules of Court.

     L.1983, c. 315, s. 17, eff. Aug. 29, 1984.

34:5A-21  Joint procedures concerning revision of workplace or environmental hazardous substance list.
  
	21.	The Department of Health, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of Labor and Workforce Development shall jointly establish a procedure for annually receiving information from the public and any other interested party, concerning any revision of the workplace hazardous substance list and any revision of the environmental hazardous substance list.  This procedure shall include a mechanism for revising the workplace hazardous substance list and the environmental hazardous substance list.  Any revision of the workplace hazardous substance list or environmental hazardous substance list shall be based on documented scientific evidence.  The Department of Health and the Department of Environmental Protection shall publicly announce any revisions of the workplace hazardous substance list or the environmental hazardous substance list, and any such additions or revisions shall be made pursuant to the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	L.1983, c.315, s.21; amended 2010, c.87, s.19; 2012, c.17, s.403.

34:5A-22.  County health department file of surveys;  public access
    Each county health department shall maintain a file of workplace surveys and  environmental surveys transmitted to it pursuant to the provisions of this act.   These surveys, pursuant to the provisions of subsection f. of section 15 of  this act, shall be made available to the public at reasonable hours and at a  fee not to exceed the cost of reproducing the surveys.

     L.1983, c. 315, s. 22, eff. Aug. 29, 1984.

34:5A-23.  Civil actions for violations;  jurisdiction;  award
    Any person may bring a civil action in law or equity on his own behalf against any employer for a violation of any provision of this act or any rule and regulation promulgated pursuant thereto or against the Department of Environmental Protection or the Department of Health for failure to enforce the  provisions of this act or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto.   The Superior Court shall have jurisdiction over these actions.  The court may  award, whenever it deems appropriate, costs of litigation, including reasonable  attorney and expert witness fees.

     L.1983, c. 315, s. 23, eff. Aug. 29, 1984.

34:5A-24.  Substances not included on hazardous substance lists; reporting;   liability
    Substances not included on the workplace hazardous substance list or the environmental hazardous substance list shall not be subject to the reporting provisions of this act.  However, the absence of any substance from the workplace hazardous substance list or the environmental hazardous substance list, or the provision of any information by an employer to an employee or any other person pursuant to the provisions of this act, shall not in any way affect any other liability of an employer with regard to safeguarding the health and safety of an employee or any other person exposed to the substance, nor shall it affect any other duty or responsibility of an employer to warn ultimate users of a substance of any potential health hazards associated with the use of the substance pursuant to the provisions of any law or rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto.

     L.1983, c. 315, s. 24, eff. Aug. 29, 1984.

34:5A-25.  Local police or fire departments;  availability of surveys to public;  request for additional information;  communications program with research and development laboratory
    a.  No local police department or local fire department receiving workplace  surveys or environmental surveys pursuant to the provisions of this act shall  make the surveys available to the public.  Any county health department, local  police department, or local fire department may request from an employer  submitting surveys to it further information concerning the surveys, and the  employer shall provide the additional information upon the request therefor.   The employer may require the requester to sign an agreement protecting the  confidentiality of any additional information provided pursuant to this  section.

    b.  Every employer with a research and development laboratory at his facility shall establish a communications program with the local fire department, which shall be designed to assist the fire department in adequately  preparing to respond to emergencies at the research and development  laboratory.

     L.1983, c. 315, s. 25, eff. Aug. 29, 1984.

34:5A-26  "Worker and Community Right to Know Fund."
  
	26. a. There is established in the Department of the Treasury a nonlapsing, revolving fund to be known as the "Worker and Community Right To Know Fund."  The "Worker and Community Right To Know Fund" shall be credited with all fees collected pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection b. of this section and interest on moneys in the "Worker and Community Right To Know Fund" shall be credited to the "Worker and Community Right To Know Fund" and all moneys in the "Worker and Community Right To Know Fund" are appropriated for the purposes of the "Worker and Community Right To Know Fund", and no moneys shall be expended for those purposes without the specific appropriation thereof by the Legislature.  The State Treasurer shall be the administrator of the "Worker and Community Right To Know Fund", and all disbursements from the "Worker and Community Right To Know Fund" shall be made by the State Treasurer upon the warrant of the Director of the Division of Budget and Accounting.
 
	b. (1) The Department of Labor and Workforce Development shall annually assess each employer a fee of not less than $75.00 nor more than an amount equal to $4.00 per employee to provide for the implementation of the provisions of this act.  All fees collected by the department pursuant to this paragraph shall be deposited in the "Worker and Community Right To Know Fund".
 
	(2)	The Department of Labor and Workforce Development shall annually assess each employer a fee of $2.00 per employee for the implementation of P.L.1991, c.235 (C.13:1D-35 et seq.).  All fees collected by the department pursuant to this paragraph shall be deposited in the "Pollution Prevention Fund" established pursuant to section 16 of P.L.1991, c.235 (C.13:1D-50), and shall be used only for the implementation of P.L.1991, c.235 (C.13:1D-35 et seq.).  
 
	c.	The moneys in the "Worker and Community Right To Know Fund" shall be disbursed only for the following purposes:  
 
	(1)	Expenses approved by the Director of the Division of Budget and Accounting and incurred by the Department of Health, the Department of Environmental Protection, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Department of the Treasury, and the county health departments in implementing the provisions of this act; and 
 
	(2)	Repayment to the General Fund of any moneys appropriated by law in order to implement the provisions of this act.  
 
	d.	The State Treasurer shall annually disburse the moneys in the "Worker and Community Right To Know Fund" for expenditures approved by the Director of the Division of Budget and Accounting pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection c. of this section, but in no case in an amount to the several departments that is greater than the following percentages of the "Worker and Community Right To Know Fund" available in any one year:  the Department of Health, 40%; the Department of Environmental Protection, 20%; the county health departments, 15%; the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, 15%; and the Department of the Treasury, 10%.  
 
	e.	Beginning two years after the effective date of this act, the State Treasurer shall make an annual audit of the "Worker and Community Right To Know Fund" to determine the adequacy of moneys on deposit in the "Worker and Community Right To Know Fund" to support the implementation of the provisions of this act.  If the State Treasurer, in consultation with the Department of Health, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of Labor and Workforce Development makes a determination that the revenues in the "Worker and Community Right To Know Fund" are sufficient to warrant a reduction in the fees imposed pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection b. of this section for the ensuing year, the State Treasurer may reduce the amount of the fees imposed during that year by an amount warranted by the balance in the "Worker and Community Right To Know Fund" at the time of the determination.  
 
	L.1983, c.315, s.26; amended 1989, c.155, s.2; 1991, c.235, s.20; 2003, c.117, s.19; 2012, c.17, s.404.

34:5A-26.1.  Fee refund 
    The Department of Labor shall refund any fee collected pursuant to section 26 of P.L.   1983, c. 315 (C. 34:5A-26) to any employer who has paid this fee and is exempt from the fee pursuant to section 8 of P.L.   1983, c. 315 (C. 34:5A-8). 

   L.  1985, c. 534, s. 2, eff. Jan. 21, 1986. 

34:5A-27.  Legislative intent
    It is the intent of the Legislature that the program established by this act  for the disclosure of information concerning hazardous substances to employees  and the public constitute the principal program in this State. To this end, no  municipality or county shall enact any law or ordinance requiring the  disclosure of information about, or the identification of, hazardous substances  in the workplace or the environment to the extent that the disclosure of  information or identification is provided for under this act, and, further, the  enactment of this act shall supersede any municipal or county law or ordinance  enacted subsequent to May 11, 1983 providing for this disclosure or  identification.

     L.1983, c. 315, s. 27, eff. Aug. 29, 1984.

34:5A-28.  Joint report
    Within two years of the effective date of this act the Department of Health,  the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Department of Labor shall  jointly prepare and submit to the Governor and the Legislature a report  evaluating the implementation of this act, together with any recommendations  for legislative or administrative action deemed necessary or appropriate.

     L.1983, c. 315, s. 30, eff. Aug. 29, 1984.

34:5A-29.  Right to enter facility to determine compliance
    a.  The Department of Health shall have the right to enter an employer's facility during the normal operating hours of the facility to determine the employer's compliance with the provisions of subsection a. of section 7, and sections 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14 of this act, and any rules and any regulations adopted pursuant thereto.

    b.  The Department of Environmental Protection shall have the right to enter  an employer's facility during the normal operating hours of the facility to  determine compliance with subsection b. of section 7 and section 9 of this act,  and any rules and any regulations adopted pursuant thereto.

     L.1983, c. 315, s. 31, eff. Aug. 29, 1984.

34:5A-30.  Rules and regulations
    Except as otherwise provided in this act, the Department of Health, the Department of Environmental Protection, the Department of Labor and the Department of the Treasury shall adopt any rules and regulations necessary to carry out their respective responsibilities under this act.

     L.1983, c. 315, s. 32, eff. Aug. 29, 1984.

34:5A-31.    Remedies  
     33. a. Whenever, on the basis of information available to him, the Commissioner of Environmental Protection finds that an employer is in violation of subsection b. of section 7, or of subsection b. or c. of section 9 of this act, or any rule and regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or the Commissioner of Health finds that an employer is in violation of subsection a. of section 7, or of section 10, 11, 12, 13, or 14 of this act, or any rule and regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the Commissioner of Environmental Protection, or the Commissioner of Health, as the case may be, shall:  

    (1)  Issue an order in accordance with subsection b. of this section requiring the employer to comply;  

    (2)  Bring a civil action in accordance with subsection c. of this section;

  

    (3)  Levy a civil administrative penalty in accordance with subsection d. of this section; or  

    (4)  Bring an action for a civil penalty in accordance with subsection e. of this section.  

    The exercise of any of the remedies provided in this section shall not preclude recourse to any other remedy so provided.  

    b.   Whenever, on the basis of information available to him, the Commissioner of Environmental Protection finds that an employer is in violation of subsection b. of section 7, or of subsection b. or c. of section 9 of this act or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or the Commissioner of Health finds that an employer is in violation of subsection a. of section 7, or of section 10, 11, 12, 13, or 14 of this act, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the Commissioner of Environmental Protection or the Commissioner of Health, as the case may be, may issue an order (1) specifying the provision or provisions of this act, or the rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto of which the employer is in violation; (2) citing the action which caused the violation; (3) requiring compliance with the provision of this act or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto of which he is in violation; and (4) giving notice to the employer of his right to a hearing on the matters contained in the order.  

    c.   The Commissioner of Environmental Protection or the Commissioner of Health, as appropriate, is authorized to commence a civil action in Superior Court for appropriate relief from a violation of this act. This relief may include an assessment against the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the discovery and establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and litigating the case under this subsection.  

    d.   The Commissioner of Environmental Protection or the Commissioner of Health, as appropriate, is authorized to impose a civil administrative penalty of not more than $2,500.00 for each violation and additional penalties of not more than $1,000.00 for each day during which a violation continues after receipt of an order from the commissioner to cease the violation. Any amount imposed under this subsection shall fall within a range established by regulation by the commissioner for violations of similar type, seriousness, and duration. No civil administrative penalty shall be imposed until after the employer has been notified by certified mail or personal service. The notice shall include a reference to the section of the act, rule, regulation or order violated; a concise statement of the facts alleged to constitute a violation; a statement of the amount of the civil administrative penalties to be imposed; and a statement of the employer's right to a hearing. The employer shall have 20 days from receipt of the notice within which to deliver to the commissioner a written request for a hearing. Subsequent to the hearing and upon finding that a violation has occurred, the commissioner may issue a final order after imposing the amount of the fine specified in the notice. If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order upon the expiration of the 20-day period. Payment of the penalty is due when a final order is issued or when the notice becomes a final order. The authority to levy a civil administrative penalty is in addition to all other enforcement provisions in this act, and the payment of a civil administrative penalty shall not be deemed to affect the availability of any other enforcement provision in connection with the violation for which the penalty is levied. A civil administrative penalty imposed under this section may be compromised by the commissioner upon the posting of a performance bond by the employer, or upon terms and conditions the commissioner may establish by regulation.  

    e.   An employer who violates this act, an order issued pursuant to subsection b. of this section, or a court order issued pursuant to subsection c. of this section, or who fails to pay in full a civil administrative penalty levied pursuant to subsection d. of this section, shall be subject, upon order of a court, to a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each day during which the violation continues. An employer who willfully or knowingly violates this act, or who willfully or knowingly makes a false statement, representation, or certification in any document filed or required to be maintained under this act, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device required to be maintained pursuant to this act, is subject upon order of a court, to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000.00, nor more than $5,000.00 per day of violation. Any penalty imposed pursuant to this subsection may be collected, and any costs incurred in connection therewith may be recovered, in a summary proceeding pursuant to "the penalty enforcement law" (N.J.S.2A:58-1 et seq.). The Superior Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce "the penalty enforcement law."  

    L.1983,c.315,s.33; amended 1991,c.91,s.345.  

34:5A-32.    Findings  
    1.   The Legislature finds that the application, enclosure, removal and encapsulation of asbestos when improperly performed creates unnecessary health and safety hazards which are detrimental to the State's interest in protecting the health, safety, and welfare of all citizens thereby exposed to such asbestos hazards.  

   L.1984,c.173,s.1; amended 1994,c.21,s.1.  

34:5A-33.    Policy declaration  
    2.   The Legislature declares it to be its purpose and policy to reduce asbestos-related hazards by:  

   a.   Encouraging contracting parties, citizens and insurance companies in their efforts to reduce disabling asbestos hazards and to stimulate initiation of new and to perfect existing programs for controlling the application, use and removal of asbestos, an extremely dangerous substance;  

   b.   Creating a climate for developing innovative methods, techniques and approaches for dealing with life-destroying asbestos materials;  

   c.   Encouraging competence and knowledge in the field of asbestos application, enclosure, repair, removal, and encapsulation by the licensing of employers, including contractors, and the permitting of employees in an effort to ensure that incompetent work will not pose a health and safety threat to the public-at-large through subsequent exposure to asbestos;  

   d.   Providing for the adoption of standards for the application, enclosure, removal, encapsulation, storage, sale, disposal and use of asbestos and asbestos-containing material; and  

   e.   Establishing an enforcement program for these standards, which shall include reporting procedures.  

   L.1984,c.173,s.2; amended 1994,c.21,s.2.  

34:5A-34.    Definitions  
    3.   As used in this act:

  

   a.   "Asbestos" means the asbestiform varieties of chrysotile (serpentine); crocidolite (riebeckite); amosite (cummuningtonitegrunerite); anthophyllite; termolite; and actinolite;  

   b.   "Asbestos-containing material" means any material which contains more than 1% asbestos by weight;  

   c.   "Employee" means any person suffered or permitted to work by an employer;  

   d.   "Employer" means a body, board, person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, joint venture, fund, authority or similar entity employing, permitting or suffering another to work. In the case of a corporation, the officers of the corporation and any agents having the management of the corporation shall be deemed to be employers of the employees of the corporation for the purposes of this act.  This term shall apply to private employers and to the State, its political subdivisions, and any boards, commissions, schools, institutions, or authorities created or recognized thereby;  

   e.   "Friable" means asbestos-containing material that when dry may be crumbled, pulverized or reduced to powder by hand pressure, and includes previously nonfriable asbestos-containing material after that material becomes damaged to the extent that when dry it may be crumbled, pulverized or reduced to powder by hand pressure.  

   L.1984,c.173,s.3; amended 1994,c.21,s.3.  

34:5A-35.    Specifications required  
    4.   Any private or public agency letting contracts for any activity involving the application, enclosure, repair, removal or encapsulation of asbestos in any structure for which a license is required shall include in these contracts specifications that these contracts are to be performed by contractors and subcontractors licensed by the Commissioner of Labor.  

   L.1984,c.173,s.4; amended 1994,c.21,s.4.  

34:5A-36.    License for asbestos work; exception  
    5.   No employer shall either directly or indirectly perform any of the functions of application, enclosure, removal, or encapsulation of asbestos in any structure, nor enter into any contract with the owner or the owner's representative for the employer to perform such work or services, without first obtaining a nontransferable license from the Commissioner of Labor, except private employers subject to the federal Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. s. 651 et seq.) who use their own employees to apply, enclose, remove, repair, or encapsulate asbestos in their own facility, or as otherwise exempted pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1994, c.21 (C.34:5A-43).  

   This license shall be in writing, shall be dated when issued, shall contain an expiration date, and shall be signed by the commissioner.  The commissioner may issue employer licenses with such conditions as the commissioner deems necessary, and as adopted by regulation, specifying the scope of work authorized by such license.  No license shall be issued by the commissioner unless the employer has completed a course of training certified by, and satisfactorily has completed an examination approved by, the Department of Health.  The license shall give the name and address of the employer to whom it is issued.  Licensed employers shall post a sign indicating, in letters more than four inches in height, "LICENSED BY THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY FOR ASBESTOS WORK," readily visible outdoors at the work site. The actual license shall be readily available at the work site for inspection by representatives of the Commissioners of Labor and Health and the contracting agency.  

   L.1984,c.173,s.5; amended 1994,c.21,s.5.  

34:5A-37.    Performance permit, exception  
    6.   Every employee performing functions of application, enclosure, repair, removal, or encapsulation of asbestos, with the exception of employees of an employer subject to the federal Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. s. 651 et seq.) applying, enclosing, repairing, removing, or encapsulating asbestos at the employer's own facility, or as otherwise exempted pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1994, c.21 (C.34:5A-43), shall first procure from the Commissioner of Labor a performance permit.  No permit shall be issued unless the employee has taken a course of training in asbestos control and removal,  passed an examination thereon, and demonstrated the ability to perform asbestos control and removal safely, in accordance with the current state-of-the-art technology. The Commissioner of Health shall certify the course of training and approve the examination necessary for a permit. This permit shall be in writing, shall be dated when issued, shall contain an expiration date, and shall be signed by the Commissioner of Labor. It shall give the name and address of the employee to whom it is issued. The permit shall be carried upon the worker's person and be readily available for inspection by representatives of the Commissioners of Labor and Health and the contracting agency.  The Commissioner of Labor may place reasonable conditions on employee permits which specify the scope of work authorized by such permit.

   L.1984,c.173,s.6; amended 1994,c.21,s.6.  

34:5A-38.    Issuance of license, permits; certification of training courses; fees  
    7.   Beginning not later than one year following the effective date of this act, licenses and permits shall be issued by the Commissioner of Labor, or his designee, and shall be valid for 12 months, in accordance with regulations promulgated under provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).  The Commissioner of Labor shall, in accordance with fee schedules adopted by regulation, establish, charge, and collect reasonable annual fees for licenses and permits.  There shall annually be appropriated an amount equivalent to the amount anticipated to be collected by the Department of Labor pursuant to the provisions of this act and that amount shall be applied to enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor.  The Commissioner of Health shall, in accordance with fee schedules adopted by regulation, establish, charge, and collect reasonable annual fees for the certification of all training agencies administering training courses and for the administration of all examinations required by this act.  There shall annually be appropriated an amount equivalent to the amount anticipated to be collected by the Department of Health for the administration of the training and examination programs certified or approved by the department.  

   L.1984,c.173,s.7; amended 1994,c.21,s.8.  

34:5A-39.    Standards, regulations; hearings  
    8.   Not later than six months after the effective date of this act, the Commissioners of Labor and Health jointly shall, in consultation with the Commissioner of Environmental Protection, adopt all standards and regulations which they deem necessary for the proper administration and enforcement of this act.  These standards and regulations shall include, but shall not be limited to, protective equipment specifications; application, enclosure, removal, and encapsulation procedures; administrative penalties; waste disposal; self-monitoring; cleanup; health checkup; license and permit issuance, suspension, renewal and revocation; fee charges; experience necessary for license or permit qualification; general subject matter of qualifying examinations; and continuing education.  Any suspension, revocation, or refusal to renew any permit or license pursuant to this act shall be effectuated as follows: the department that is responsible for the issuance of the permit or license may suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew any license or permit because of a violation of any provision of this act.  Prior to that suspension, revocation, or failure to renew, the department shall afford the applicant, licensee, or permit holder an opportunity for a hearing in accordance with the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), except that, if the department has reason to believe that a condition exists at a job site which poses an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare, it may order the immediate suspension of the license, permit, or certification pending the outcome of the hearing.  

   L.1984,c.173,s.8; amended 1985,c.523; 1994,c.21,s.9.  

34:5A-40.    Enforcement  
	9.	P.L.1984, c.173 (C.34:5A-32 et seq.), and its standards and regulations, shall be enforced by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development and the Commissioner of Health, who have the right-of-entry to all pertinent premises and records for purposes of inspection and information.  Both commissioners may employ the following powers and remedies in enforcing their respective responsibilities under P.L.1984, c.173 (C.34:5A-32 et seq.).
 
	a.	Whenever either commissioner finds that a person has violated any provision of P.L.1984, c.173 (C.34:5A-32 et seq.) for which that commissioner has the responsibility of enforcement, that commissioner may issue an administrative order specifying the provision or provisions of the act which the person has violated, ordering abatement of the violation and giving notice of the person's right to a hearing on the matters contained in the order.  The person shall have 10 calendar days from receipt of the order within which to deliver to the commissioner a written request for a hearing.  After the hearing, and upon finding that a violation has occurred, the commissioner may issue a final order.  If no hearing is requested, the order shall become final upon expiration of the 10-day period.  A request for a hearing shall not automatically stay the effect of an administrative order.  A stay of an administrative order may only be granted by the commissioner upon a written request and a factual basis clearly supporting the appropriateness of the stay.
 
	b.	Either commissioner may institute an action or proceeding in the Superior Court for injunctive or other relief for any violation of P.L.1984, c.173 (C.34:5A-32 et seq.) for which that commissioner has the responsibility of enforcement, and the court may proceed in the action in a summary manner.  In the proceeding, the relief may restrain any violation or compel the taking of any action required pursuant to P.L.1984, c.173 (C.34:5A-32 et seq.), and the court may grant temporary or interlocutory relief.  The relief may include, singularly or in combination:
 
	(1) A temporary or permanent restraining order or injunctive relief;
 
	(2) Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation or inspection leading to the establishment of the violation and for the reasonable costs of preparing and litigating the case; and
 
	(3) Assessment of the violator for the costs incurred by the State in correcting or terminating any adverse health and environmental effects resulting from the violation.
 
	c.	Either commissioner may assess a civil administrative penalty for any violation of P.L.1984, c.173 (C.34:5A-32 et seq.) for which that commissioner has the responsibility of enforcement not to exceed $100,000 for each violation.  Each day during which the violation continues shall constitute an additional, separate and distinct offense.  No assessment shall be levied pursuant to this section until after the violator has been notified by certified mail or personal service.  The notice shall include a reference to the section of the statute violated, a concise statement of the facts alleged to constitute a violation, a statement of the amount of civil administrative penalties to be imposed, and a statement of the violator's right to a hearing.  The violator shall have 10 calendar days from receipt of the notice within which to deliver to the commissioner a written request for a hearing.  After the hearing, and upon finding that a violation has occurred, the commissioner may issue a final order after assessing the amount of the fine specified in the notice.  If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order after the expiration of the 10-day period.  Payment of the assessment is due when a final order is issued or the notice becomes a final order.  The authority to levy a civil administrative penalty is in addition to all other enforcement provisions and the payment of any assessment shall not be deemed to affect the availability of any other enforcement provisions in connection with the violation for which the assessment is levied.  The department may compromise any civil administrative penalty assessed under this section in an amount the department determines appropriate.  Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding commenced by the commissioner pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).  The balance of a penalty imposed pursuant to this section in excess of $25,000 shall be allocated to the department that assessed the penalty and used to fund asbestos programs.
 
	d.	A person who violates an administrative order issued pursuant to subsection a. of this section, or a court order issued pursuant to subsection b. of this section, or who fails to pay in full an administrative assessment pursuant to subsection c. of this section is subject, upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction, to a civil penalty not to exceed $50,000 per day for such violation.
 
	The pursuit of any of the remedies specified in this section shall not preclude the commissioner from seeking any other remedy.

   L.1984,c.173,s.9; amended 1994,c.21,s.10; 2022, c.140, s.1.

34:5A-41  Violations; penalties.
	10.  Any person who knowingly hinders or delays the Commissioners of Labor and Workforce Development or Health or the authorized representative thereof, in the performance of the duty to enforce P.L.1984, c.173 (C.34:5A-32 et seq.), or knowingly submits false or misleading information on any license or permit application required by P.L.1984, c.173 (C.34:5A-32 et seq.), or fails to obtain licenses or permits required by the provisions of  P.L.1984, c.173 (C.34:5A-32 et seq.), or refuses to make these licenses or permits accessible to either commissioner, or the authorized representative thereof, or otherwise violates any provision of P.L.1984, c.173 (C.34:5A-32 et seq.) or any regulation adopted under P.L.1984, c.173 (C.34:5A-32 et seq.), shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a crime of the third degree and, notwithstanding the provisions of N.J.S.2C:43-3, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100,000 in addition to any other appropriate disposition authorized by subsection b. of N.J.S.2C:43-2.  The balance of a penalty imposed pursuant to this section in excess of $25,000 shall be allocated to the department that was the subject of the violation and used to fund asbestos programs.

 	L.1984, c.173, s.10; amended 1994, c.21, s.11; 1997, c.325, s.5; 2012, c.17, s.405; 2022, c.140, s.2.

34:5A-42.  Discrimination against complaining employee;  penalties
    Any employer who discriminates against or otherwise sanctions an employee who complains or cooperates with the Commissioner of Labor or Health, or the designee thereof, in administering this act is a disorderly person and upon conviction is subject to the penalties specified in section 10 of this act.

     L.1984, c. 173, s. 11, eff. Oct. 31, 1984.

34:5A-43.    Adoption of standards; exemptions; fees  
    7.  a.  The Commissioner of Health shall, by regulation, adopt standards and other requirements for the certification of training programs and for approving examinations for the issuance of licenses or permits pursuant to P.L.1984, c.173 (C.34:5A-32 et seq.).  

   b.   The Commissioner of Health may, by regulation, exempt from the license or permit requirements of P.L.1984, c.173 (C.34:5A-32 et seq.) designated asbestos-related activities should sufficient data indicate that no significant asbestos exposure exists.  These exempted activities shall involve non-friable asbestos-containing material that is not rendered friable by the activity.  

   c.   The Department of Health shall, in accordance with fee schedules adopted by regulation, establish, charge, and collect reasonable annual fees for the certification of all training agencies administering training courses and for approving all examinations required by this act.  There shall annually be appropriated an amount equivalent to the amount anticipated to be collected by the Department of Health for the administration of the training and examination programs certified or approved by the department.  

   L.1994,c.21,s.7.  

34:5A-44.    Petition for enforcement action  
    12.  Any person who believes that a violation of this act has occurred may petition the Commissioner of Health or the Commissioner of Labor to bring an enforcement action pursuant to this section. Any citizen complaint filed pursuant to this section shall specify the provision alleged to have been violated, the facts which constitute the alleged violation and the name and address of the citizen lodging the complaint.  Upon receipt of a citizen's complaint pursuant to this section, the commissioner who is responsible for enforcement action regarding the violation shall:  

   a.   Give notice of the complaint within 10 calendar days to the person alleged to be in violation;  

   b.   Give notice to the citizen who filed the complaint of the scheduling of an enforcement investigation inspection to investigate the complaint within 30 calendar days of its having been filed;  

   c.   Afford the complaining citizen or his or her representative an opportunity to be present during the enforcement investigation inspection. Public employees who bring complaints shall have the right to accompany the commissioner on an enforcement investigation inspection and shall receive payment of normal wages for time spent during normal working hours on the inspection;  

   d.   Afford the complaining citizen access to all public records regarding the commissioner's investigation; and  

   e.   Render a final decision within 90 calendar days of receipt of a citizen complaint on the appropriate disposition, after investigation, of the citizen's complaint.  The decision shall either reference the initiation of an enforcement action or state the factual and legal basis of the decision not to bring an enforcement action.  

   Public employees bringing a complaint pursuant to this section shall have all protections and rights set forth in section 21 of P.L.1983, c.516 (C.34:6A-45).  

   L.1994,c.21,s.12.  

34:6-21.1.  Reports of fires in industrial establishments
    The fire chief of every municipality, or in the absence thereof, the person  in responsible charge of fire fighting in such municipalities, shall report the  occurrence of every fire in an industrial establishment in the municipality to  the Commissioner of Labor and Industry or his duly authorized representative,  on or before the tenth of the month following the month in which the fire  occurred.

     L.1950, c. 51, p. 90, s. 1.

34:6-21.2.  Form of report
    The report shall be made on forms prescribed and furnished by the commissioner and shall identify the premises by ownership and location, state the number of injuries and fatalities that were caused by the fire, contain an estimate of amount of fire damage, contain a statement of probable cause and origin where known or determined and furnish other information which may be determined by the commissioner to be necessary to determine fire causes and losses in the industries of this State.

     L.1950, c. 51, p. 90, s. 2.

34:6-21.3.  Effective date
    This act shall take effect July first, one thousand nine hundred and fifty.

     L.1950, c. 51, p. 90, s. 3.

34:6-47.1.   Definitions 
    As used in this act: 

   a.   "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor or any of his authorized representatives. 

   b.   "High-voltage lines" means electrical conductors installed above ground and having a voltage differential in excess of 750 volts between any pair of conductors or between any conductor and ground.  In the case of alternating current, the voltage shall be measured in R.M.S. value.  This definition shall not include approved armored cable used to supply power to portable equipment and insulated power cables enclosed in approved metallic raceways. 

   L. 1948, c. 249, s. 1; amended by L. 1966, c. 261, s. 2; 1987, c. 124, s. 2. 

34:6-47.2.  Prohibited activity
    No employer or supervising agent of an employer shall require or permit an employee to participate in the operation, erection, transportation, handling, or storage of any tools, machinery, equipment, supplies, materials, or apparatus or the moving of any building, if in the course of such operation, erection, transportation, handling, storage or moving it is possible for such tools, machinery, equipment, supplies, materials, apparatus or building, to come within 6 feet of a high-voltage line;  or to participate in any activity which would cause the employee to come within 6 feet of a high-voltage line; unless precautionary action has been taken to protect against the danger from contact with such high-voltage line, either by de-energizing such high-voltage line and grounding it where necessary, or other effective methods or devices which have been approved in advance by the commissioner for the particular case  and for the particular location.

    No person shall operate, erect, transport, handle or store any tools, machinery, equipment, supplies, materials or apparatus, or move any building, if in the course of such operation, erection, transportation, handling, storage  or moving, it is possible for such tools, machinery, equipment, supplies,  materials, apparatus or building, to come within 6 feet of a high-voltage line  unless precautionary action has been taken to protect against the danger from  contact with such high-voltage line either by de-energizing such high-voltage  line and grounding it where necessary, or by using other effective methods or  devices which have been approved in advance by the commissioner for the  particular case and for the particular location.

    In no case shall the required 6 foot clearance be provided by moving or displacing any conductor, except where the same is temporarily relocated pursuant to arrangements made with the owner or person in charge of the high-voltage line.

     L.1948, c. 249, p. 1100, s. 2.  Amended by L.1966, c. 261, s. 3.

34:6-47.4.  Warning sign required
    The owner, agent, lessee, bailee, user, or employer responsible for the operations of equipment capable of coming in contact with a high-voltage line in the course of its operation, shall post and maintain in plain view of the operator on each piece of such equipment, an approved durable warning sign legible at a distance of 12 feet reading  "Unlawful to operate this equipment within 6 feet of high-voltage lines" .  The owner, agent, lessee, bailee, user,  or employer responsible for the operations of equipment shall provide such  other warning signs on equipment or at the work site as may be required by  regulations promulgated hereunder.  The requirement that warning signs be posted shall not apply to railway equipment operating on railway right-of-way in relation to high-voltage conductors of such railway system under conditions for which exemption is granted under section 8 of this act.

     L.1948, c. 249, p. 1101, s. 4.  Amended by L.1966, c. 261, s. 4.

34:6-47.5.  Notification to power company and responsibility for safeguards
    Whenever any activity is to be performed requiring precautionary action under section 2 of this act, the employer, contractor or other person responsible for the activity shall, promptly notify the owner or person in charge of the high-voltage line of the intended activity and shall fully comply  with and shall be responsible for the cost and for the completion of the  precautionary action required under section 2 of this act before proceeding  with such activity.

     L.1948, c. 249, p. 1102, s. 5.  Amended by L.1966, c. 261, s. 5.

34:6-47.6.  Enforcement
    The commissioner shall administer and enforce the provisions of this act and  he is hereby empowered to prescribe and promulgate rules and regulations consistent herewith.

     L.1948, c. 249, p. 1102, s. 6.

34:6-47.7a.  Penalty for violation  
     6.   Any person violating any of the provisions of P.L.1948, c.249 (C.34:6-47.1 et seq.) shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $500.00 nor more than $5,000.00 to be collected in a civil action by a summary proceeding under "the penalty enforcement law" (N.J.S.2A:58-1 et seq.).  Any violation of P.L.1948, c.249 (C.34:6-47.1 et seq.) by an officer, agent or employee shall also be a violation of P.L.1948, c.249 (C.34:6-47.1 et seq.) by his employer if such employer had knowledge of and actual control over the cause of such violation. Where the violation is of a continuing nature each day during which it continues, shall constitute an additional, separate and distinct offense.  Any sum collected as a fine or penalty pursuant to this section shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor.  

    The commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered to compromise and settle any claim for a penalty under this section in such amount in the discretion of the commissioner as may appear appropriate and equitable under all of the circumstances.  

    L.1966,c.261,s.6.; amended 1987,c.124,s.3; 1991,c.205,s.23.  

34:6-47.8  Exceptions.
  
	8.	This act shall not be construed as applying to, shall not apply to, and is not intended to apply to, the construction, reconstruction, operations, and maintenance of overhead electrical conductors and their supporting structures and associated equipment by authorized and qualified electrical workers; nor to the authorized and qualified employees of any person engaged in the construction, reconstruction, operation, and maintenance of overhead electrical circuits or conductors and their supporting structures and associated equipment of rail transportation systems, or electrical generating, transmission, distribution, and communication systems.  This exception when applied to railway systems, shall be construed as permitting operation of standard rail equipment, which is normally used in the transportation of freight or passengers or both and the operation of relief trains, or other equipment in emergencies, or in maintenance of way service, at a distance of less than 6 feet from any high-voltage conductor of such railway system; but this act shall be construed as prohibiting normal repair or construction operations at a distance of less than 6 feet from any high-voltage conductor by other than properly qualified and authorized persons or employees under the direct supervision of an authorized person who is familiar with the hazards involved, unless there has been compliance with the safety provisions of sections 2, 4, and 5 hereof.
 
	This act shall not be construed as applying to, shall not apply to and is not intended to apply to, motor vehicle transportation across or along a public road or highway where such transportation is subject to the requirements of Title 39, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulation of the Revised Statutes, nor to motor vehicle transportation subject to the requirements of the New Jersey Turnpike Authority, P.L.1948, c.454 (C.27:23-1 et seq.).
 
	L.1948, c.249, s.8; amended 1966, c.261, s.7; 2013, c.253, s.17.

34:6-47.9.  Partial invalidity
    In case any provision of this act shall be adjudged unconstitutional or void  for any reason, such adjudication shall not affect any of the other provisions  of this act.

     L.1948, c. 249, p. 1103, s. 9.

34:6-67.2.  Application of chapter
    Whenever, in the chapter to which this act is a supplement, reference is made to a factory, to a workshop, or to a place where the manufacture of goods of any kind is carried on, it shall be presumed, unless the context of the particular section in which it appears expressly states to the contrary, that said words or phrases, or any of them, refer, among other things, to newspaper plants, in which newspapers are printed or published, and to any place in which  persons are employed in the printing or publishing industry.  Said newspaper  plants and other places in which persons are employed in the printing or  publishing industry are expressly included within the terms and provisions, the  requirements and prohibitions contained in said chapter 6 of Title 34, wherever  reference is made to any factory, workshop, mill or other place where the  manufacture of goods is carried on, except where the context of the particular  section of said chapter expressly states to the contrary.

     L.1962, c. 192, s. 1.

34:6-98.1.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the Mine Safety Act.

     L.1954, c. 197, p. 730, s. 1.

34:6-98.2  Definitions relative to mine safety.
  
	2.	As used in this act:

	"Approved" means approved by the commissioner.
 
	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development or any of his authorized representatives.
 
	"Department" means the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	"Excavations" or "workings" means shafts, tunnels, entries, winzes, raises, stopes, open cut and any and all working places and parts of a mine, either above ground or underground, excavated or being excavated, whether abandoned or in use.
 
	"Face" means the advancing breast of any place of work.
 
	"Mine" includes any mines within the State, whether on the surface or underground and any mining plant, material, equipment or explosives on the surface or underground, which may contribute to the mining or handling of ore or other metalliferous or nonmetalliferous products.  The term "mine" shall also include quarry, sand pit, gravel pit, clay pit and shale pit.
 
	"Operator" means the person, firm, association, company, corporation or any officers or agents thereof, in immediate possession of any mine or mining claim or its accessories as owner or lessee and, as such, responsible for its management and condition.
 
	"Section" means the mine safety section within the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	"Superintendent" means the person who has immediate supervision of a mine for an operator.
 
	Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular.
 
	L.1954, c.197, s.2; amended 2007, c.155, s.1.

34:6-98.3  Mine safety section, powers, duties.
  
	3. a. There is hereby created within the Department of Labor and Workforce Development a mine safety section.
 
	b.	The mine safety section shall be under the immediate supervision of a section chief, who shall be responsible for the efficient, effective administration of the work of the section.  The section chief shall be assisted by and supervise such other mine safety inspectors, technicians and other employees as may be necessary to perform the work.
 
	c.	The section chief shall personally or by assignment to employees of the section, inspect, investigate, inquire and examine into the operation, workings, methods, safety devices and appliances, machinery, sanitation, ventilation, means of ingress and egress, means taken to protect the lives and insure the safety and health of miners, together with the causes of accidents, injuries and fatalities and means taken to comply with the law; conduct scientific tests to determine amount and condition of air together with contaminants therein or for any purpose that shall provide for the maintenance of safe, sanitary and healthful conditions, furnish such reports and do other related work as required.
 
	d.	Employees of the section shall have the power and authority, upon exhibition of official credentials, at all reasonable hours to enter and examine any part of a mine, mining plant, equipment or workings.  All operators and their employees shall render all assistance necessary to facilitate such examination.
 
	e.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2007, c.155).
 
	f.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2007, c.155).
 
	g.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2007, c.155).
 
	h.	No employee of the department shall make public, directly or indirectly to any person any knowledge or information obtained by him in the exercise of his official duties concerning ores, ore bodies or values of any mine or part thereof.  Any employee who shall violate any of the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a crime of the fourth degree and, on conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 1 year, or both, and shall be dismissed from his position.
 
	i.	It shall be the duty of the section to cause to have inspected at least once in every 3 months, every underground mine in this State, and every other working mine at least twice each year, and more often, if it is deemed necessary for the safety of the persons involved with the mine.
 
	j.	After every inspection, the mine safety inspector shall enter forthwith in a book to be kept at the mine and designated as the "record of mine safety inspection," the portion of the mine inspected, the nature of the inspection and the dangers and defects observed.  This record shall be open at all reasonable hours to the examination of the operator, any employee or the designated representative of the employees of the mine inspected. Nothing contained in or omitted from any entry in such record shall limit or affect the duty and obligations of the operator, superintendent or employee.
 
	L.1954, c.197, s.3; amended 1973, c.257, s.1; 1981, c.458, s.1; 2007, c.155, s.2.

34:6-98.4  Authority and duties of the commissioner.
  
	4. a. The commissioner shall administer the provisions of this act and may promulgate, make, amend and repeal necessary and reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this act.  Such rules and regulations shall have the force and effect of law and shall be enforced in the same manner.  It is the policy and intent of this section that the physical plant, operations and methods of the mining industry or any part thereof including mines abandoned prior to the passage of this act and mines abandoned subsequent to the passage of this act shall be so constructed, equipped, arranged, operated, maintained and conducted in all respects as to provide for reasonable and adequate protection to the lives, health and safety of miners, others employed in the mining industry and frequenting the same, the owners of the surface of the ground above such mines and the general public, as well as the protection of property. 
 
	b.	When requested to do so, the commissioner may make tests, or have same made, to determine if any device, safeguard or equipment may be approved for use in connection with any provisions of this act.  The commissioner may charge a fee for such approval, payable by the approval applicant, in any amount commensurate with the cost to the State for making such tests or have same made, in which case he may require the applicant to pay all cost directly to the private agency making the test.
 
	c.	The commissioner shall appoint all personnel pursuant to the provisions of Title 11A of the New Jersey Statutes and arrange for all services necessary to administer the provisions of this act.  He shall arrange for operations to be conducted in branch offices located near the mining centers of the State if, in his opinion, the effectiveness of the service can be thereby improved.
 
	d.	If, upon examination or inspection, it shall appear to an inspector that a mine or part thereof is, from any cause, in a dangerous condition, or fails to comply with the provisions of this act or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, he shall so report to the section and the commissioner shall at once notify the operator in charge thereof, such notice to be in writing and to be served by copy upon the operator.  Said notice shall state in detail in what particular said mine or part thereof is deemed dangerous, insecure and not in compliance with the provisions of this act, and provide a reasonable specified time to comply.  The operator of said mine shall forthwith make such change in order to comply with the requirements of this act.
 
	e.	In case of any civil or criminal proceedings at law against the parties so notified, on account of loss of life or bodily injuries sustained by an employee, subsequent to such notice, and in consequence of such dangerous condition, and without an affirmative and diligent effort having been made to remedy the same to the satisfaction of the commissioner, a certified copy of the notice served by the commissioner shall be prima facie evidence of the negligence of such party or parties.
 
	f.	If it appears from a reexamination of the mine by the inspector that such changes or compliances have not been made within the time specified in such notice, and that the mine or part of such mine is still in an unlawful condition or dangerous to life, health or property and in the opinion of the commissioner, it is necessary for the protection of life, health or property that such mine or part of the mine be vacated, the commissioner shall forthwith order the cessation of the operation and working of said mine or part of mine, and order that the employees shall not be permitted therein for any purpose other than to remedy the defects complained of, until the provisions of this act are complied with to the satisfaction of the commissioner.  The operator of said mine shall forthwith obey said order.
 
	g.	If a representative of the section finds conditions in any mine which in his opinion are dangerous to the health and lives of employees, owners of the surface of the ground above the mine or the general public, he shall report the facts forthwith to the commissioner.  The commissioner shall order all workings stopped in the particular section of the mine in which the dangerous condition was found, if in his opinion such an action is necessary to preserve life and limb.  Work shall not be resumed until the commissioner so authorizes.
 
	h.	The commissioner shall have the power and authority to require that every mine, pit or quarry of any operator be registered with him and that a certificate of registration be obtained before the opening of such mine, pit or quarry.  The application and certificate forms shall be prescribed by the commissioner.
 
	A certificate of registration shall expire 1 year from its effective date, unless sooner revoked or suspended by the commissioner.  A certificate of registration may be renewed upon the filing of an application of renewal on a form prescribed by the commissioner.  A certificate of registration shall at all times be prominently displayed at each mine, pit or quarry of the operator.
 
	The commissioner shall have the power and authority to charge an annual registration fee of not less than $500 nor more than $3,000 for each certificate of registration issued.  Thereafter, these fees may be adjusted by the commissioner in accordance with fee schedules adopted by regulation.  
 
	L.1954, c.197, s.4; amended 1971, c.154, s.3; 1973, c.257, s.2; 2007, c.155, s.3.

34:6-98.5  Annual report to Governor.
  
	5.	The commissioner shall embody in his annual report to the Governor a statistical summary and report of work of the section during the year ending June 30.
 
	a.	The report shall contain a statement showing for each mine, the number of persons employed underground and above-ground; the number and nature of fatal, lost-time injuries and serious accidents; the number of inspections made, complaints filed, inquests attended, workings ordered vacated and violations found; and any other information deemed important and relevant to safety in the mining industry of the State together with such recommendations as in the judgment of the commissioner are necessary to enforce the law, insure the safety of persons in mines and preserve property.  The commissioner may prepare supplemental reports containing any or all of the above described statements, from time to time.  A copy of any supplemental or annual report shall be made publicly available.
 
	L.1954, c.197, s.5; amended 2007, c.155, s.4.

34:6-98.6  General requirements.
 
 	6. a. Every operator shall comply with the provisions of this act and the rules and regulations issued hereunder and every person shall comply with such provisions as applicable to that person.
 
	b.	Every operator before opening a new mine, pit or quarry, shall report the location of such proposed mine, pit or quarry and the operator's name and address in writing to the commissioner and to the local governing body of the municipality in which the mine, pit or quarry is to be located, and make application in writing to the commissioner for permission to open such mine, pit or quarry.
 
	c.	Every operator shall report the location of the mine and the name and address of the owner of the surface and of the mineral rights in writing to the commissioner and the local governing bodies involved before the commencement of operations by him.
 
	d.	Every operator abandoning or permanently discontinuing any mine, pit or quarry shall notify the commissioner and the local governing bodies involved in writing no less than 60 days prior to such abandonment or discontinuance.
 
	e.	The operator shall post at the surface entrance, or around the surface extremities of any mine, pit or quarry, appropriate, conspicuous and readily legible warning notices of the existence and dangers thereof and shall also place or cause to be placed guardrails, fences or other approved means, sufficient to prevent accidental fallings in any operating or abandoned mine, pit or quarry as the commissioner may direct.
 
	f.	The protection shall include adequate fences, when any such mine or area is declared a hazard as provided by this act, or effective and secure capping of surface access to mine workings or other protective measures which in the judgment of the commissioner are necessary to prevent injury to persons or damage to property by accidental fallings into the abandoned mine.
 
	In any case where an abandoned mine constitutes an imminent hazard to persons and the order of the commissioner to protect such mine has not been complied with in the time specified, the commissioner is authorized to take such steps as may be necessary to eliminate the imminent hazard.  The operator of the mine shall reimburse the commissioner for the actual cost of whatever corrective measures have been employed in eliminating the imminent hazard.  The cost of any such corrective measures, until reimbursed, shall constitute a lien on such property and the mineral rights thereto.
 
	The provisions of subsection e. of this section shall be applicable to mines abandoned prior to the passage of this act when any such mine is declared a hazard by the municipal governing body or by the State, after public hearing, and after such protection is requested by the municipality or State.
 
	g.	It shall be the duty of the mine operator, superintendent, or anyone in charge of a mine, with 10 or more persons, to keep at such places about the mine as may be designated by the commissioner, a stretcher and a woolen and waterproof blanket, in good condition, for use in caring for any person who may be injured at the mine.  When more than 50 persons are employed, two or more stretchers with woolen and waterproof blankets shall be kept, and in all mines, a supply of first-aid equipment as may be prescribed by the section shall be kept readily accessible for the treatment of anyone injured.  In all mines a first-aid corps shall be organized, consisting of the foreman, shift bosses, and other employees designated by the operator or superintendent of the mine to cause the organization of such; and to procure the services of a physician or qualified first-aid instructor to instruct the members of such first-aid corps from time to time, not less than once in each calendar month, until a sufficient number of members of such corps as may be required by the section shall be certified by said physician or instructor to be qualified in the proper handling and treatment of injured persons before treatment by a physician.
 
	h.	Adequate medical care or attention shall be provided for all injuries arising out of and in the course of employment.
 
	i.	When considered necessary by the section, and so ordered by it, the operator of every underground mine shall make and maintain, or cause to be made and maintained, a reasonably accurate map of the workings of such mine.  At least once in every 6 months, or more often, if necessary, the operator or engineer of such mine shall cause to be shown, with reasonable accuracy on the map of said mine, all the excavations made therein during the time elapsed since such excavations were last shown on said map, and all parts of said mine which were worked and abandoned during said elapsed period of time shall be clearly indicated on said map, and all underground workings shall be surveyed and mapped before they are allowed to become inaccessible.  Such maps shall at all times be open to examination by an inspector of the section.
 
	j.	No person shall disobey an order given in pursuance of the law, or do a willful act whereby the lives or health of persons working in such mines, or the security of a mine, or the machinery connected therewith, may be endangered.
 
	k.	Notices shall be placed by the superintendent, or under his direction by the mine foreman or shift boss, at the entrance of any working place deemed dangerous, and at the entrance to old or abandoned workings; and no person other than those who are authorized by the operator or superintendent, shall remove or go beyond any caution board or danger signal so placed.
 
	l.	At any mine employing 25 or more persons underground, the operator shall provide, and keep in a readily accessible place, at least 2 approved portable oxygen breathing apparatuses in condition to be used in case of emergency; also, the operator or superintendent of such mine shall provide training and periodic drills for a mine rescue crew in the use of such apparatuses, fire protection methods and rescue work all in a manner as may be required by the section.  Tests, at least once monthly, of apparatuses by the actual use thereof shall be made.
 
	m.	It shall be the duty of the superintendent of any mine, within the provisions of this act, to keep at all times in the office of the mine and in the timekeeper's office thereof, in an accessible place and subject to inspection by all persons, at least one printed copy of this act.
 
	n.	No minor under 18 years of age shall be employed, permitted or suffered to work in, about, or in connection with any mine.
 
	o.	Strangers and visitors shall not be allowed underground unless accompanied by the owner, official or employee deputized to accompany them.
 
	p.	No person shall be required, without his consent, to work underground in any mine for more than 8 hours in any consecutive 24 hours, which 8 hours shall be reckoned from the time he arrives at his place of work in the mine until he leaves such place, provided that:
 
	(a)	A Saturday shift may work longer hours for the purpose of avoiding work on Sunday or changing shift at the end of the week or giving any of the persons a part holiday;
 
	(b)	The said limit shall not apply to a foreman, pumpman, cagetender, or any person engaged solely in surveying or measuring, nor shall it apply in cases of emergency, where life or property is in imminent danger, or in any case of repair work.
 
	q.	No person shall knowingly injure or destroy any equipment or machinery of any mine; nor, unless lawfully authorized to do so, obstruct or open an airway, handle or disturb any part of the machinery of the hoisting engine of the mine, open the door of a mine and neglect to close it, endanger the mine or those working therein, disobey an order given in pursuance of the law, or do a willful act whereby the lives or health of persons working in such mines, or the security of a mine, or the machinery connected therewith, may be endangered.
 
	L.1954, c.197, s.6; amended 1973, c.257, s.3; 2007, c.155, s.5.

34:6-98.7  Safety.
  
	7. a. Every mine shall be so constructed, equipped, arranged, operated, maintained and conducted in all respects as to provide reasonable and adequate protection to the lives, health and safety of all persons employed therein, or legally frequenting the same, the owners of the surface of the ground above the mine, the general public and to provide for the protection of property.
 
	b.	No person shall work or be permitted to work alone in an unsafe place.
 
	c.	No person shall be permitted to work in an unsafe place unless for the purpose of making it safe, and then only after proper precautions have been taken to protect the persons who are doing the work.
 
	No person shall be in solitary employment at a working face unless he is in communication with another employee at reasonable intervals as determined by the commissioner.
 
	d.	An air current sufficient to remove smoke, dust and noxious gases and to insure the safety of every person shall be conducted along every passageway and working place in underground workings in such a manner and in accordance with the standards established by the section.
 
	e.	Every mine shall install and maintain approved washing, dressing and toilet facilities and every underground mine shall install and maintain an approved miner's dryhouse for drying the working clothes of the miners.
 
	f.	The commissioner shall require that an underground mine, operating either through a vertical or inclined shaft, or a horizontal tunnel, and producing from stoping operations shall have not less than two approved outlets, at least 150 feet apart.  Where there is no such escapement shaft or opening, work thereon must be commenced as soon as stoping begins, and must be diligently prosecuted until the escapement shaft, raise, or opening is completed and continued to and connected with the lowest workings.  The subterranean workings shall connect such outlets with each other in a safe, approved manner.  Such outlets shall at all times provide safe and separate passage between the subterranean workings and the surface.
 
	g.	Every mine shall be properly and sufficiently protected in an approved manner against the hazards of fire from any cause.
 
	h.	All working places and travel roads shall be, when necessary, kept timbered, barricaded, or otherwise guarded to prevent injury to any person from falling material, falling objects or fall of such person.
 
	i.	When advancing a drift, exit, level or incline toward a mine working that is suspected to be filled with water, a bore hole must be kept at least 20 feet in advance of the breast of the drive, and also, if necessary, in directions laterally from the course of the drive.  Such additional precautionary measures shall be taken as may be deemed necessary by the commissioner to obviate the danger of a sudden break through of water.
 
	j.	No raise shall be allowed to approach within 10 feet of any portion of a winze or stope in which there is a dangerous accumulation of water, unless such winze or stope be first unwatered by bailing or pumping or by means of a bore from the raise.
 
	k.	In every mine where, in the opinion of the commissioner, there is danger of a sudden inrush of water, such additional raises, drifts or other workings shall be constructed as are necessary to insure the escape of persons from the lower workings, and all sumps and places for the storage of water in mines shall be so constructed as to prevent leakage as far as possible, and insure the safety of the persons working below the same.
 
	l.	It shall be unlawful for any operator to impound water or to keep water impounded within any mine in which persons are working below the water so impounded in such manner as to endanger the safety of such persons, unless the water be impounded by a dam or dams or wall or walls approved by the section.
 
	m.	Every place where drilling or blasting work is being carried on in an underground mine shall be adequately supplied at all times with clean water under pressure or other approved appliances for controlling dust.
 
	n.	Potable drinking water shall be available to employees during working hours.
 
	o.	Approved personal protective equipment shall be worn by all employees during the course of their work as required by standards and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this act.
 
	L.1954, c.197, s.7; amended 1973, c.257, s.4; 2007, c.155, s.6.

34:6-98.8  Explosives.
 
 	8. a. When explosives are used in a mine or quarry, the manner of storing, keeping, handling, moving, charging and firing, or in any manner using such explosives, shall be in accordance with the requirements of the "Explosives Act," P.L.1960, c.55 (C.21:1A-128 et seq.), as amended or supplemented, and the rules and regulations now in effect or hereafter issued thereunder, except for the following limitations:
 
	b.	All explosives in excess of the amount required for the work of 1-day underground operations may be stored underground in a safely located secondary storage magazine.  The maximum amount of explosives to be stored in such magazine shall not exceed the requirements for a 48 hours' supply.
 
	c.	The commissioner may regulate and limit the amount of explosives stored in a primary magazine in any underground portion of a mine with due regard for the safety of miners.
 
	d.	Any temporary supply for the work of a shift shall be kept in such a place that its accidental discharge will not endanger the miners.
 
	L.1954, c.197, s.8; amended 2007, c.155, s.7.

34:6-98.9  Complaints; serious accidents.
  
	9. a. Whenever the commissioner receives a complaint in writing signed by 2 or more persons employed in a mine, setting forth that the mine or part thereof in which he or they are working is being operated contrary to law, or is dangerous in any respect to the health or lives of those employed therein, he shall cause to be inspected such mine as soon as possible.  The names of the persons making such complaint shall be kept secret, unless permission to disclose them be expressly granted by the persons making the complaint.  Such complaint shall in all cases set forth the nature of the danger existing at the mine, and the time when such danger was first observed.  If, after such inspection, it is found that the conditions are dangerous to the health or lives of those employed therein, the commissioner shall serve a notice, setting forth fully the facts, upon the operator or any person having charge of such mine, and shall order the operator of said mine or mines to remove such dangerous or harmful conditions, and the operator of said mine shall obey said order.
 
	b.	Whenever loss of life or serious accident shall occur in any mine, the operator thereof shall forthwith give notice immediately in the quickest possible manner, and, in addition, shall report the facts thereof in writing within 24 hours after such occurrence in a manner prescribed by the section.
 
	The refusal or failure of said owner, agent, manager or operator to so report shall be a misdemeanor.  The section, upon receipt of notice of such accident, shall investigate the same and make, or cause to be made, a report which shall be filed for future reference.  In case of the loss of life, any inspector of the section may take testimony of witnesses relative to the same, for the purpose of ascertaining the cause of such accident, and for his information in filing a report concerning the same.  If, after making such investigation, the section considers the facts warrant it, a copy of the report of such accident and all papers relating thereto shall be forwarded to the county prosecutor of the county in which the accident or loss of life occurred, together with an accompanying statement, showing in what particular or particulars it is believed the law to have been violated, and if upon the receipt thereof, the prosecuting officer of the said county deems the facts sufficient to make a prima facie case of criminal action against any person or persons, he shall present such evidence to the grand jury, or take such steps for the criminal prosecution of such operator, employees or persons as may seem advisable.
 
	L.1954, c.197, s.9; amended 2007, c.155, s.8.

34:6-98.10.  Limitation of municipal ordinances
    No municipality or other governmental subdivision shall have the power to make any ordinance, by-law or resolution providing for safety to workers in the  mining industry or providing for protection of property that does not comply  with the standards herein established by this act, and the rules and regulations promulgated by the commissioner hereunder.  Nothing in this act shall, however, limit the right of any municipality or other governmental subdivision to make inspections of mining operations.

     L.1954, c. 197, p. 743, s. 10.

34:6-98.11.  Hearing of aggrieved persons
    a.  Any person aggrieved by an act of the commissioner or the department under this act may, upon application made within 15 days after notice thereof, be entitled to a hearing before the commissioner who shall, within 30 days thereafter, hold a hearing of which at least 15 days' written notice shall be given to all interested parties.  Within 30 days after such hearing, the commissioner shall issue an appropriate order modifying, approving or disapproving its prior order or act.  A copy of such order shall be served upon  all interested parties.

    b.  Pending the determination by the commissioner and upon application therefor, the commissioner may stay the operation of such order upon such terms  and conditions as he may deem proper.

     L.1954, c. 197, p. 744, s. 11.

34:6-98.12.  Appropriation
    There is hereby appropriated to the Department of Labor and Industry the sum  of $70,000.00 for the use of the commissioner in administering and enforcing  the provisions of this act.

     L.1954, c. 197, p. 744, s. 12.

34:6-98.13.  Enforcement of act
    It shall be the duty of the commissioner to enforce the provisions of this act, to make complaints against persons or firms;  companies or corporations, or agents thereof;  and operators, violating any of its provisions and to prosecute violations of the same.

     L.1954, c. 197, p. 744, s. 13.

34:6-98.14  Violations, penalties.
 
 	14.	Any person violating any of the provisions of this act shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $2,500 for the first offense, not more than $5,000 for the second offense and not more than $10,000 for the third and any subsequent offense, to be collected in a civil action by a summary proceeding under the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).  Any person violating any provision of this act which results in serious bodily injury, shall be liable for a penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $25,000 to be collected in a civil action by a summary proceeding under the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).  Any violation of the act by an officer, agent or employee shall also be a violation of the act by his employer if such employer had knowledge of and actual control over the cause of such violation.  Where the violation is of a continuing nature each day during which it continues, after the date given by which the violation must be eliminated in the order by the commissioner, shall constitute an additional separate and distinct offense, except during the time an appeal from said order may be taken or is pending.
 
	The commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered to compromise and settle any claim for a penalty under this section in such amount in the discretion of the commissioner as may appear appropriate and equitable under all of the circumstances.
 
	L.1954, c.197, s.14; amended 1973, c.257, s.5; 2007, c.155, s.9.

34:6-98.15.  Provisions severable
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this act is held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the remaining  portion of this act.

     L.1954, c. 197, p. 745, s. 15.

34:6-98.16.  Inconsistent acts superseded
    All acts or parts of acts inconsistent with this act are hereby superseded.

     L.1954, c. 197, p. 745, s. 16.

34:6-98.17.  Repeals
    Article 9 of chapter 6 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes (sections 34:6-68  to 34:6-98) and sections 34:1-34, 34:1-35, 34:1-36 of the Revised Statutes are  hereby repealed.

     L.1954, c. 197, p. 745, s. 17.

34:6-98.18.  Effective date
    This act shall take effect October 1, 1954, providing however, that sections  3 and 12 of this act shall take effect immediately.

     L.1954, c. 197, p. 745, s. 18.

34:6-119.1.  Company defined
    As used in this act,  "company"  and  "companies"  include corporations, associations, and any and all other legal entities.

     L.1966, c. 112, s. 1, eff. June 17, 1966.

34:6-119.2.  Facilities for employees;  rest rooms, lunch rooms, etc.
    Every railroad company, express company, car-loading and freight-forwarding  company and airline company, which is a common carrier of passengers and  freight, or either, or both, and which has or shall have in this State, a  station, office, depot, shop, platform shelter houses, section headquarters,  assembly points or other place incidental to the conduct of its business as a  common carrier, where its employees are required to assemble or to be in  attendance in the performance of their work as such employees, shall provide  and maintain for its employees, in such cases as the Commissioner of Labor and  Industry of New Jersey shall certify to be necessary, adequate facilities for  the health and comfort of said employees, including rest rooms, rooms wherein  lunches may be eaten, lockers, washrooms and toilets, with separate facilities  for men and women where both men and women are employed.  As used in this  section, "stations"  shall include stations for passengers and freight,   "offices" shall include yard offices as well as other offices,  "depots"  shall include passenger and freight depots,  "shops" shall include locomotive shops, diesel shops and other shops and  "platforms" shall include platforms  for loading or unloading of freight and express, or for either, or both.  And   "shelter houses, section headquarters, assembly points" shall include tool  houses, car houses or any location used as an assembly point.

     L.1966, c. 112, s. 2.

34:6-119.3.  Determination of adequacy by commissioner;  rules and regulations
    The Commissioner of Labor and Industry shall have the authority to determine  the adequacy of the said facilities and may order the furnishing and  maintaining of adequate facilities of the kind prescribed by this act and fix  the time, which shall not exceed 6 months, within which such facilities shall  be provided.  The Commissioner of Labor and Industry may prescribe rules and  regulations to administer and effectuate the purposes of this act. Such rules  and regulations shall have the force and effect of law and shall be enforced in  the same manner.

     L.1966, c. 112, s. 3.

34:6-119.4.  Compliance with act
    The said companies shall comply with the provisions of this act within 6 months from the effective date of this act, except that in the case of any new constructions and installations, compliance with this act shall coincide with the commencement of the use of such constructions and installations.

     L.1966, c. 112, s. 4.

34:6-119.5.  Investigations and inquiries by Department of Health
    Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to preclude investigations and inquiries by the State Department of Health pursuant to section 26:2-34 of the Revised Statutes.

     L.1966, c. 112, s. 5.

34:6-119.6.  Violation of act; penalty  
     6.   Any company, the officers and agents thereof, and any other person who shall violate any of the provisions of this act or of any order made by the Commissioner of Labor pursuant to this act, shall be liable to a penalty of $50.00 for the first violation and $100.00 for each subsequent violation. In the case of a continuing violation, the violation on each day shall be deemed to be a separate violation. Any such penalty shall be enforced and collected in accordance with "the penalty enforcement law" (N.J.S. 2A:58-1 et seq.). Any such penalty may be collected or enforced by summary proceedings or in a summary manner. Any action to collect or enforce any such penalty shall be brought in the name of the Commissioner of Labor in the Superior Court. All penalties recovered under this act shall be paid into the treasury of this State.  

    L.1966,c.112,s.6; amended 1991,c.91,s.346.  

34:6-120.  Short title of article
    This article may be cited by its short title as  "the home work law" .

34:6-121.  Tenement defined
    Within the meaning of this article a tenement is any house or building or portion thereof which is rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied or is occupied as the home or residence of three families or more, living independently of each other and doing their cooking upon the premises.

34:6-122.  License required
    No dwelling, tenement, or room therein, or building situated immediately in  the rear of a tenement or dwelling shall be used for the purpose of manufacturing, altering, repairing, finishing or distributing therein, for hire  or reward, any goods whatsoever unless a license is secured therefor, as provided in this article.

34:6-123.  Application for license
    Application for such a license shall be made to the commissioner by any family or member thereof, or any person desiring to manufacture, alter, repair,  finish or distribute any goods in any dwelling, tenement, or room therein, or  building situated immediately in the rear of a tenement or dwelling.  Each  license shall run continuously for a period of one year, whereupon a new or  further license must be obtained.  Each application for such a license shall  describe the dwelling, tenement, room or building, shall specify the number of  persons to be employed therein, and be in such form as the commissioner may  determine.  Blank applications shall be prepared and furnished by the  commissioner.

34:6-124.  Investigation before granting license
    Before any such license is granted, an inspection of the dwelling, tenement,  room, or building sought to be licensed, shall be made by the commissioner,  factory inspector or investigator.  If the commissioner or such inspectors or  investigators ascertain that such dwelling, tenement, room, or building is in a  clean and proper sanitary condition, and that the goods specified in the  application may be manufactured, altered, repaired, finished or distributed  therein under clean and healthful conditions, the commissioner shall grant the  license.

34:6-125.  Number of employees
    Each license shall state the maximum number of persons who may be employed in the dwelling, tenement, room, or building.  The number shall be determined by the number of cubic feet of air space contained in each room mentioned in the license, allowing not less than two hundred and fifty cubic feet for each person employed between the hours of six o'clock in the morning and six o'clock  in the evening, unless by special written permit of the commissioner and not  less than four hundred cubic feet for each person employed therein between the  hours of six in the evening and six in the morning, but no permit shall be  issued unless the dwelling, tenement, room, or building has suitable light at  all times during work hours.

34:6-126.  License to be posted;  revocation
    The license must be posted in a conspicuous place in the room or rooms where  the work is carried on.  The license may be revoked by the commissioner if the  health of the community or of the employees requires it, or if it appears that  the place to which the license relates is not in a healthy and proper sanitary  condition.  Every room in which goods are manufactured, altered, repaired,  finished or distributed shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and  shall be subject to examination and inspection by the commissioner, factory  inspectors, investigators, local boards of health, or tenement house inspectors  for the purpose of ascertaining whether the goods, or any part or parts  thereof, are clean and free from vermin and every matter of infectious or  contagious nature.

34:6-127.  Diseases to be reported
    Any person holding such license shall immediately report to the department any case of infectious or contagious disease occurring in the place covered by the license.  If the commissioner, factory inspector, investigator, local board  of health, or tenement house inspector shall find evidence of infectious or  contagious disease present in any place subject to the provisions of this  article he or it shall issue such orders as the public health may require and  shall condemn and destroy such infectious and contagious goods.

34:6-128.  Contracts to manufacture in unlicensed place unlawful
    It shall be unlawful for any person to contract to manufacture, alter, repair, finish or distribute for such purposes any goods whatsoever in an unlicensed dwelling, tenement or room therein or building situated immediately in the rear of a tenement or dwelling, not licensed as provided in this article.  It shall also be unlawful for any person to receive from, handle or convey to others or to sell, offer for sale, to expose for sale or hold in stock any goods that have been manufactured or altered or repaired or finished or distributed for such purposes in any such unlicensed dwelling, tenement, room, or building.

34:6-129.  Separate living quarters;  toilets
    The commissioner may, when he deems it necessary, require that any and all rooms to which this article applies, shall be separate from and have no door, window or other opening into any living or sleeping room.  He may further require or direct a separate outside entrance to the rooms where the work is carried on, and if such work is carried on above the first floor, he may direct  that a separate and distinct stairway leading thereto be constructed and every  such room shall be well and sufficiently heated and ventilated by ordinary, or,  if necessary, by mechanical appliances.  He may also require suitable closet  arrangements and separate toilets when and as he deems it necessary.

34:6-130.  Contract record
    Any person, by himself or by his agent, contracting for the manufacturing, altering, repairing, finishing or distributing in any place regulated by this article of any goods whatsoever, shall keep a register of the names and addresses plainly written in English of the persons to whom the article or goods are given, and the place where the articles are to be so manufactured, altered, repaired, finished or distributed.  The register shall be subject to inspection on demand by the commissioner or factory inspectors or investigators, and a copy thereof shall be furnished at his or their request.

34:6-130.1.  Records of and payment for homework in hand knitting industry
    All homeworkers engaged or employed in the hand knitting industry shall keep  a daily record of work done, and all employers in said industry shall likewise  keep and maintain a record of the daily work done by any such homeworker or  employee.  All records shall be kept and maintained by all parties for a period  of two years.  All employers shall henceforth be required to pay each employee  for work done immediately upon the completion and delivery of the same.

     L.1940, c. 98, p. 232, s. 1.

34:6-130.2.  Violations of section 34:6-130.1;  penalties
    Any violation of the provisions hereof shall subject the offender to a penalty of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, and a penalty of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second and each subsequent offense.  All penalties sued for hereunder shall be in accordance with the practice and procedure contained in section 34:6-136 of the Revised Statutes.

     L.1940, c. 98, p. 232, s. 2.

34:6-131.  Manufacture of infants' clothing, dolls and dolls' clothing prohibited in tenement houses
    The manufacturing, altering, repairing or finishing in whole or in part, or  distributing for the purposes thereof, of any dolls, dolls' clothing, articles  of children's or infants' wearing apparel in any tenement house is hereby  prohibited, notwithstanding anything to the contrary elsewhere in this article.

34:6-132.  Infants' and dolls' clothing and dolls;  manufacture in dwelling
    No license to manufacture, alter, repair or finish in whole or in part, or distribute for the purposes thereof, any dolls, dolls' clothing, or articles of  children's or infants' wearing apparel, shall be granted for any dwelling unless the applicant shall also first secure the approval of the local board of  health.

34:6-133.  Tailors and seamstresses exempted
    Nothing in this article shall be held to prevent the employment of a tailor  or seamstress by any person for the purpose of making, altering, repairing or  finishing any articles of wearing apparel for the personal use of such person  or for the personal use of his family.

34:6-134.  Penalty
    Any corporation, the officers and agents thereof, the members of any firm, the agents thereof, and any other person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five dollars for the first violation and fifty dollars for each subsequent violation.

34:6-135.  Disorderly house
    Any place where manufacturing, altering, repairing, finishing or distributing for the purposes thereof, of any goods, for hire or reward, is habitually carried on in violation of this article shall be deemed a disorderly  house, and the officers or agents of any corporation, the members of any firm,  and any other person owning, operating or managing the business shall be deemed  to be guilty of keeping a disorderly house, and upon conviction thereof, shall  be fined a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars, or shall be imprisoned for a  term not to exceed two years, or both.

34:6-136.    Recovery of penalties; disposition  
     34:6-136. Any penalty for a violation of this article shall be recovered in a civil action brought in the name of the commissioner in the Superior Court or municipal court of the municipality, where the offense is committed. 

    A penalty recovered shall be transmitted by the clerk of the court to the commissioner and by him paid into the treasury of this State.  

    Amended 1953,c.33, s.16; 1991,c.91,s.347.  

34:6-136.1.  Declaration of policy
    (a) The Legislature has long recognized, through laws regulating the employment of men, women and children, that working conditions detrimental to health and welfare result in injury not only to the workers immediately affected but to the public interest as a whole.  Now the Legislature finds that  industrial home work runs counter to, and tends to defeat, the purpose of these  laws because it is performed at excessively low wages for long and irregular  hours, under insanitary and otherwise unhealthful working conditions, in  constant competition with factory production and free from effective  regulation;  that these factors result in (1) serious danger to the health,  efficiency and general well-being of home workers, (2) the breakdown of  standards of employment for factory workers in this State, (3) rendering more  difficult the enforcement of laws governing the standards of employment for  such factory workers, (4) unfair competition between employers in factory production and employers utilizing industrial home work, and (5) detriment to the consumer and the public welfare.

    (b) It is hereby declared to be the policy of this act, through the exercise  by the Legislature of the police power, to control strictly the methods of  production by industrial home work in this State.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 828, s. 1.

34:6-136.2.  Definitions
    Whenever used in this act.

    (a)  "Person"  means any individual;  firm;  partnership, or the officers or  agents thereof;  domestic corporation or foreign corporation, or the officers  or agents of such domestic or foreign corporation; company, association or  society, or the officers or agents thereof;  the legal representatives of a  deceased individual;  the receiver, trustee or successor of an individual,  firm, partnership, domestic corporation or foreign corporation, company,  association, or society.

    (b)  "To manufacture"  includes to prepare, alter, repair, finish or process  in whole or in part, or handle in any way connected with the production,  wrapping, packaging or preparation for display of an article or materials.

    (c)  "Home"  means any room, house, apartment or other premises, whichever is most extensive, used in whole or in part as a place of dwelling;  and includes outbuildings upon premises that are primarily used as a place of dwelling, where such outbuildings are under the control of the persons dwelling  on such premises.

    (d)  "Employer"  means any person, including any independent contractor, who, directly or indirectly or through an employee, agent, independent contractor, subcontractor, or any other person,

    (1) in any way distributes or delivers or causes to be distributed or delivered to another person any articles or materials to be manufactured within  this State in a home, and thereafter to be returned to him, not for the  personal use of himself or of a member of his family, or thereafter to be disposed of otherwise in accordance with his direction;  or

    (2) sells or causes to be sold to another person any articles or materials for the purpose of having such materials or articles manufactured within this State in a home and of then rebuying such materials or articles, after such manufacture, either by himself, or by someone designated by him.

    (e)  "Industrial homework"  means any manufacture, in a home, of materials or articles for an employer, but shall not be construed to mean or include any manufacture performed for an employer by any person employed by him at the place of manufacture, where such place is used for manufacturing only, and who does not dwell in the building where the manufacture is performed, even though persons may dwell in other parts of such building;  provided, however, that where persons dwell in such building, the living quarters shall be entirely separate and independent from the part of the building where the manufacture is  performed and have independent entrances separated by open air.  A place of  manufacture shall not be construed to be a cellar or basement of a house or an  outbuilding.

    (f)  "Home worker"  means any person engaged in manufacturing, in a home, materials or articles for an employer.

    (g)  "Industry"  shall mean any trade, business, industry, or any portion or  branch thereof, or groups of industries.

    (h)  "Commissioner"  means the Commissioner of Labor of the State of New Jersey or any of his authorized representatives.

    (i)  "Tenement"  means any house or building or portion thereof which is rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied or is occupied as the home or residence of three families or more, living independently of each other and doing their cooking upon the premises.

    (j) Words used in the singular shall include the plural and the plural the singular.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 829, s. 2.  Amended by L.1942, c. 307, p. 1137, s. 1.

34:6-136.3.  Prohibited homework  
     Prohibited homework.  The manufacture of any of the following by industrial homework shall be unlawful, and no permit or certificate issued under this act shall be deemed to authorize such manufacture:  (1) Articles of food or drink, (2) Articles for use in connection with the serving of food or drink, (3) Toys and dolls, (4) Tobacco, (5) Drugs and poisons, (6) Bandages and other sanitary goods, (7) Explosives, fireworks, and articles of like character, (8) Articles of infants' and children's wearing apparel, (9) Articles of women's or men's wearing apparel, (10) Articles, the processing of which requires exposure to substances determined by the commissioner to be hazardous to the health or safety of persons so exposed, (11) the manufacture or distribution of dolls' clothing in any tenement house is hereby prohibited, anything to the contrary herein notwithstanding.  

    L.1941,c.308,s.3; amended 1991,c.47,s.1.  

34:6-136.4.  Power to prohibit
    (a) The commissioner shall have the power upon his own initiative, and it shall be his duty upon receipt of a petition of fifty or more residents of this  State, to make an investigation of any industry which employs home workers, in  order to determine:  (1) Whether the wages and conditions of employment are  injurious to the health and welfare of home workers in such industry;  and (2)  Whether the wages and conditions of employment of home workers prevailing in  such industry have the effect of rendering unduly difficult the maintenance of  existing labor standards in or the observance and enforcement of labor  standards established by law or regulation for factory workers in such  industry.

    (b) If, on the basis of information in his possession, with or without an investigation, and after a public hearing as provided for by section five of this act, the commissioner shall find that industrial home work cannot be continued within any industry without:  (1) injuring the health and welfare of the home workers within that industry, or (2) rendering unduly difficult the maintenance of existing labor standards of factory workers in that industry or the observance and enforcement of labor standards established by law or regulation for factory workers in that industry, the commissioner shall by order prohibit industrial home work in such industry, except as may be otherwise provided in such order pursuant to the provisions of section six of this act, and no permit issued under this act shall be deemed thereafter to authorize the furnishing of articles or materials for industrial home work prohibited by such order.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 830, s. 4.

34:6-136.5.  Hearings
    Before making such order the commissioner shall hold a public hearing or hearings at which an opportunity to be heard shall be afforded to any employer,  or representatives of employers, and any home worker, or representative of home  workers, and any other person or persons having an interest in the subject  matter of hearing.  A public notice of such hearing shall be given in such  manner as may be fixed by the commissioner.  Such notice shall be given at  least thirty days before the hearing is held. Such hearing or hearings shall  be in such place or places as the commissioner deems most convenient to the  employer and home workers to be affected by such order.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 831, s. 5.

34:6-136.6.  Orders
    (a) The commissioner shall determine the effective date of such order, which  date shall be not less than ninety days after the date of its promulgation.   The order shall set forth the type or types of manufacturing which are  prohibited after its effective date, and shall contain such terms and  conditions as the commissioner may deem necessary to carry out the purpose and  policy of this act and to safeguard its provisions.  The commissioner may in  such order permit limited distribution of industrial home work under such terms  or conditions as are hereinafter prescribed by subsection (b) of this section,  to any person if he finds (1) That such person is unable to adjust to factory  employment because of old age or physical or mental deficiency or disability,  or is unable to leave the home because his services are essential to care for  an invalid in the home;  and (2) That such limited distribution is not  inconsistent with the purpose and policy of this act.

    (b) Industrial home work shall be performed under subsection (a) of this section only where (1) the employer maintains a factory or business in this State in which persons are employed on operations which are the same or similar  to the home work operations permitted and, provided further, that the commissioner shall determine the ratio, which shall not exceed one-third, of the number of home workers engaged by an employer to the number of persons employed by said employer in his factory or business, said determination to be based on conditions of employment, maintenance of existing labor standards and other factors involving the preservation of the best interests of this State; (2) on any operation, a home worker is paid at least the same rate as that paid to workers on the same or similar operations in the factory or business; and (3) the employer and home worker comply with such other terms or conditions as the commissioner may by rule or regulation prescribe to safeguard  the health and welfare of home workers and the wages and working conditions of  factory workers, and to effectuate the purpose of this section.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 832, s. 6.

34:6-136.7.  Permit required
    (a) Every employer must procure from the commissioner an employer's permit.   Application for such permit shall list the names and addresses of home workers  and shall be made on a form prescribed by the commissioner. Such permit shall  be in writing, dated when issued, and signed by the commissioner.  It shall  give the name and address of the person to whom it is issued and shall  designate and limit the acts that are permitted.  Such permit shall be valid  for a period of one year from the date of its issuance, unless sooner revoked,  and shall not be transferable for any cause.

    (b) Such permit shall be issued or remain valid only where the employer (1)  maintains a factory or business within this State or (2) operates through another employer possessing a valid permit and maintaining a factory or business within this State.  A permit shall only be issued when the same conditions specified in section 6(b) of this act exist, prevail or are established.

    (c) No such permit shall be issued to or remain valid for any independent contractor to act for an employer unless such other employer or employers for whose direct or indirect benefit or account such independent contractor so acts  possesses a valid employer's permit;  nor shall any such permit be issued to  any person, or to the successor in interest of any person, or to a person  directly or indirectly owned or controlled by any person, whose employer's  permit has been revoked by the commissioner within two years prior to the  latest application for such permit.

    (d) No employer shall deliver or cause to be delivered any article or materials for industrial home work to an independent contractor who is not in possession of a valid employer's permit.

    (e) No employer shall deliver or cause to be delivered any article or materials for industrial home work unless (1) such an employer is in possession  of a valid permit;  (2) the home worker is in possession of a valid home  worker's certificate where such article or materials are distributed to said  home worker by employer;  (3) where subsequent distribution is intended, such  person is in possession of a valid permit. The commissioner may revoke any  employer's permit for violation of this section. The employer shall also be  subject to the penalties provided in this act for such violation.

    (f) Before any permit is granted to an employer to distribute industrial home work from a home, an inspection of home or room therein shall be made by the commissioner.  If the commissioner ascertains that such home or room therein is in a clean and proper sanitary condition and that the articles or materials may be distributed for manufacturing purposes under clean and healthful conditions, the commissioner shall grant the permit and allow the use  of such home or room therein for the purpose of distributing industrial home  work.  Every room in which industrial home work is distributed shall be kept in  a clean and sanitary condition and shall be subject to examination and  inspection by the commissioner, local boards of health or tenement house inspection for the purpose of ascertaining whether said articles or materials are clean and free from vermin and every matter of infectious or contagious nature.

    (g) Any person holding a permit issued by the commissioner shall immediately  report to the commissioner any case of infectious or contagious disease, of  which the employer has knowledge, occurring in a place or home used for the  distribution of industrial home work.  If the commissioner, local board of  health or tenement house inspector shall find evidence of infectious or  contagious disease present in any home or room therein where industrial home  work is distributed, the commissioner, local board of health, or tenement house  inspector shall issue such orders as the public health may require and shall  condemn and destroy such infectious and contagious goods.

    (h) The permit must be posted in a conspicuous place in the room where industrial home work is distributed except that where such distribution is made  from a factory or business, the employer shall file and keep the permit on file  on the premises from which such home work is distributed.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 833, s. 7.

34:6-136.8.  Fees
    A fee of $150.00 shall be paid to the Department of Labor and Industry for the original issuance of an employer's permit.  For each annual renewal of such  permit, the employer shall pay to the department a fee of:  (1) $150.00, where  at no time during the preceding calendar year did the employer directly or  indirectly have business relations with more than 25 home workers;  (2) $300.00, where at any time during the preceding calendar year the employer directly or indirectly had business relations with more than 25 home workers.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 835, s. 8.  Amended by L.1971, c. 154, s. 6, eff. May 20, 1971.

34:6-136.9.  Revocation of permit
    If the commissioner has reason to believe that a person having an employer's  permit is not observing the provisions of this act or any rule, regulation or  order issued thereunder, or the conditions of the employer's permit, the  commissioner may, on ten days' notice, summon such person to appear before the  commissioner to show cause why the commissioner should not find that he has  failed to observe such provisions or conditions.

    (b) If, after such notice and opportunity to be heard, the commissioner finds as a fact that such person has failed to observe or comply with a provision of this act, his permit, or a regulation or order issued by the commissioner under authority of this act, the commissioner may revoke the permit of such person.

    (c) The commissioner may revoke a permit if the health of the community or of the employees require it, or if it appears that the place in which the industrial home work is distributed is not in a healthy or proper sanitary condition.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 835, s. 9.

34:6-136.10.  Home worker's certificate
    (a) Every person desiring to engage in industrial home work within this State must procure from the commissioner a home worker's certificate which shall be issued without cost and which shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of its issuance, unless sooner revoked or suspended. Application for such certificate shall be made in such form as the commissioner may by regulation prescribe.  No home worker's certificate shall be issued:  (1) To any person under the age of sixteen years;  or (2) To any person suffering from  an infectious, contagious, or communicable disease or living in a home that is  not clean, sanitary and free from infectious, contagious or communicable  disease.

    (b) The commissioner may, upon reasonable notice and opportunity to be heard, revoke or suspend any home worker's certificate if he finds that the holder is performing industrial home work contrary to the conditions under which the certificate was issued or to any provision of this act or has permitted any person not holding a valid home worker's certificate to assist him in performing his industrial home work.  The commissioner may also revoke a  home worker's certificate if the health of the community or the persons in the  home requires it, or if it appears that the home to which such certificate  relates is not in a healthy and proper sanitary condition.

    (c) Before any application for a home worker's certificate is approved and such certificate is issued, the commissioner shall cause an inspection of the home to be made.  If the home is in a clean and proper sanitary condition and if the articles or materials may be manufactured therein under clean and healthful conditions, the commissioner shall issue the certificate permitting the use of such home for performing industrial home work by the home worker. Home worker's certificates shall not be transferable, because of a change in address of a home worker and a new application shall be made and certificate issued subject to the above inspection.

    (d) The home worker's certificate must be posted in a conspicuous place in the room or rooms where the industrial home work is being manufactured.

    (e) Every room in a home where articles or materials are being manufactured  shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be subject to  examination and inspection by the commissioner, local boards of health or  tenement house inspectors for the purpose of ascertaining whether said articles  or materials are clean and free from vermin and every matter of infectious or  contagious nature.

    (f) Any person holding a home worker's certificate shall immediately report  to the commissioner any case of infectious or contagious disease occurring in  the home.  If the commissioner, local board of health or tenement house  inspector shall find evidence of infectious or contagious disease present in  any home where industrial home work is being carried on, premises where  industrial home work is being distributed, the commissioner, local board of  health or tenement house inspector shall issue such orders as the public health  may require and shall condemn and destroy such infectious and contagious goods  and such local board or inspector shall forward a copy of such order to the  commissioner.

    (g) The commissioner may, when he deems it necessary, require that any and all rooms in a home used for industrial home work or the distribution thereof, shall be separate from and have no door, window or other opening into any living or sleeping room.

    (h) In addition to the other requirements of this act, no home workers' certificate shall be issued for the manufacture of dolls' clothing nor shall a permit be issued for the distribution of dolls' clothing for manufacture unless  the applicant thereof shall first secure the approval of the local board of  health.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 836, s. 10.

34:6-136.11.  Records to be kept
    Each employer shall keep within this State in such form and manner as the commissioner may by rule, regulation or order prescribe and shall forward to the commissioner at such intervals and upon such blanks as the commissioner may  by rule, regulation or order prescribe and provide a complete and accurate  record of:  (1) All persons engaged in industrial home work directly or  indirectly for or in behalf of such employer;  (2) All places where such persons work;  (3) All articles or materials directly or indirectly distributed  to such persons;  (4) All articles or materials manufactured by such persons;   (5) The net cash wages received by each home worker and such piecework rates  at which each home worker is compensated; (6) All independent contractors to  whom he has furnished materials to be manufactured by industrial home work;   and (7) Such other facts and information as may be pertinent to the proper  enforcement and effectuation of the provisions of this act.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 838, s. 11.

34:6-136.12.  Conditions of manufacture
    Industrial home work shall be performed:  (1) Only by a person possessing a  valid home worker's certificate, and resident in the home in which the work is  done;  (2) Only by persons 16 years of age or over;  (3) Only in accordance  with the wages, hours or working conditions established for labor in factories  or businesses by persons of the same age as the home workers by State law or  regulation or any applicable Federal law or regulation;  (4) Only in accordance  with the provisions of any State law or regulation, including the provisions of  this act, or of any applicable Federal law or regulation, relating to  employment and applicable to home workers;  and (5) Only in a home that is  clean and sanitary and free from any infectious, contagious or communicable  disease.

    Every employer shall be deemed to have accepted responsibility for the observance of the conditions of manufacture specified by this section and of such terms and conditions as may be specified pursuant to section 6 of this act;  and each of such conditions shall be deemed to be a condition of the employer's permit to the same extent as though it were expressly set forth therein.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 838, s. 12.  Amended by L.1980, c. 90, s. 6.

34:6-136.13.  Labels required
    No employer shall deliver or cause to be delivered any materials or articles  to be manufactured by any home worker unless there has been conspicuously  affixed to each article a label or other mark of identification bearing the  employer's name and address, printed or written legibly in English.  But if the  goods are of such a nature that they cannot be individually so labeled or  identified, then the employer shall conspicuously label in such manner as the  commissioner may by rule or regulation prescribe.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 839, s. 13.

34:6-136.14.  Unlawfully manufactured or distributed articles or materials
    (a) Any article or material which is being manufactured in a home in violation of any provisions of this act may be removed by the commissioner and may be retained by him until claimed by the employer.  The commissioner shall by registered mail give notice of such removal to the person whose name and address are affixed to the article or material as provided by section thirteen.   Unless the article or material so removed is claimed within thirty days  thereafter, it may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of.  Where the owner or  the article or material cannot be determined, unless such article or material  removed by the commissioner is claimed within thirty days after such removal,  it may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of.

    (b) It shall be a violation of this act for any person to receive from, handle or convey to others, to sell, offer for sale, to expose for sale or hold  in stock any articles or materials that have been manufactured by a home worker, who does not possess a valid home worker's certificate or distributed for manufacture by persons not in possession of a valid permit.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 839, s. 14.

34:6-136.15.  Agreements to contributions by employees void
    Any agreement by a home worker to pay any portion of a payment required of any other person by any provision of this act shall be void and of no effect.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 840, s. 15.

34:6-136.16. Enforcement; administration, oaths, affidavits, subpoenas, witnesses  
     16.  Enforcement, administration, oaths, affidavits, subpoenas, witnesses.

  

    (a)  The commissioner shall enforce and administer the provisions of this act and the commissioner is directed to make all inspections and investigations necessary for proper enforcement and administration thereof.  

    (b)  In the administration of this act the commissioner shall have the power to administer oaths, take affidavits and the depositions of witnesses and issue subpoenas for and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of papers, books, accounts, payrolls, documents, records, testimony and other evidence of whatever description.  In the case of failure of any person to comply with any order of the commissioner or subpoena, lawfully issued, or on the refusal of any witness to produce evidence or to testify as to any matter regarding which he may be lawfully interrogated, it shall be the duty of the Special Civil Part, Law Division, of the Superior Court or the Superior Court, or the judge thereof, upon application by the commissioner to compel obedience by proceedings for contempt, as in the case of disobedience of a subpoena issued for such court or a refusal to testify therein.  

    (c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of any other general, local or special law, all fees and other moneys derived from the operation of this act shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor.  

    L.1941,c.308,s.16; amended 1950,c.42; 1991,c.91,s.348; 1991,c.205,s.14.  

34:6-136.17.  Rules and regulations
    The commissioner shall have the power to make, issue, amend and rescind such  rules, regulations and orders as are necessary or appropriate to carry out the  provisions of this act.  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, such  rules, regulations or orders may define the terms used in this act.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 841, s. 17.

34:6-136.18.  Injunctive relief against violations
    The commissioner shall have the power to institute a civil action in the Superior Court for injunctive relief, and such court shall have the power to restrain any employer from violating any of the provisions of this act.  The court may proceed in the action in a summary manner or otherwise.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 841, s. 18.  Amended by L.1953, c. 33, p. 586, s. 17.

34:6-136.19. Penalties  
     19.  Penalties.  Any employer or person who: (1) Directly or indirectly in any way, distributes, delivers or causes to be distributed or delivered, or sells or causes to be sold, articles or materials for industrial home work in violation of any provision of this act or of any rule, regulation or order issued thereunder; or (2) Violates or fails to comply with any provision of this act or any rule, regulation or order issued thereunder; or (3) Does not possess a valid employer's permit issued by the commissioner pursuant to section 7 of this act or fails to comply with any provision or condition of that permit; or (4) Refuses to allow the commissioner or his authorized representative to enter his place of business or other place for the purpose of investigating in the enforcement of this act, and of inspecting any records required to be kept by section 10 of this act; or (5) Willfully makes a false statement or representation in order to lower the amount of fees due from him under this act; or (6) Makes any deduction from the wages or salary of a home worker in order to pay any portion of a payment which the employer or person is required to make by this act; shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense and, upon conviction for a violation, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000.  If an employer or person knowingly violates this act or if an employer or person commits a second violation or multiple violation of this act, that employer or person shall be guilty of a crime of the fourth degree.  Each day a violation is continued and each home worker engaged in industrial home work directly or indirectly for or in behalf of the employer or person in violation of any provision of this act or any rule, regulation or order issued thereunder shall be considered a separate offense.  

    As an alternative to or in addition to any other sanctions provided by law for violations of any provision of Article 12 of chapter 6 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes when the Commissioner of Labor finds that an employer has violated that article, the commissioner is authorized to assess and collect administrative penalties, up to a maximum of $250 for a first violation and up to a maximum of $500 for each subsequent violation, specified in a schedule of penalties to be promulgated as a rule or regulation by the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).  When determining the amount of the penalty imposed because of a violation, the commissioner shall consider factors which include the history of previous violations by the employer, the seriousness of the violation, the good faith of the employer and the size of the employer's business.  No administrative penalty shall be levied pursuant to this section unless the Commissioner of Labor provides the alleged violator with notification of the violation and of the amount of the penalty by certified mail and an opportunity to request a hearing before the commissioner or his designee within 15 days following the receipt of the notice.  If a hearing is requested, the commissioner shall issue a final order upon such hearing and a finding that a violation has occurred.  If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order upon expiration of the 15-day period.  Payment of the penalty is due when a final order is issued or when the notice becomes a final order.  Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding commenced by the commissioner pursuant to "the penalty enforcement law" (N.J.S.2A:58-1 et seq.).  Any sum collected as a fine or penalty pursuant to this section shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor.  

    L.1941,s.308,s.19; amended 1989,c.161; 1991,c.205,s.15.  

34:6-136.20.  Construction
    If any provision of this act or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the act and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 842, s. 20.

34:6-136.21.  Exemptions
    Nothing in this act shall be held to prevent the employment of a tailor or seamstress by any person for the purpose of making, altering, repairing or finishing any articles of wearing apparel for the personal use of such person or members of his family.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 842, s. 21.

34:6-136.22.  Disorderly house
    Any home or other place where industrial home work is habitually carried on  or articles or materials are habitually being distributed for manufacture in  violation of any of the provisions of this act shall be a disorderly house and  any person owning, operating or managing a business involving such industrial  home work or the distribution of such articles or materials for manufacture  shall be deemed guilty of keeping a disorderly house, and, upon conviction  thereof, shall be fined a sum of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00)  nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or shall be imprisoned for a term  not to exceed two years or both.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 842, s. 22.

34:6-136.23.  Time of taking effect
    This act shall take effect ninety days after its adoption;  except sections  seven (a), (b) and (c), section eight, and section sixteen (c) which shall take  effect immediately, and except that the commissioner shall have power  immediately to promulgate rules and regulations, appoint such officers and  employees, and fix their compensation, as may be necessary to carry out the  provisions of this act, and do such other things as may be necessary to set up  the machinery required to enforce the provisions of this act.

     L.1941, c. 308, p. 843, s. 24.

34:6-144.    Findings, declarations  
     1.   The Legislature finds and declares that:

    a.   There is growing concern over the increasing number of people working for employers in certain segments of the apparel industry under conditions which may violate State laws and regulations concerning wages and hours, child labor, unemployment and temporary disability insurance, and workers' compensation and the payment of payroll taxes;  

    b.   Persons working under these unlawful sweatshop conditions are being exploited daily;  

    c.   It is the sense of this Legislature that this exploitation of garment workers must be eliminated; and  

    d.   Therefore, it is necessary and proper for the Legislature to create a special task force to enforce the State's labor laws in the apparel industry and to establish a registration system for employers in that industry.  

    L.1987,c.458,s.1.  

34:6-145.    Definitions  
     2.   As used in this act:

     a.   "Apparel industry" means the making, cutting, sewing, finishing, assembling, pressing or otherwise producing of apparel, designed or intended to be worn by any individual and sold or offered for sale for that purpose, but does not include cleaning, pressing or tailoring services performed upon apparel sold or offered for sale at retail;  

    b.   "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor;

    c.   "Contractor" means any person who contracts to perform in this State the cutting, sewing, finishing, assembling, pressing or otherwise producing of any apparel, or a section or component of apparel, designed or intended to be worn by any individual and sold or offered for sale, except at retail, for that purpose.  "Contractor" shall include, but not be limited to, a subcontractor, jobber or wholesaler, but shall not include a production employee employed for wages who does not employ others;  

    d.   "Department" means the State Department of Labor;

    e.   "Manufacturer" means any person who contracts with a contractor to perform in this State the cutting, sewing, finishing, assembling, pressing or producing of any apparel, or a section or component of apparel, designed or intended to be worn by any individual and sold or offered for sale, except at retail, for that purpose, or who cuts, sews, finishes, assembles, presses or otherwise produces in this State any apparel, or a section or component of apparel, designed or intended to be worn by any individual and sold or offered for sale, except at retail, for that purpose.  "Manufacturer" shall not include a production employee employed for wages who does not employ others;  

    f.   "Production employee" means any person who is employed by a contractor or manufacturer directly to perform the cutting, sewing, finishing, assembling, pressing or otherwise producing of any apparel, or a section or component of apparel, designed or intended to be worn by any individual and sold or offered for sale, except at retail, for that purpose;  

    g.   "Apparel industry unit" means the Special Task Force on the Apparel Industry created by section 4 of this act and reestablished as the apparel industry unit by this 1991 amendatory and supplementary act.  

    L.1987,c.458,s.2; amended 1991,c.189,s.4.  

34:6-146.    Registration of manufacturers, contractors  
     3. a. No manufacturer or contractor shall engage in the apparel industry in this State unless the manufacturer or contractor is registered as a manufacturer or contractor with the department, in writing, on a form provided by the commissioner.  That form shall contain the following information: whether the manufacturer or contractor is a sole proprietorship, partnership, or corporation; the manufacturer's or contractor's name and principal business address in the State; the name and address of each person with a financial interest in the manufacturer's or contractor's business and the amount of that interest, except that if the manufacturer or contractor is a publicly-traded corporation, only the names and addresses of the corporation officers shall be required; the manufacturer's or contractor's tax identification number; and, if the registrant is a contractor, whether that contractor subcontracts the cutting or sewing of apparel or sections or components thereof. Divisions, subsidiary corporations, or related companies may, at the option of the manufacturer or contractor, be named and included under one omnibus registration.  

    b.   The commissioner shall issue pursuant to the provisions of this act, a certificate of registration upon receipt of a manufacturer's or contractor's completed registration form and documentation that the manufacturer or contractor has paid any surety bond required pursuant to subsection h. of section 7 of P.L.1987, c.458 (C.34:6-150) and provides workers' compensation coverage for the manufacturer's or contractor's production employees working in this State.  The initial fee for each registration shall be $300.  Each subsequent annual registration fee shall be $300.  The commissioner may prorate the initial annual registration fee if the certificate of registration is for a period of less than 12 months.  Registrations shall be renewed on or before January 15th of each year, and all fees shall be payable to the Division of Workplace Standards.  With respect to manufacturers or contractors operating prior to or on the effective date of this act, the initial registration shall be filed on or before the first day of the sixth month following the effective date of this act and shall be effective until the following January 15th.  With respect to new manufacturers or contractors, the initial registration shall be filed upon the commencement of manufacturing or contracting in the apparel industry and shall be effective until the following January 15th.  The commissioner may, by order, compel registration pursuant to this subsection.  

    L.1987,c.458,s.3; amended 1991,c.189,s.5.  

34:6-147.    Special Task Force on the Apparel Industry reestablished as apparel industry unit  
     4.   The commissioner shall establish, within 120 days of the effective date of this act, a Special Task Force on the Apparel Industry to enforce State labor laws affecting the employment of production employees in the apparel industry and to exercise the special duties and powers set forth in sections 5 and 6 of this act.  The special task force shall include personnel from the department who shall be charged with ensuring compliance with the State's wage and hour, unemployment compensation, temporary disability, workers' compensation, and industrial homework laws.  Upon the effective date of this 1991 amendatory and supplementary act, the special task force shall be reestablished as the apparel industry unit.  

    L.1987,c.458,s.4; amended 1991,c.189,s.6.  

34:6-148.    Duties of apparel industry unit  
     5.   The apparel industry unit is charged with the following duties:

    a.   To inspect manufacturers and contractors, with respect to their production employees, for compliance with the registration requirements of section 3 of this act;  

    b.   To inspect manufacturers and contractors, with respect to their production employees, for compliance with other labor and payroll tax laws of this State that affect the employment of production employees; and  

    c.   To ensure, with respect to their production employees, compliance by manufacturers and contractors with the orders of, and assessments of civil penalties by, the commissioner pursuant to this act and other labor laws of this State applicable to the employment of production employees.  

    L.1987,c.458,s.5; amended 1991,c.189,s.7.  

34:6-149  Powers of apparel industry unit.

	6.	The apparel industry unit shall have the following powers:

	a.	To investigate and conduct inspections at locations where an apparel industry manufacturer or contractor is operating to ensure compliance with this act;  

	b.	To inspect books, records and premises of manufacturers and contractors, with respect to their production employees, to determine compliance with the State's labor laws, including but not limited to, laws concerning wages, overtime compensation, unemployment compensation and temporary disability insurance, workers' compensation coverage, child labor, and industrial homework laws, and, if the apparel industry unit determines that a manufacturer or contractor has violated a provision of any of those laws with respect to its production employees, to assess and collect, on behalf of the commissioner, any administrative penalty authorized by law.  If the violation is of a provision of a labor law for which the assessment and collection of an administrative penalty is not otherwise authorized, the apparel industry unit is hereby authorized to assess and collect an administrative penalty of not less than $250 and not more than $500 for a first violation and not less than $500 and not more than $1,000 for each subsequent violation, specified in a schedule of penalties promulgated by rule or regulation of the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.). No administrative penalty shall be levied pursuant to this subsection unless the commissioner or his designee provides the violator with notification of the violation and of the amount of the penalty by certified mail and an opportunity to request a hearing within 15 days following the receipt of the notice.  If a hearing is requested, the commissioner, or his designee, may issue a final order upon such hearing and a finding that a violation has occurred.  If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order upon the expiration of the 15-day period.  Payment of the penalty is due when a final order is issued or when the notice becomes a final order.  Any penalty imposed under this subsection may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding pursuant to "the penalty enforcement law" (N.J.S.2A:58-1 et seq.). Any penalty imposed under this subsection shall be paid to the Division of Workplace Standards and applied to enforcement and administrative costs of the division; and  

	c.	To serve as the designee of the commissioner for the purpose of taking any action authorized by this act necessary to implement its provisions.  

	L.1987,c.458,s.6; amended 1991, c.189, s.8; 1999, c.4, s.1.

34:6-150  Violations, penalties.

	7. a. Any manufacturer or contractor who has failed to comply with the registration requirements of section 3 of this act shall be deemed to have violated this act.  

	b.	Any manufacturer or contractor who has failed to comply, for the second time within any three-year period, with an order issued by the commissioner to comply with the registration requirements of section 3 of this act shall be deemed to have violated this act.  

	c.	Any manufacturer or contractor who contracts for the performance of any apparel industry service, as identified in subsection a. of section 2 of this act, with any other manufacturer or contractor whom the manufacturer or contractor knows does not hold a valid registration shall be deemed to have violated this act.  A contractor or manufacturer who knowingly violates this subsection c. within three years after having been found liable for a civil or administrative penalty for violating this subsection c. is guilty of a crime of the fourth degree.

	d.	No manufacturer or contractor shall perform services or hold himself out as being able to perform services as a registered manufacturer or contractor unless he holds a valid registration pursuant to this act. A contractor or manufacturer who knowingly violates this subsection d. within three years after having been found liable for a civil or administrative penalty for violating this subsection d. is guilty of a crime of the fourth degree.

	e.	If the commissioner or his designee determines that any manufacturer or contractor commits a violation as provided in subsection a., b., or c. of this section, or violates subsection d. of this section, the commissioner or his designee may impose a civil penalty, and such penalty shall be made with due consideration of the size and past experience of the manufacturer or contractor and the seriousness of the violation, upon the manufacturer or contractor of not less than $1,000 and not more than $2,000 for an initial violation and not less than $2,000 and not more than $4,000 for each subsequent violation, and, as an alternative or in addition to the civil penalty, the commissioner or his designee is authorized to assess and collect an administrative penalty, of not less than $250 and not more than $500 for a first violation and not less than $500 and not more than $1,000 for each subsequent violation, specified in a schedule of penalties to be promulgated by rule or regulation of the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).  No administrative penalty shall be levied pursuant to this subsection unless the commissioner or his designee provides the violator with notification of the violation and of the amount of the penalty by certified mail and an opportunity to request a hearing within 15 days following the receipt of the notice.  If a hearing is requested, the commissioner, or his designee, may issue a final order upon such hearing and a finding that a violation has occurred.  If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order upon the expiration of the 15-day period.  Payment of the penalty is due when a final order is issued or when the notice becomes a final order.  Any penalty imposed under this subsection may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding pursuant to "the penalty enforcement law" (N.J.S.2A:58-1 et seq.).  The civil or administrative penalties shall be paid to the Division of Workplace Standards and applied to enforcement and administrative costs of the division, except as provided in subsection b. of section 11 of this act.  Any civil penalty imposed pursuant to this section shall be enforceable in a summary manner pursuant to Rule 4:70 of the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey.

	f.	If any manufacturer or contractor fails to comply with an order by the commissioner to register or renew registration, the commissioner may seek and obtain in a summary action in Superior Court an injunction prohibiting such unlawful activity.  

	g.	An intentional failure to comply with the registration requirements of section 3 of this act shall be a crime of the fourth degree.  

	h.	The commissioner or his designee may, after a hearing thereon, and after due consideration of the size and past experience of the manufacturer or contractor and the seriousness of the violation, require as a condition of continued registration, the payment of a surety bond or may revoke, by order, the registration of any manufacturer or contractor for any period ranging from 30 days to one year upon being found guilty of:

	(1)	A second violation of the same provision of this act within any three-year period; or  

	(2)	A second violation within any three-year period of the same provision of any other labor law applicable to the employment of production employees.  

	The surety bond shall be payable to the State and shall be for the benefit of production employees damaged by any failure of the manufacturer or contractor to pay wages or benefits or otherwise comply with the provisions of law.  The surety bond shall be in the sum and form that the commissioner deems necessary for the protection of the production employees, but shall not exceed $2,500 per production employee.  

	i.	Any manufacturer or contractor who contracts, for the second time within any three-year period, for the performance of any apparel industry service with any other manufacturer or contractor whom the manufacturer or contractor knows has failed to comply with the registration requirements of section 3 of this act, shall, if the other manufacturer or contractor has failed to pay any civil penalty assessed under subsection e. of this section, be liable to pay a civil penalty equal to the civil penalty that the other manufacturer or contractor has been assessed.  

	j.	Nothing herein shall affect either the authority of the department to enforce the industrial homework laws of this State or the right of any manufacturer to possess or repossess any apparel, or sections or components of apparel, that are located at any contractor with whom it has contracted.  
	L.1987,c.458,s.7; amended 1991, c.189, s.9; 1999, c.4, s.2.

34:6-151.    Additional penalties  
     1. a.  The commissioner may, in addition to seeking civil, administrative, or criminal penalties pursuant to P.L.1987, c.458 (C.34:6-144 et seq.), order the apparel industry unit to confiscate any partially or completely assembled articles of apparel and any equipment used in the assembly of apparel from any manufacturer or contractor who is violating any provision of P.L.1987, c.458 (C.34:6-144 et seq.) and has previously been found liable for a civil or administrative penalty for two or more separate violations of P.L.1987, c.458 (C.34:6-144 et seq.) during the immediately preceding three-year period.  All items confiscated shall be placed in the custody of the apparel industry unit until the confiscation order becomes final and until the final resolution of any appeal of the final confiscation order pursuant to subsection b. of this section.  

    b.   Prior to the time that the confiscation order becomes final, the commissioner or his designee shall provide the manufacturer or contractor with notification of the violation and confiscation by certified mail and an opportunity to request from the commissioner or his designee, by certified mail, a hearing before the commissioner or his designee within 15 days following receipt of the notice.  If a hearing is requested, the commissioner or his designee shall hold the hearing within 10 days following receipt of the request and may issue a final confiscation order upon such hearing and a finding that a violation has occurred.  If a hearing is not requested, the commissioner or his designee shall issue a final confiscation order upon the expiration of the 15-day period.  The manufacturer or contractor may appeal the final confiscation order to the Appellate Division of the Superior Court within 30 days following the issuing of the final confiscation order.  Upon issuance of a final confiscation order or, if an appeal is made to the Appellate Division, upon the final resolution of that appeal, title to the confiscated goods shall vest in the State, and the apparel industry unit shall dispose of them pursuant to regulations adopted by the commissioner.  

    L.1991,c.189,s.1.  

34:6-152.    List of violators made public  
     2.   The commissioner or his designee shall make public a list of all manufacturers and contractors which have been found guilty of violations of P.L.1987, c.458 (C.34:6-144 et seq.) or any other act for which a manufacturer or contractor may, pursuant to P.L.1987, c.458 (C.34:6-144 et seq.), be subject to a revocation of registration or confiscation of items of apparel or equipment for a subsequent violation.  The commissioner or his designee shall update that public list in a timely manner.  The commissioner shall make the list and any updates of the list available upon the request to any requesting manufacturer, contractor, or organization representing manufacturers or contractors.  

    L.1991,c.189,s.2.  

34:6-153.    Manufacturer, contractor to keep records on production employees  
     3.   Each manufacturer and contractor shall keep accurate records regarding all of its production employees during the preceding three years and make those records available to the apparel industry unit upon request.  The records shall include:  

    a.   The name and address of each production employee and the age of each production employee who is a minor;  

    b.   The number of hours of work and the time of day that work begins and ends for each production employee;  

    c.   The wages, wage rates, and piece rates paid during each payroll period; and  

    d.   Contract worksheets indicating the price per unit agreed upon between manufacturer and contractor.  

    L.1991,c.189,s.3.  

34:6-154.    Information confidential, use by apparel industry unit  
    8.   Information obtained or collected by the department pursuant to this act shall be exempt from P.L.1963, c.73 (C.47:1A-1 et seq.), and shall be used exclusively by the apparel industry unit in effectuating the purposes of this act.  

   L.1987,c.458,s.8; amended 1991,c.189,s.10.  

34:6-155.    Report  
     9.   Two years after the effective date of this act the special task force shall issue a report on its activities.  This report shall be delivered to the labor committees and appropriations committees of the Legislature.  

    L.1987,c.458,s.9.  

34:6-156.    Training for apparel industry unit  
     10.  The apparel industry unit shall receive training to be provided by the State in each of the areas of the State's labor laws and other applicable State laws necessary to carry out the duties and powers of section 5 and section 6 of this act.  

    L.1987,c.458,s.10, amended 1991,c.189,s.11.  

34:6-157.    Appropriation  
     11. a. There is appropriated from the General Fund $350,000.00 to the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor to effectuate the purposes of this act.  

    b.   Receipts from registration fees and penalties collected pursuant to the provisions of this act, up to $350,000.00, shall be deposited in the General Fund.  Receipts in excess of that amount are appropriated to the division to effectuate the purposes of this act.  

    L.1987,c.458,s.11.  

34:6-158  Findings, declarations relative to procurement of apparel.
 
 	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	A significant portion of the apparel industry has a history of poor conditions for its workers;
 
	b.	The largest part of the apparel purchases of the State of New Jersey are for State employee uniforms, which should project a positive image for the State and help to instill pride on the part of State employees;
 
	c.	The State of New Jersey has, as a market participant, a compelling interest in guaranteeing that these uniforms and all of the other apparel it acquires are produced in the United States of America in conditions which are conducive to the reliable provision of high quality apparel and of which the State, its citizens, and its employees may be proud; and
 
	d.	It is, therefore, an appropriate policy to ensure that the State's interests as a market participant are protected with respect to apparel contracts entered into by the State and its instrumentalities.
 
	L.2009, c.247, s.1; amended 2013, c.253, s.18.

34:6-159  Definitions relative to procurement of apparel.
  
	2.	For the purpose of P.L.2009, c.247 (C.34:6-158 et seq.):

	"Apparel" means any clothing, headwear, linens or fabric.
 
	"Apparel contracts" shall include all purchases, rentals or other acquisitions of apparel products by the State of New Jersey, including authorizations by the State of New Jersey for vendors to sell apparel products through cash allowances or vouchers issued by the State of New Jersey, and license agreements with a public body.
 
	"Apparel production" shall include the cutting and manufacturing of apparel products performed by the vendor or by any sub-contractors, not including the production of supplies or sundries such as buttons, zippers, and thread.
 
	"Bidder" means any person making a bid with a public body to serve as a vendor to a public body.
 
	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	"Poverty line" means the official poverty line based on family size, established and adjusted under section 673 (2) of Subtitle B of the "Community Services Block Grant Act," Pub.L.97-35 (42 U.S.C. s.9902 (2)).
 
	"Public body" means the State of New Jersey, any agency of the State or any authority created by the Legislature.
 
	"Vendor" means any person or business selling or otherwise providing apparel to or for a public body or entering into a license agreement with a public body to produce or provide items of apparel bearing names, trademarks or images of, or related to, the public body.
 
	L.2009, c.247, s.2; amended 2013, c.253, s.19.

34:6-160  Apparel production in compliance with certain requirements.
  
	3.	When purchasing or otherwise obtaining apparel from a vendor, including approving a vendor for participation in allowance or voucher programs, a public body shall require that all apparel production is in compliance with each of the following requirements, except in the case of a requirement that is adjudicated to be unenforceable because of preemption by federal law:
 
	a.	All apparel production under the contract shall be performed in the United States, except in cases in which the commissioner determines that it is not possible for the public body to obtain apparel produced in the United States which meets the necessary requirements of the public body;
 
	b.	Apparel production workers employed to produce the apparel shall be provided a work environment that is safe, healthy, and free of discrimination on the basis of race, national origin, religion, sex and sexual preference;
 
	c.	Apparel production workers employed to produce the apparel shall be provided non-poverty compensation at an hourly rate determined by the commissioner to be not less than the poverty line for a family of three, based on 40 hours of work a week for 50 weeks a year;
 
	d.	Apparel production workers employed to produce the apparel shall not be terminated except for just-cause and vendors and their contractors and sub-contractors shall provide a mechanism to resolve all disputes with apparel production workers;
 
	e.	Vendors and their contractors and sub-contractors shall adapt a neutrality position with respect to attempts to organize by their employees, and agree to voluntarily recognize a union when a majority of workers have signed cards authorizing union representation;
 
	f.	The facilities where the apparel production occurs shall be open to inspection by the commissioner, any political subdivision of this State, any other state or other governmental or intergovernmental unit with which the commissioner cooperates, or by any appropriate consortia in which the commissioner participates; and
 
	g.	No contractor or sub-contractor involved in the providing or production of apparel has a pattern or practice of violation of legal employment protections, including laws and regulations governing wages and hours, discrimination, occupational safety and health, child labor, industrial homework, workers' compensation, and occupational safety and health.
 
	Every apparel contract and bid application shall contain a provision or provisions detailing the requirements of P.L.2009, c.247 (C.34:6-158 et seq.), and compliance with P.L.2009, c.247 (C.34:6-158 et seq.) shall be made a binding part of all apparel contracts.
 
	L.2009, c.247, s.3; amended 2013, c.253, s.20.

34:6-161  Information provided to public body by bidder for apparel contract.
  
	4.	Every bidder for an apparel contract with a public body shall inform the public body in writing of the following information, which shall be made available by the public body to the public as soon as possible, but in no case less than 30 days before a decision is made to award an apparel contract to a bidder:
 
	a.	Every location where apparel production is to take place, including any sub-contractor locations;
 
	b.	The name, business address, and names of principal officers of each sub-contractor to be used for apparel production in fulfillment of an apparel contract; and
 
	c.	An affidavit that each apparel production location meets the requirements of P.L.2009, c.247 (C.34:6-158 et seq.).
 
	Any changes to the reported information during the term of an apparel contract must be reported by the vendor to the public body. The public body shall report all information required under this section to the commissioner, who shall make the information available upon request to the public.
 
	L.2009, c.247, s.4; amended 2013, c.253, s.21.

34:6-162  Apparel Procurement Board.
 
	5. a. The Apparel Procurement Board is established and shall be composed of seven individuals as follows: three individuals selected by the New Jersey State AFL-CIO who represent unions of uniformed personnel of the State; three individuals selected by the Governor who represent agencies that employ uniformed personnel of the State; and one individual selected by the commissioner to represent the commissioner.  After the effective date of this act, members shall be appointed to serve for terms of three years. Each member appointed pursuant to this act shall hold office for the term of appointment and until he is reappointed or a successor is appointed and qualified. Each member serving upon the effective date who was selected prior to the effective date of this act shall hold office until a successor is appointed and qualified or the member is appointed pursuant to this act, after which he will hold office for the term of appointment.  A member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring in the membership of the board for any reason other than the expiration of the term shall have a term of appointment for the unexpired term only.  Each vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.  Any appointed member may be removed from office by the Governor, for cause, after a hearing and may be suspended by the Governor pending the completion of the hearing.  Members of the board shall serve without compensation.
 
	b.	The Apparel Procurement Board shall be administered by the commissioner and shall have the power to receive complaints that any bidder or contractor is not in compliance with this act, and recommend an investigation into the merits of such complaints.  If the commissioner determines, upon a hearing after notice, that a vendor, sub-contractor or bidder has not complied with any requirement of this act, including any finding of failure to provide truthful information as required by this act, the commissioner may terminate an existing apparel contract at the earliest feasible date, and may bar the vendor or bidder from receiving pending or subsequent apparel contracts for a period determined by the commissioner, but there shall be a period of debarment of not less than three years if the contractor or subcontractor demonstrates a pattern of repeated serious noncompliance with the provisions of this act.
 
	c.	The commissioner and the board shall give priority to coordinating enforcement, monitoring and information collection activities with any political subdivision of this State, with any other state or its political subdivisions and with any other governmental and intergovernmental units and shall give priority to participating in any appropriate consortia which assist in enforcement, monitoring and information collection activities and are independent of the monitored industries.
 
	L.2009, c.247, s.5.

34:6A-1.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the  "Worker Health and Safety Act."

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 1, eff. June 19, 1965.

34:6A-2.  Definitions
	2.	The following terms wherever used or referred to in this act shall have the following meaning:
 
	(a)	"Act" means this act and rules and regulations promulgated hereunder.
 
	(b)	"Board" means the Industrial Safety Board established under this act.
 
	(c)	"Bureau" means the Bureau of Engineering and Safety in the Division of Labor, Department of Labor and Industry established under this act.
 
	(d)	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the Department of Labor and Industry or his authorized representatives.
 
	(e)	"Committee" means the New Jersey State Industrial Safety Committee established under this act.
 
	(f)	"Department" means the Department of Labor and Industry.
 
	(g)	"Employee" means any person engaged in service to an employer for wages, salary or other compensation.
 
	(h)	"Employer" means any person or corporation, partnership, individual proprietorship, joint venture, firm, company or other similar legal entity who engages the services of an employee and who pays his wages, salary, or other compensation; and any person exercising supervision of employees on an employer's behalf.
 
	(i)	"Owner" means the person possessing legal or equitable title.  For the purposes of this act "Person possessing equitable title" shall mean that person or corporation, partnership, individual proprietorship, joint venture, firm, company or other legal entity that has actual control over the premises used in whole or in part as a place of employment.
 
	(j)	"Place of employment" means any building or other premises occupied by an employer in or about which an employee customarily is suffered or permitted to work.
 
	(k)	"Domestic worker" means all persons defined as a domestic worker by section 2 of P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-70).

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 2; amended 2023, c.262, s.4.

34:6A-3.  Safe and healthful place of employment
    Every employer shall furnish a place of employment which shall be reasonably  safe and healthful for employees.  Every employer shall install, maintain and  use such employee protective devices and safeguards including methods of  sanitation and hygiene and where a substantial risk of physical injury is  inherent in the nature of a specific work operation shall also with respect to  such work operation establish and enforce such work methods, as are reasonably  necessary to protect the life, health and safety of employees, with due regard  for the nature of the work required.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 3.

34:6A-4.  Structural adequacy;  fire prevention;  ventilation and lighting;   elevators
    The owner of any premises used in whole or in part as a place of employment  shall be responsible for its structural adequacy, protection against the origin  and spread of fire and for the provision of adequate general ventilation and  lighting, emergency egresses, fire warning systems and for safe elevator  systems.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 4.

34:6A-5.  Protective devices or safeguards;  rendering ineffective
    No person shall render ineffective any employee protective devices or safeguards installed or provided in compliance with the provisions of this act for the protection of the health or safety of any employee.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 5.

34:6A-6.  Enforcement of act;  entry and inspection
    The commissioner shall enforce the provisions of this act, make complaints against persons violating its provisions and prosecute violations of the same.

    The commissioner shall have the power and authority, without notice or delay  during regular working hours or other reasonable hours within reasonable limits  and in a reasonable manner, to enter and inspect any place of employment and  all pertinent conditions, structures, machinery, apparatus, devices, equipment  and materials and to question privately the owner and any employer or  employee.

    No person shall obstruct, hinder or delay or interfere with by force or otherwise the performance by the commissioner of any duty under the provisions of this act.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 6.  Amended by L.1973, c. 259, s. 1, eff. Nov. 28, 1973.

34:6A-7.  Written orders as to violations;  imminent physical hazards
    If upon inspection the commissioner discovers a condition which exists in violation of the provisions of this act he shall be authorized to order in writing such violation to cease and to take such steps necessary to enforce such an order.  Said written order shall state the items which are in violation  of the provisions of this act and shall provide a reasonable specified time  within which the violations must cease.  The person responsible shall make the  corrections necessary to comply with the requirements of this act within the  time specified in the order.

    If the violation constitutes an imminent physical hazard and the commissioner's order is not obeyed he may forthwith prohibit the employment of any person in any place or in any activity which would expose him to the imminent physical hazard.  Upon notice received from the responsible employer or owner that the imminent physical hazard has been eliminated, a reinspection shall be made within one working day.  If upon reinspection the commissioner determines that the imminent physical hazard has been eliminated, work may be resumed immediately.  If the reinspection is not made within one working day following said notice, work may be resumed. Where the person responsible denies that a violation constituting an imminent physical hazard exists, he shall have the right to apply to the commissioner for a hearing which must be afforded and a decision rendered within 48 hours of the request for a hearing. If the commissioner rules against the petitioning party, the petitioning party shall have the right to apply for injunctive relief against the order to cease work. Jurisdiction for such injunctive relief shall be in the Chancery Division of the Superior Court of New Jersey, but the only issue to be determined shall be the existence of a violation constituting an imminent physical hazard.  Such relief may be sought by an order to show cause and may be granted ex parte pending a hearing de novo of the matter.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 7.

34:6A-8.  Aggrieved persons;  hearings
    Any person aggrieved by a ruling, action or order of the commissioner under  this act upon application made within 15 days after written notice thereof  shall be entitled to a hearing before the commissioner who shall within 30 days  thereafter hold a hearing of which at least 15 days' written notice shall be  given to all interested parties.  Within 30 days after such hearing the  commissioner shall issue an appropriate order modifying, approving or  disapproving his prior ruling, action or order.  A copy of such order shall be  served upon all interested parties.  Pending the determination by the  commissioner and upon application therefor the commissioner may stay the  operation of such ruling, action or order upon such terms and conditions as are  reasonably necessary to insure compliance with the provisions of this statute.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 8.

34:6A-9.  Rules and regulations.
	9.	The commissioner shall make and promulgate rules and regulations reasonably necessary to implement the purposes of this act.  Such rules and regulations shall have the force and effect of law and shall be enforced in the manner provided in this act.
 
	The commissioner shall provide for the adoption of all applicable occupational standards, amendments, or changes adopted or recognized by the Secretary of Labor under the authority of the "Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970," which shall be applicable to domestic workers employed by individuals in the residences of the individuals.
 
	Buildings or other structures in use on the effective date of this act as a place of employment other than a place where the manufacturing of goods of any kind is carried on shall not be made to comply with the requirements of rules and regulations promulgated hereunder substantially affecting such building or other structures unless such compliance is essential to correct an unsafe or unhealthful condition which constitutes a serious and substantial threat to the health or safety of employees.
 
	The commissioner shall before promulgation furnish a copy of proposed rules and regulations to the members of the committee for its review and recommendations.  Within 90 days of the receipt of said proposed rules and regulations the committee shall provide the commissioner and the board with its written recommendations.  Following receipt of the committee's recommendations or upon the expiration of 90 days, the commissioner shall furnish to every member of the board a copy of the proposed rules and regulations with or without change in his discretion and at the same time a notice of intent to promulgate proposed rules and regulations shall be published by the commissioner.  This notice of intent shall state briefly the purpose of the proposed rules and regulations, shall state that a copy of the proposed rules and regulations may be obtained by any person upon written request to the department, and shall fix the date, time and place for a public hearing on the proposed rules and regulations, which date shall be not less than 21 days after the publication of the notice.  All person appearing at such hearing shall be given the opportunity to be heard.  Rules and regulations, as so proposed or as changed by the commissioner after such hearing, may be promulgated by the commissioner 90 days following delivery to the board to be effective on such date as the rules and regulations shall provide unless disapproved by a majority of the board and if so disapproved such rules or regulations shall not become effective.  Within 30 days after the public hearing and on 30 days' notice the commissioner shall call a meeting of the board for the purpose of discussing the proposed rules and regulations.  If any changes were made in the proposed rules or regulations following the public hearing, a copy of such change shall accompany such notice.  At any meeting called for such purpose disapproval shall be by vote of the majority of the members of the board.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 9; amended 2023, c.262, s.5.

34:6A-10.  Submission of plans and specifications
    The commissioner shall have the power and authority to require by rules and  regulations promulgated hereunder that the owner of any building or structure  to be erected or adapted as a place of employment submit to the commissioner  such plans and specifications for his approval and other data relative thereto  before the building or structure is erected or adapted.

    He shall further have the power and authority to require by rules and regulations promulgated hereunder that prior to the installation of sanitation facilities, fire prevention and protection, egresses, exhaust and ventilating systems, elevators and other conveying equipment and employee protective devices and equipment the owner or employer submit plans and specifications for  his approval and other data relative thereto.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 10.

34:6A-11.  Certificate of registration;  duration;  renewal;  display; fee
    The commissioner shall have the power and authority to require that places of employment be registered with the department;  and that a certificate of registration be obtained from the department for each place of employment. The  application and certificate forms shall be prescribed by the commissioner.

    A certificate of registration shall expire 1 year from its effective date, unless sooner revoked or suspended by the commissioner;  provided, however, that the commissioner may in his discretion require every employer subject to this chapter to register on a date to be fixed by him, which shall be not sooner than 3 months nor later than 15 months from the effective date of this act.  A certificate of registration may be renewed upon the filing of an application for renewal upon a form prescribed by the commissioner.  A certificate of registration shall at all times be prominently displayed at each  place of employment of the employer.

    The commissioner shall have the power and authority to charge an annual registration fee of not less than $15.00 nor more than $50.00 for each certificate of registration issued.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 11.  Amended by L.1971, c. 154, s. 1, eff. May 20, 1971.

34:6A-12.  Report of accidental deaths, fines, etc.
    Whenever accidental loss of life, or a major fire, major explosion or major  structural failure shall occur at a place of employment, the employer shall  report such occurrence to the bureau in the quickest manner possible.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 12.

34:6A-13.  Service and assistance to employers
    The commissioner is authorized to provide service and assistance to employers in carrying out their responsibilities under this act and to suggest to employers or groups of employers methods and procedures by which they may develop safety programs to carry out such responsibilities.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 13.

34:6A-14.  Bureau of Engineering and Safety
    There is hereby established within the Division of Labor of the Department a  Bureau of Engineering and Safety, the function of which shall be, under the direction of the commissioner, to administer and enforce the provisions of this  act and to perform such other duties as the commissioner may direct or as may  be provided by law.  The bureau shall be administered by a deputy director of  the Division of Labor, appointed by the commissioner, who shall be a licensed  professional engineer of this State, but this requirement shall not apply to,  or affect the continuance in such position of, the deputy director  administering the bureau on the effective date of this act.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 14.

34:6A-15.  New Jersey State Industrial Safety Committee
    There is hereby established within the department the New Jersey State Industrial Safety Committee.  The membership, in a number not to exceed 100, shall be appointed by the commissioner and shall comprise persons who have taken a prominent part in the field of accident prevention, or are responsible for accident prevention matters in the organization by which they are employed.   In appointing members the commissioner shall, insofar as possible give  representation to the various geographical areas of the State and to the various kinds of places of employment subject to this act.

    The committee shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings, which rules shall  be subject to ratification by the commissioner.

    It shall be the function of the committee to advise the commissioner and the  board with respect to rules and regulations proposed to be adopted under this  act;  and to advise the commissioner on matters of safety promotion and accident prevention generally.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 15.

34:6A-16.  Industrial Safety Board
    There is hereby established within the department an industrial safety board.  The board shall consist of 15 members, all of whom shall be residents of the State of New Jersey;  14 appointed by the Governor and the commissioner who shall serve as chairman.  Members appointed by the Governor shall be appointed for a 4-year term commencing on July 1 of the year of appointment, except that of those first appointed, 3 shall be appointed for a term of 1 year, 3 for a term of 2 years, 4 for a term of 3 years, and 4 for a term of 4 years, which terms shall commence on July 1, 1965.  Each member shall hold over  after the expiration of his term until his successor has been appointed and has  qualified.  The Governor may remove any appointed member of the board for cause  after a public hearing.

    Of the members appointed by the Governor, one member shall be selected from  a list of names submitted by the American Society of Safety Engineers; one  member from a list of names submitted by the American Industrial Hygiene Association, New Jersey section;  2 members from a list of names submitted by the New Jersey AFL-CIO;  one member from a list of names submitted by the New Jersey State Industrial Safety Committee;  one member from a list of names submitted by the American Insurance Association;  one member from a list of names submitted by the American Mutual Insurance Alliances;  one member from a list of names submitted by the New Jersey State Chamber of Commerce;  one member from a list of names submitted by the New Jersey Manufacturer's Association;  one member from a list of names submitted by the South Jersey Manufacturers' Association;  one member from a list of names submitted by the Medical Society of New Jersey;  one member from a list of names submitted by New Jersey Society of Architects, a Chapter of the American Institute of Architects;  one member from a list of names submitted by New Jersey Society of  Professional Engineers;  and one member from a list of names submitted by the  Self-Insurers' Association of New Jersey.  At least 3 names shall be submitted  by each organization for each member that is to be appointed from its list.   Should any organization fail to submit a list the Governor shall appoint a  public member or public members, as the case may be, in lieu of the member to  be selected from such organization.

    The members of the board shall serve without compensation except for the actual expense incurred while engaged in their duties as members of the board. It shall be the duty of the board to act upon proposed rules and regulations in accordance with the provisions of section 9 of this act. The board shall meet at such time as the commissioner may designate at the time and place selected by him.  A meeting of the board shall be called by the commissioner when requested by any 3 members of the board.  The head of the bureau shall serve as secretary of the board.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 16.  Amended by L.1969, c. 96, s. 1, eff. June 26, 1969.

34:6A-17.  Existing rights or remedies unaffected;  burden of care
    This act shall not in any way enlarge or diminish any right or remedy otherwise existent pursuant to the Revised Statutes of New Jersey or at common law, or increase the burden of care ordinarily imposed by the common law of the  State upon those within its jurisdiction.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 17.

34:6A-18.  Appeals
    Except as otherwise provided herein, relief from any final order, ruling, or  action of the commissioner made pursuant to this act may be sought by application to the Appellate Division of the Superior Court of New Jersey.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 18.

34:6A-19.  Penalties;  compromise of claims.
	19.	Any person violating any of the provisions of this act shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $975 nor more than $13,653 to be collected in a civil action by a summary proceeding under the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).  Notwithstanding the penalties prescribed in this section, the penalty amounts shall be subject to adjustment by the commissioner to remain consistent with the "Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970," (29 U.S.C. s.651 et seq.).  Fifty percent of the sum collected as a penalty pursuant to this subsection shall be provided to the employee harmed by violation. Any violation of the act by an officer, agent or employee shall also be a violation of the act by his employer if such employer had knowledge of and actual control over the cause of such violation.  Where the violation is of a continuing nature each day during which it continues, after the date given by which the violation must be eliminated in the order by the commissioner, shall constitute an additional, separate and distinct offense, except during the time an appeal from said order may be taken or is pending.
 
	The commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered to compromise and settle any claim for a penalty under this section in such amount in the discretion of the commissioner as may appear appropriate and equitable under all of the circumstances.
 
	Nothing in this section shall affect the rights of employees or any remedies available to employees provided by section 5 of P.L.1986, c.105 (C.34:19-5) or any other provision of law.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 19; amended 2023, c.262, s.6.

34:6A-20.  Repealer;  savings clause.
    Revised Statutes sections 34:1-29 through 34:1-33;  34:1-37;  34:6-1 through  34:6-47;  34:6-48 through 34:6-67.1;  34:6-99 through 34:6-104; and 34:6-137  through 34:6-143 are hereby repealed;  provided, however, that any rules and  regulations adopted pursuant to the provisions of any section repealed herein  shall remain in force and effect until 5 years following the effective date of  this act or until sooner replaced by rules and regulations adopted under the  provisions of this act.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 20.

34:6A-21.  Severability.
    If any section, clause or phrase of this act is held unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this act.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 21.

34:6A-22.  Exemptions.
	22.	This act is not intended to apply and shall not apply to the following:
 
	(a)	Places of employment under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Federal Government with respect to the health and safety of employees;
 
	(b)	Places of employment subject to the provisions of the Mine Safety Act, P.L.1954, c.197;
 
	(c)	Employment and places of employment subject to the provisions of the Construction Safety Act, P.L.1962, c.45;
 
	(d) (Deleted by amendment, P.L.2023, c.262)
 
	(e)	Transportation equipment coming under the jurisdiction of the Interstate Commerce Commission, Federal Aviation Administration, or of the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles;
 
	(f)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2023, c.262)
 
	(g)	Schools, colleges and universities;
 
	(h)	Places of employment with fewer than four employees, except places of employment by individuals for domestic services in the residences of the individuals; employment in which the manufacturing of goods of any kind is carried on; and except as hereinafter provided in paragraph (o) of this section;
 
	(i)	Agricultural employment;
 
	(j)	Banks and other financial institutions;
 
	(k)	Places of employment in which the employees are primarily engaged in office operations and buildings under the actual control of one employer and in which the employees are primarily engaged in office operations or laboratories primarily engaged in research, development, or testing conducted on premises, in separate buildings, or in building sections devoted exclusively to these operations;
 
	(l)	Public utilities which own, operate, manage or control any autobus, canal, express, railroad, street railway, traction railway, subway, pipeline, gas, electric light, heat, power, water, oil, sewer, telephone or telegraph system, plant or equipment for public use, under privileges granted by the State or by any political subdivision thereof, with respect to work operations performed in connection with the plant or facilities of such public utility located in the public streets and highways, roads and alleys, private rights-of-way, or upon their customers' premises;
 
	(m)	Liquefied petroleum gas bulk plants and facilities subject to the jurisdiction and supervision of the Superintendent of State Police, pursuant to chapter 139 of the laws of 1950 (C.21:1B-1 to 21:1B-8);
 
	(n)	Natural gas pipeline utilities subject to the provisions of the Natural Gas Safety Act (P.L.1952, c. 166) (C.48:10-2 to 48:10-9); and
 
	(o)	Establishments with fewer than 10 employees and which are devoted exclusively to the sale of goods, or furnishing of services, at retail.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 22; amended 2023, c.262, s.7.

34:6A-23.  Exceptions from literal requirements of rules and regulations
    The commissioner shall have the power and authority to grant exceptions from  the literal requirements of rules and regulations promulgated under this act.   Such exception shall be granted in any particular case only where it is clearly evident that it is necessary to prevent undue hardship or where existing conditions prevent compliance.  In no case shall any exception be granted unless in the opinion of the commissioner reasonable protection of the health and safety of workers and the public will be maintained thereby.  An application for an exception shall be filed in writing with the commissioner, setting forth specifically the requirements of the rules and regulations from which an exception is desired and the reason why enforcement of the applicable provisions of the rules and regulations is unreasonable.  The commissioner shall grant or deny the exception within 30 days from the date of receipt by him of the application.  The commissioner shall maintain a record of all exceptions granted and shall make such record reasonably available for public examination and shall mail a copy of all rulings granting exceptions to the members of the board.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 23.

34:6A-24.  Duties of Health Department not abrogated
    This act is not intended to abrogate the duties of the New Jersey State Department of Health under chapter 177, laws of 1947.

     L.1965, c. 154, s. 24.

34:6A-25.  Short title  
     This act shall be known and may be cited as the  "New Jersey Public Employees' Occupational Safety and Health Act."     L.1983, c. 516, s. 1, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.  

34:6A-26.  Legislative findings
    The Legislature finds that the safety and health of public employees in the  workplace is of primary public concern.  Personal injuries and illnesses arising out of work situations result not only in wage loss and increased medical expenses for employees, but also in decreased productivity and increased workers' compensation expenses for employers. The Legislature therefore declares:  a. that it is the policy of this State to ensure that all public employees be provided with safe and healthful work environments free from recognized hazards, b. that it is the responsibility of the State to promulgate standards for the protection of the health and safety of its public workforce, and c. that it is in the public interest for public employers and public employees to join in a cooperative effort to enforce these standards.

     L.1983, c. 516, s. 2, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

34:6A-27.  Definition
    As used in this act:

    a.   "Advisory board"  means the Public Employees' Occupational Safety and Health Advisory Board created by section 4 of this act;

    b.   "Commissioner"  means the Commissioner of Labor or his designee;

     c.   "Employer"  means public employer and shall include any person acting directly on behalf of, or with the knowledge and ratification of: (1) the State, or any department, division, bureau, board, council, agency or authority  of the State, except any bi-state agency;  or (2) any county, municipality, or  any department, division, bureau, board, council, agency or authority of any  county or municipality, or of any school district or special purpose district  created pursuant to law;

    d.   "Employee"  means any public employee, any person holding a position by  appointment or employment in the service of an  "employer"  as that term is  used in this act and shall include any individual whose work has ceased as a  consequence of, or in connection with, any administrative or judicial action  instituted under this act;  provided, however, that elected officials, members  of boards and commissions, and managerial executives as defined in the "New  Jersey Employer-Employee Relations Act," P.L.1941, c. 100 (C. 34:13A-1 et seq.).  shall be excluded from the coverage of this act;

    e.   "Employee representative"  means a  "representative"  as that term is defined in the  "New Jersey Employer-Employee Relations Act,"  P.L.1941, c. 100 (C. 34:13A-1 et seq.);

    f.   "Review commission"  means the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission created by section 18 of this act;

    g.   "Secretary"  means the Secretary of the United States Department of Labor;

    h.   "Workplace"  means a place where public employees are assigned to work.

     L.1983, c. 516, s. 3, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

34:6A-28.   Advisory board  
     There is created a Public Employees' Occupational Safety and Health Advisory Board to assist the commissioner in establishing standards for the occupational safety and health of public employees.  The board shall make itself available to receive information regarding matters of concern to public employees in the areas of occupational safety and health.  The advisory board, under the chairmanship of the commissioner, shall consist of the Commissioner of Education, the Commissioner of Health, the Commissioner of Environmental Protection, the Commissioner of Community Affairs, the State Treasurer, or their designees, and 18 members to be appointed by the Governor, as follows: one member representing the fire service, one member representing municipalities, one member representing municipal employees, one member representing county government, one member representing employees of county government, one member representing State employees, one member representing public health care facilities, one member representing employees of public health care facilities, one member representing correctional institutions, one member representing employees of correctional institutions, one member representing law enforcement employees, one member representing local school boards, one member representing local school board employees, one member representing Rutgers, The State University, one member representing employees in institutions of higher education, and three members representing the public.  The members selected by the Governor shall be selected on the basis of their experience and competence in the field of occupational safety and health.  No more than nine members appointed by the Governor shall be from the same political party.  Each member shall serve for a term of three years and until his successor is appointed and qualified.  A vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the Governor to the unexpired term.  The members of the advisory board shall serve without compensation but shall be entitled to reimbursement for their actual traveling expenses and other expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.  

    L.1983,c.516,s.4; amended 1990,c.129,s.1.  

34:6A-29.   Plan for health and safety standards  
    5.   The commissioner shall, in consultation with the Commissioner of Health, the Commissioner of Community Affairs and the advisory board, promulgate a plan for the development and enforcement of occupational safety and health standards with respect to public employers and public employees, in accordance with section 18(c) of the "Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970," Pub.L.91-596 (29 U.S.C. s.651 et seq.).  The Department of Labor shall be the sole agency responsible for administering and enforcing this plan throughout the State. The plan shall:  

   a.   Provide for the development and enforcement of safety and health standards;  

   b.   Provide for the right of entry and inspection in all workplaces by the commissioner;  

   c.   Provide for the right of entry and inspection in all workplaces by the Commissioner of Health;  

   d.   Prohibit advance notice of inspections;

  

   e.   Contain satisfactory assurances that the Department of Labor and the Department of Health have the legal authority and qualified personnel necessary to carry out their responsibilities under this act;  

   f.   Give satisfactory assurances that the State will devote adequate funds to the administration and enforcement of the standards;  

   g.   Contain satisfactory assurances that the State will, to the extent permitted by law, establish and maintain an effective and comprehensive occupational safety and health program applicable to all employees of public agencies of the State and its political subdivisions, which program is as effective as the corresponding provisions of the "Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970," Pub.L.91-596 (29 U.S.C. s.651 et seq.);  

   h.   Provide that the Department of Labor shall make such reports to the secretary in the form and containing the information that the secretary from time to time requires; and  

   i.   Provide for such cooperation with the Department of Community Affairs in implementing the plan as is consistent with the provisions of P.L.1983, c.516 (C.34:6A-25 et seq.) and the "Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970," Pub.L.91-596 (29 U.S.C. s.651 et seq.).  

   L.1983,c.516,s.5; amended 1995,c.186,s.1.  

34:6A-30.   Adoption of standards  
    6.  a.  The commissioner shall provide for the adoption of all applicable occupational health and safety standards, amendments or changes adopted or recognized by the secretary under the authority of the "Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970."  Whenever the United States Secretary of Labor adopts a standard pursuant to the provisions of the "Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970" (29 U.S.C. s.651 et seq.), the commissioner shall publish that federal standard in the New Jersey Register in accordance with the provisions of section 5 of P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-5) and, notwithstanding the provisions of section 4 of P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-4), that federal standard shall be deemed to be duly adopted as a State regulation upon its publication by the commissioner.  

   b.   The commissioner shall not adopt any standard within the scope of the State uniform construction code adopted pursuant to P.L.1975, c.217 (C.52:27D-119 et seq.) or the uniform fire safety code adopted pursuant to P.L.1983, c.383 (C.52:27D-192 et al.), unless the standard is a standard adopted pursuant to subsection a. of this section.  If the Commissioner of Community Affairs determines that a standard for building or structural safety adopted by the commissioner pursuant to subsection a. of this section is more stringent than the applicable standards adopted into code pursuant to the State uniform construction code or the uniform fire safety code, he shall adopt a rule incorporating the more stringent standard into the relevant code. If the Commissioner of Community Affairs determines that there is a difference between a provision of any new or existing standard adopted pursuant to subsection a. of this section and a provision of the uniform construction code or the uniform fire safety code, and he determines that the provision of the code is as effective as the provision of the standard, he shall prepare and submit to the commissioner an application for submission to the Secretary of Labor seeking (1) the approval of that provision of the uniform construction code or the uniform fire safety code as being as effective as the provision of the standard and (2) the approval of the incorporation of the code provision into the State plan.  

   c.   Where no federal standards are applicable or where standards more stringent than the federal standards are deemed advisable, the commissioner shall, in consultation with the Commissioner of Health and the Commissioner of Community Affairs and, with the advice of the advisory board, provide for the development of State standards as may be necessary in special circumstances.  

   d.   The commissioner and the Commissioner of Health, or their designees, shall meet with the advisory board at each scheduled meeting for these purposes.  The advisory board shall meet not less than four times each year.  

   e.   The Commissioner of Health shall not adopt standards or issue orders to comply in any area but shall be charged with inspection, investigation and related activities in the following areas:  

   (1)  Occupational health and environmental control;

  

   (2)  Medical and first aid;

  

   (3)  Toxic and hazardous substances;

  

   (4)  Respiratory protective equipment; and

  

   (5)  Sanitation.

  

   The Commissioner of Labor shall be charged with inspection, investigation and related activities for all other regulated areas and with adopting of standards and issuing orders to comply in all regulated areas.  

   L.1983,c.516,s.6; amended 1995,c.186,s.2.  

34:6A-31.    Promotion of goals of the act  
    7.   The commissioner, in consultation with the Commissioner of Health and the Commissioner of Community Affairs and with the advice of the advisory board, shall:  

   a.   Provide for a method of encouraging employers and employees in their efforts to reduce the number of safety and health hazards arising from undesirable, inappropriate, or unnecessarily hazardous or unhealthful working conditions at the workplace and of stimulating employers and employees to institute new, and to perfect existing, programs for providing safe and healthful working conditions;  

   b.   Provide for the publication and dissemination to employers, employees, and labor organizations, and the posting, where appropriate, by employers of informational, educational and training materials calculated to aid and assist in achieving the objectives of this act;  

   c.   Provide for the establishment of new, and for the perfection and expansion of existing, programs for occupational safety and health education for employers and employees and institute methods and procedures for the establishment of a program for voluntary compliance by employers and employees with the standards established pursuant to this act.  

   L.1983,c.516,s.7; amended 1995,c.186,s.3.  

34:6A-32    Promulgation of regulations.
  
	8.	The commissioner shall, in consultation with the Commissioner of Health and the Commissioner of Community Affairs and with the advice of the advisory board, promulgate all regulations which the commissioner deems necessary for the proper administration and enforcement of this act.  A variance may be granted if the commissioner determines that the applicant is in compliance with the requirements for a permanent variance as set forth in subsection c. of section 15 of this act.  The variance shall not be deemed to be a variation approved pursuant to the "State Uniform Construction Code Act," P.L.1975, c.217 (C.52:27D-119 et seq.) or the "Uniform Fire Safety Act," P.L.1983, c.383 (C.52:27D-192 et al.) or any other building or fire safety standard or code.  
 
	Space leased by a public employer shall be subject to current health or safety rules and regulations.  Any deficiency, including a deficiency resulting either from occupant use or deferred maintenance by the lessor, shall be subject to correction in accordance with the governing rules and regulations at the time that the deficiency is cited by the commissioner or the Commissioner of Health. However, a lease of any duration may not be entered into unless the leased property is in conformance with such rules and regulations as are in effect at the time the lease is executed. 
 
	No fire company, first aid, or rescue squad, whether paid, part-paid, or volunteer, shall be required to pay to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development or the Department of Health  any registration or inspection fee imposed by rule or regulation with regard to the filling of air cylinders for respiratory equipment used by the fire company, first aid, or rescue squad. 
 
	L.1983, c.516, s.8; amended 1995, c.186, s.4; 2000, c.126, s.6; 2012, c.17, s.406.

34:6A-33.    Responsibilities of employers  
    9.   Every employer shall:

  

   a.   Provide each of his employees with employment and a place of employment which are free from recognized hazards which may cause serious injury, physical harm or death to his employees; and  

   b.   Comply with occupational safety and health standards promulgated under this act.  

   L.1983,c.516,s.9; amended 1995,c.186,s.5.  

34:6A-34.    Duty of compliance by public employees
    Every public employee shall comply with occupational safety and health standards and all regulations promulgated under this act which are applicable to his own actions and conduct.

     L.1983, c. 516, s. 10, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

34:6A-35.    Inspections; compliance  
    11.  a.  The commissioner and the Commissioner of Health shall be charged with making inspections in their jurisdictional areas as specified in section 6 of P.L.1983, c.516 (C.34:6A-30).  The commissioner may call on the professional staff of other departments whenever he deems their assistance necessary.  

   b.   Each commissioner shall have the right of immediate entry at reasonable hours and without advance notice into any workplace to conduct such investigations as he may deem necessary.  Each commissioner shall maintain records of the results of any investigation under his jurisdiction, which, after a final agency or judicial action is taken regarding any order to comply which results from the inspection, shall be made available to the public upon request, except that any information which identifies an individual employee shall be confidential.  The authority of each commissioner to inspect any premises for purposes of investigating an alleged violation under his jurisdiction shall not be limited to the alleged violation but shall extend to any other area of the premises in which he has reason to believe that a violation of any provision of this act under his jurisdiction exists.  The Commissioner of Health shall make his inspection records available to the commissioner for purposes of enforcement.  

   c.   If either commissioner concludes that conditions or practices in violation of any provision of this act under his jurisdiction exist in any workplace, he shall inform the affected employees and employers of the danger.

   d.   Each order to comply issued under this section, or a copy or copies thereof, shall be prominently posted at or near each place where a violation referred to in the order to comply occurred and the commissioner shall make the order available to employee representatives, affected employees and, upon request, to the public.  

   e.   Any employee who accompanies either commissioner on an inspection shall receive payment of normal wages for the time spent during the inspection.  

   f.   Where there is no authorized employee representative, each commissioner or his authorized representative shall consult with a reasonable number of employees concerning matters of health and safety in the workplace. 

   g.   Any person who gives advance notice of any inspection to be conducted under this act, without authority from the commissioner, the Commissioner of Health or their designees, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both.  

   L.1983,c.516,s.11; amended 1995,c.186,s.6.  

34:6A-36.    Notice of safety violation  
    12.  a.  Any employee, group of employees or employee representative who believes that a violation of a safety standard exists, or that an imminent danger exists, may request an inspection by giving notice to the commissioner of the violation or danger. The notice and request shall be in writing, shall set forth the grounds for the notice and shall be signed by the employee, a group of employees or an employee representative.  Upon the request of the person giving the notice, his name or the name of any employee representative giving the notice shall be withheld. The commissioner shall conduct an appropriate inspection at the earliest time possible.  

   The commissioner shall so interpret and administer this section so as to encourage any employee, group of employees or employee representative who believes that a violation of a safety standard exists, or that an imminent danger exists, to report that violation or danger in the first instance to the employer's safety officer.  

   b.   A representative of the employer, the employee or employees giving the notice and an employee representative shall be given the opportunity to accompany the commissioner during an inspection for the purpose of aiding in such inspection.  Where there is no authorized employee representative, the commissioner shall consult with a reasonable number of employees concerning matters of safety in the workplace.  

   c.   Any employee who accompanies the commissioner on an inspection shall receive payment of normal wages for the time spent during the inspection.  

   d.   The information obtained by the commissioner under this section shall be obtained with a minimum burden upon the employer.  

   L.1983,c.516,s.12; amended 1995,c.186,s.7.  

34:6A-38.    Notice of health standard violation  
    14.  a.  Any employee, group of employees or employee representative who believes that a violation of a health standard exists, or that an imminent danger exists, may request an inspection by giving notice to the Commissioner of Health of the violation or danger.  The notice and request shall be in writing, shall set forth the grounds for the notice and shall be signed by the employee, a group of employees or employee representative.  Upon the request of the person giving the notice, his name or the name of any employee representative giving the notice shall be withheld.  The Commissioner of Health shall conduct an appropriate inspection at the earliest time possible. In any case of a possible imminent hazard, the commissioner may request the assistance of other State agencies having appropriate expertise.  

   The Commissioner of Health shall so interpret and administer this section so as to encourage any employee, group of employees or employee representative who believes that a violation of a health standard exists, or that an imminent danger exists, to report that violation or danger in the first instance to the employer's safety officer.  

   b.   A representative of the employer, an employee giving the notice and an employee representative shall be given the opportunity to accompany the Commissioner of Health during an inspection for the purpose of aiding in such inspection.  Where there is no authorized employee representative, the Commissioner of Health shall consult with a reasonable number of employees concerning matters of health in the workplace.  

   c.   Any employee who accompanies the Commissioner of Health or the Commissioner of Community Affairs on an inspection shall receive payment of normal wages for the time spent during the inspection.  

   d.   The information obtained by the Commissioner of Health under this section shall be obtained with a minimum burden upon the employer.  

   L.1983,c.516,s.14; amended 1995,c.186,s.8.  

34:6A-39.    Variances  
    15.  a.  Any employer may apply to the commissioner for a temporary order granting a variance from a standard or any provision thereof promulgated under this act.  A temporary order shall be granted only if the employer files an application with the commissioner which meets the requirements of this section and establishes in a hearing conducted pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) and P.L.1978, c.67 (C.52:14F-1 et seq.) that:  

   (1)  he is unable to comply with the standard by its effective date because of the unavailability of professional or technical personnel or of materials and equipment needed to comply with the standard or because necessary construction or alteration of facilities cannot be completed by the effective date;  

   (2)  he is taking all available steps to safeguard employees against the hazards covered by the standard; and  

   (3)  he has an effective program for complying with the standard as quickly as practicable.  

   Any temporary order issued under this section shall prescribe the practices, means, methods, operations and processes which the employer shall adopt and use while the order is in effect and the order shall state in detail what the employer's program shall be for complying with the standard.  

   A temporary order may be granted only if notice to the employees is given; provided, however, that the commissioner may issue one interim order to be effective until a decision is made on the basis of the hearing.  An employee representative or, where one does not exist, the affected employees, may appear at the hearing, with or without counsel, and submit testimony concerning the employer's application for the variance.  No temporary order may be in effect for longer than the period needed by the employer to achieve compliance with the standard or one year, whichever is shorter, except that such an order may be renewed no more than twice so long as the requirements of this section are met and if an application for renewal is filed at least 90 days prior to the expiration date of the order.  No interim renewal of an order may remain in effect longer than 180 days.  

   b.   An application for temporary variance shall contain:

  

   (1)  a specification of the standard or portion thereof from which the employer seeks a variance;  

   (2)  a representation by the employer, supported by representations from qualified persons who have firsthand knowledge of the facts represented, that he is unable to comply with the standard or portion thereof and a detailed statement of the reasons therefor;  

   (3)  a statement of the steps he has taken and will take, with specific dates, to protect employees against the hazard covered by the standard;  

   (4)  a statement of when he expects to be able to comply with the standard and what steps he has taken and what steps he will take, with dates specified, to comply with the standard;  

   (5)  a certification that he has informed his employees of the application by giving a copy thereof to their employee representative where one exists, and posting a statement at the place where notices to employees are normally posted, giving a summary of the application and specifying where a copy may be examined.  A description of the notification procedure used by the employer shall be contained in the certification.  The information to the employees shall also inform them of their right to appear and be heard, as set forth in subsection a. of this section, at the hearing on the variance application; and

   (6)  a statement, if appropriate, that such a variance is necessary to permit an employer to participate in an experiment approved by him designed to demonstrate or validate new and improved techniques to safeguard the health or safety of workers.  

   c.   Any affected employer may apply to the commissioner for a rule or order for a permanent variance from a standard promulgated under this act. An employee representative or, where one does not exist, the affected employees, shall be given notice of each such application and shall be afforded an opportunity to participate in a hearing pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C. 52:14B-1 et seq.) and P.L.1978, c.67 (C.52:14F-1 et seq.) on the merits of the application, with or without counsel, and to submit testimony.  The commissioner shall issue such rule or order if he determines on the record, after an opportunity for an inspection, where appropriate, that the proponent of the variance has demonstrated, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the conditions, practices, means, methods, operations or processes used or proposed to be used by an employer will provide workplaces which are as safe and healthful as those which would prevail if he complied with the standard.  The rule or order so issued shall prescribe the conditions the employer shall maintain and the practices, means, methods, operations and processes which he shall adopt and utilize to the extent they differ from any standard adopted pursuant to this act. Such a rule or order may be modified or revoked upon application by an employer, any employee, group of employees or employee representative, or by the commissioner on his own motion, in the manner prescribed for its issuance under this section at any time after six months from its issuance.  

   d.   In determining whether to grant a variance from a health standard, the commissioner shall consult with the Commissioner of Health.  

   L.1983,c.516,s.15; amended 1995,c.186,s.9.  

34:6A-40.    Employer records; reports  
    16.  In accordance with the regulations which shall be adopted by the commissioner, each employer shall make, keep, preserve and make available the following records to the commissioner and the Commissioner of Health:  

   a.   Records regarding the employer's activities relating to this act as the commissioner deems necessary or appropriate for the enforcement of this act or for developing information regarding the causes and prevention of occupational accidents and illness.  

   b.   Records regarding work-related deaths, injuries and illnesses other than minor injuries which require only first aid treatment and which do not involve medical treatment, loss of consciousness, restriction of work or of motion, or transfer to another job.  

   c.   Records regarding employee exposure to potentially toxic materials or other harmful physical agents which the regulations require to be monitored or measured.  The regulations shall provide employees or their representatives with an opportunity to observe the monitoring or measurement and access to the records of the monitoring or measurement.  Each employee or former employee shall be informed of and have access to all records which will indicate his own exposure to toxic materials or harmful physical agents and the properties, characteristics and effects thereof.  Each employer shall promptly notify any employee who has been or is being exposed to toxic materials of harmful physical agents in concentrations or at levels which exceed those prescribed by any safety and health standard promulgated under this act, and shall inform any employee who is being exposed of the corrective action being taken and the time limit for compliance pursuant to subsection a. of section 17 of this act.

   Each employer shall, in accordance with regulations which shall be adopted by the commissioner, file with the commissioner periodic reports based on the records kept pursuant to this section.  The commissioner shall develop and maintain an effective program of collection, compilation, analysis and reporting to the public of statistics on work-related deaths, injuries and illnesses other than minor injuries which require only first aid treatment and which do not involve medical treatment, loss of consciousness, restriction of work or of motion, or transfer to another job, except that any information which identifies an individual employee shall be confidential.  The commissioner shall promote, encourage or directly engage in programs of studies, information and communication concerning occupational safety and health statistics.  

   L.1983,c.516,s.16; amended 1995,c.186,s.10.  

34:6A-41.    Compliance orders; violations; penalties  
    17.  a.  If the commissioner determines that an employer has violated a provision of this act, or a safety standard or regulation promulgated under this act, if the commissioner receives a certification from the Commissioner of Health that an employer violation has been determined to exist within the Commissioner of Health's jurisdiction, or if the commissioner receives a report from the Department of Labor or the Department of Health, prepared as a result of the investigation of the death or serious injury of one or more firefighters, which indicates the existence of a violation of this act or of a safety standard promulgated under this act, he shall with reasonable promptness, and in no case more than six months after his determination or the receipt of the certificate or report, issue to the employer a written order to comply which shall describe the nature of the violation, including a reference to the provision of the section, standard, regulation or order alleged to have been violated, the sanction therefor, where appropriate, and shall fix a reasonable time for compliance.  

   b.   If the commissioner issues to an employer an order to comply, the employer shall post such order or a copy thereof at or near each location of the violation cited in the order so that it is clearly visible to affected employees.  The commissioner shall make such order available to employee representatives and affected employees, and shall make the order available to the public upon request.  

   c.   If no notice of intent to contest any provision of the order is filed with the commissioner by an employer, employee or employee representative within fifteen working days of the issuance of an order to comply, the order shall be deemed final and not subject to review by any court or agency.  If, within fifteen working days of the issuance of an order to comply, any employer, employee or employee representative files a notice with the commissioner of intent to contest any provision of the order, the commissioner shall immediately advise the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission of the notification, and the commission shall afford an opportunity for a hearing.  The review commission shall thereafter issue an order, based on a finding of fact, affirming, modifying, or vacating the commissioner's order to comply or the proposed penalty, or directing other appropriate relief, and the order shall become final 45 days after its issuance.  The rules of procedure prescribed by the review commission shall provide affected employers, employees, or representatives of affected employees an opportunity to participate as parties to hearings under this subsection.  

   d.   If the time for compliance with an order of the commissioner issued pursuant to this section elapses, and the employer has not made a good faith effort to comply, the commissioner shall impose a civil administrative penalty of up to $7,000 per day for each violation of a provision of P.L.1983, c.516 (C.34:6A-25 et seq.), or of a standard or regulation promulgated under that act, or of an order to comply.  Any employer who willfully or repeatedly violates the requirements of this section or any standard, rule, order or regulation promulgated under that act shall be assessed a civil administrative penalty of up to $70,000 for each violation.  Penalties imposed under this section may be recovered with costs in a civil action commenced by the commissioner by a summary proceeding under "the penalty enforcement law" (N.J.S.2A:58-1 et seq.) in the Superior Court or a municipal court, either of which shall have jurisdiction to enforce "the penalty enforcement law" in connection with this act.  If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it continues after the date given for compliance in accordance with the order of the commissioner shall constitute an additional separate and distinct offense.  

   e.   The commissioner is authorized to compromise and settle any claim for a penalty under this section in such amount as, in the discretion of the commissioner, may appear appropriate and equitable under all of the circumstances.  In any claim involving investigations conducted by the Department of Health, the commissioner shall make the determination as to the compromise or settlement of the claim in consultation with the Commissioner of Health.  

   L.1983,c.516,s.17; amended 1991,c.91,s.349; 1991,c.186,s.2; 1995,c.186,s.11.  

34:6A-42.    Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  
    18.  a.  There is established an Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission within the Department of Labor to hear appeals regarding orders to comply and penalties issued under this act.  The commission shall consist of three members appointed by the Governor from among persons who by reason of training, education or experience are qualified to carry out the functions of the commission.  The Governor shall designate one of the members of the commission to serve as chairman.  

   b.   Members of the review commission shall serve terms of four years and until their successors are appointed.  The salaries, compensation and wages of the members of the commission shall be established by the commissioner. The Department of Labor shall provide the review commission with the support staff necessary for the review commission to perform its duties. The members and the support staff shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.  

   c.   The review commission shall meet as often as is necessary to hear and rule on appeals regarding orders to comply and penalties issued under this act.  The review commission shall adopt rules with respect to the procedural aspects of its hearings.  

   d.   An employee or employee representative may participate as a party to any proceeding regarding the employees' employer before the review commission.

   e.   The review commission shall hear and make a determination upon any proceeding instituted before it, and shall make a report of the determination which shall constitute its final disposition of the proceedings.  The report shall become the final order of the commission 45 days after the issuance of the report.  

   f.   In the conduct of hearings the review commission may subpena and examine witnesses, require the production of evidence, administer oaths and take testimony and depositions.  

   g.   After hearing an appeal the review commission may sustain, modify or dismiss a citation or penalty.  

   L.1983,c.516,s.18; amended 1995,c.186,s.12.  

34:6A-43.    Appeals from decision of review commission
    Any appeal from a decision of the review commission shall be to the Appellate Division of the Superior Court.

     L.1983, c. 516, s. 19, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

34:6A-44.    Restraining orders
    The Attorney General, at the request of and on behalf of the commissioner, may bring an action in the Superior Court to restrain any conditions or practices in any workplace which the commissioner determines, in accordance with section 17 of this act, are such that a danger exists which could reasonably be expected to cause death or serious physical harm. Any order issued under this act may require such steps to be taken as may be necessary to  avoid, correct or remove such imminent danger and prohibit the employment or  presence of any individual in locations or under conditions where such imminent  danger exists.

     L.1983, c. 516, s. 20, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

34:6A-45.    Retaliatory discrimination prohibited  
    21.  a.  No person shall discharge, or otherwise discipline, or in any manner discriminate against any employee because such employee has filed any complaint or instituted or caused to be instituted any proceeding under or related to this section or has testified or is about to testify in any such proceeding, or because of the exercise by such employee on behalf of himself or others of any right afforded by this section.  

   b.   Any employee who believes that he has been discharged, disciplined or otherwise discriminated against by any person in violation of this section may, within 180 days after the employee first has knowledge such violation did occur, file a complaint with the commissioner alleging that discrimination. Upon receipt of the complaint, the commissioner shall cause an investigation to be made as he deems appropriate.  If, upon that investigation, the commissioner or his designee determines that the provisions of this section have been violated, he shall, not more than 90 days after the receipt of the complaint, notify the employer and the employee of his determination, which shall include an order for all appropriate relief, including rehiring or reinstatement of the employee to his former position with back pay and reasonable legal costs.  The notice shall become the commissioner's final determination, unless, within 15 days of receipt of the notice, the employer or employee requests a hearing before the commissioner or his designee, in which case the commissioner shall issue his final determination not more than 45 days after the hearing report is issued.  

   c.   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to diminish the rights of any employee under any law, rule or regulation or under any collective negotiation agreement.  

   d.   Any waiver by an employee or applicant for employment of the benefits or requirements of this act shall be against public policy and be void and any employer's request or requirement that an employee waive any rights under this act as a condition of employment or continued employment shall constitute an act of discrimination.  

   L.1983,c.516,s.21; amended 1995,c.186,s.13.  

34:6A-47.    Advisors to commission of capital budgeting and planning on workplace safety and health
    The Commissioner of Labor, the Commissioner of Community Affairs and the Commissioner of Health shall serve in an advisory capacity to the New Jersey Commission on Capital Budgeting and Planning on matters of workplace safety and  health, to ensure that new construction meets the standards established by this  act.

     L.1983, c. 516, s. 23, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

34:6A-48.    Act inapplicable to right to strike
    Nothing in this act shall be deemed to give public employees the right to strike over occupational safety and health issues.

     L.1983, c. 516, s. 24, eff. Jan. 17, 1984.

34:6A-49.    Uniform codes not superseded, permits required  
    25.  Except as provided in section 6 of P.L.1983, c.516 (C.34:6A-30), nothing in this act shall be deemed to conflict with or supersede any provision of the "State Uniform Construction Code Act," P.L.1975, c.217 (C.52:27D-119 et seq.) or the code promulgated thereunder or to affect or limit the powers, duties, authorities and responsibilities of the Commissioner of Community Affairs or any enforcing agency thereunder.  Except as provided in section 6 of P.L.1983, c.516 (C.34:6A-30), nothing in this act shall be deemed to conflict with or supersede any provision of the "Uniform Fire Safety Act," P.L.1983, c.383 (C.52:27D-192 et al.), or the code promulgated thereunder, nor affect or limit the powers, duties, authorities and responsibilities of the Commissioner of Community Affairs or any enforcing agency thereunder.  

   Whenever an action taken to comply with the provisions of this act makes it necessary for a property owner or employer to obtain a permit pursuant to the State uniform construction code, the owner or employer shall obtain the permit from the enforcing agency having jurisdiction.  The commissioner shall inform any owner or employer who is required to take an action to be in compliance that it is the responsibility of the owner or employer to contact the agency having jurisdiction to determine whether a permit is required and to obtain any required permit.  

   L.1983,c.516,s.25; amended 1995,c.186,s.14.  

34:6A-50.    Annual report  
    16.  a.  Not later than December 31 of the first full calendar year following the effective date of this 1995 amendatory and supplementary act and not later than December 31 of each subsequent year, the commissioner shall, in consultation with the Commissioners of Health and Community Affairs, issue to the Governor and the Legislature an annual report on the effects of this 1995 amendatory and supplementary act on the protections provided, State plan approval, and costs and benefits to public employees and employers.  

   b.   The report issued pursuant to subsection a. of this section on the fifth full calendar year following the effective date of this 1995 amendatory and supplementary act shall include any recommendations the commissioner deems appropriate for amendments to, or the repeal of, this 1995 amendatory and supplementary act, provided that the recommendations shall include an implementation plan which includes measures to offset any loss of federal funding caused by any recommended amendments or repeal.  

   L.1995,c.186,s.16.  

34:6B-1.     Smoking, use of tobacco products shall not affect employment
     1.   No employer shall refuse to hire or employ any person or shall discharge from employment or take any adverse action against any employee with respect to compensation, terms, conditions or other privileges of employment because that person does or does not smoke or use other tobacco products, unless the employer has a rational basis for doing so which is reasonably related to the employment, including the responsibilities of the employee or prospective employee.  

    L.1991,c.207,s.1.  

34:6B-2.     Law, workplace policies not affected  
     2.   Nothing contained in this act shall be construed to affect any applicable laws, rules or workplace policies concerning smoking or the use of other tobacco products during the course of employment.  

    L.1991,c.207,s.2.  

34:6B-3.     Aggrieved person may institute civil action  
     3.   Upon a violation of any provision of this act, an aggrieved person may, in addition to any other available remedy, institute civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction, within one year from the date of the alleged violation, for relief as follows:  

    a.   With respect to a prospective employee, the court may:

  

    (1)  order injunctive relief as it deems appropriate;

  

    (2)  award compensatory and consequential damages incurred by the prospective employee as a result of the violation;  or  

    (3)  award reasonable attorneys' fees and court costs.

  

    b.   With respect to an employee or former employee, the court may:

  

    (1)  order injunctive relief as it deems appropriate, including reinstatement of the employee to the same position held before the violation or the position the employee would have held but for the violation, as well as the reinstatement of full fringe benefits and seniority rights;  

    (2)  award compensatory and consequential damages incurred by the employee or former employee as a result of the violation, including compensation for lost wages, benefits and other remuneration;  or  

    (3)  award reasonable attorneys' fees and court costs.

  

    L.1991,c.207,s.3.  

34:6B-4.     Penalties  
     4.   Any employer who violates any provision of this act shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $2,000 for the first violation and $5,000 for each subsequent violation, collectible by the Commissioner of Labor in a summary proceeding pursuant to "the penalty enforcement law" (N.J.S.2A:58-1 et seq.).  

    L.1991,c.207,s.4.  

34:6B-5  Definitions relative to disclosure of personal information for certain electronic communications devices.
 
 	1.	For purposes of this act:

	"Electronic communications device" means any device that uses electronic signals to create, transmit, and receive information, including a computer, telephone, personal digital assistant, or other similar device.
 
	"Employer" means an employer or employer's agent, representative, or designee.  The term "employer" does not include the Department of Corrections, State Parole Board, county corrections departments, or any State or local law enforcement agency.
 
	"Personal account" means an account, service or profile on a social networking website that is used by a current or prospective employee exclusively for personal communications unrelated to any business purposes of the employer.  This definition shall not apply to any account, service or profile created, maintained, used or accessed by a current or prospective employee for business purposes of the employer or to engage in business related communications.
 
	"Social networking website" means an Internet-based service that allows individuals to construct a public or semi-public profile within a bounded system created by the service, create a list of other users with whom they share a connection within the system, and view and navigate their list of connections and those made by others within the system.
 
	L.2013, c.155, s.1.

34:6B-6  Prohibited actions by employers.
 
	2.	No employer shall require or request a current or prospective employee to provide or disclose any user name or password, or in any way provide the employer access to, a personal account through an electronic communications device.
 
	L.2013, c.155, s.2.

34:6B-7  Waiver, limitation of protection prohibited.
  
	3.	No employer shall require an individual to waive or limit any protection granted under this act as a condition of applying for or receiving an offer of employment. An agreement to waive any right or protection under this act is against the public policy of this State and is void and unenforceable.
 
	L.2013, c.155, s.3.

34:6B-8  Retaliation, discrimination prohibited.
 
 	4.	No employer shall retaliate or discriminate against an individual because the individual has done or was about to do any of the following:
 
	a.	Refuse to provide or disclose any user name or password, or in any way provide access to, a personal account through an electronic communications device;
 
	b.	Report an alleged violation of this act to the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development;
 
	c.	Testify, assist, or participate in any investigation, proceeding, or action concerning a violation of this act; or
 
	d.	Otherwise oppose a violation of this act.
 
	L.2013, c.155, s.4.

34:6B-9  Violations, penalties.
 
 	5.	An employer who violates any provision of this act shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for the first violation and $2,500 for each subsequent violation, collectible by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development in a summary proceeding pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	L.2013, c.155, s.5.

34:6B-10  Construction of act.
  
	6. a. Nothing in this act shall be construed to prevent an employer from complying with the requirements of State or federal statutes, rules or regulations, case law or rules of self-regulatory organizations.
 
	b.	Nothing in this act shall prevent an employer from implementing and enforcing a policy pertaining to the use of an employer issued electronic communications device or any accounts or services provided by the employer or that the employee uses for business purposes.
 
	c.	Nothing in this act shall prevent an employer from conducting an investigation:
 
	(1)	for the purpose of ensuring compliance with applicable laws, regulatory requirements or prohibitions against work-related employee misconduct based on the receipt of specific information about activity on a personal account by an employee; or
 
	(2)	of an employee's actions based on the receipt of specific information about the unauthorized transfer of an employer's proprietary information, confidential information or financial data to a personal account by an employee.
 
	d.	Nothing in this act shall prevent an employer from viewing, accessing, or utilizing information about a current or prospective employee that can be obtained in the public domain.
 
	L.2013, c.155, s.6.

34:6B-11  Short title.
 
 	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as "The Opportunity to Compete Act."

	L.2014, c.32, s.1.

34:6B-12  Findings, declarations relative to certain employment rights of persons with criminal records.
 
 	2.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	Removing obstacles to employment for people with criminal records provides economic and social opportunities to a large group of people living in New Jersey, increasing the productivity, health, and safety of New Jersey communities.
 
	b.	Criminal background checks by employers have increased dramatically in recent years, with estimates of 90 percent of large employers in the United States now conducting background checks as part of the hiring process.
 
	c.	Barriers to employment based on criminal records stand to affect an estimated 65 million adults in the United States with criminal records.
 
	d.	Employment advertisements in New Jersey frequently include language regarding criminal records that either explicitly precludes or strongly dissuades people from applying.
 
	e.	Individuals with criminal records represent a group of job seekers ready and able to contribute and add to the workforce.
 
	f.	Securing employment significantly reduces the risk of recidivism for persons with criminal records.
 
	g.	Currently, at least 64 states, counties, and cities have enacted or passed statutes, ordinances, or policies to remove barriers to the employment of persons with criminal histories by public and private employers.
 
	h.	The nation's largest public employer, the United States government, and the nation's largest private employer have each implemented their own policies removing barriers to the employment of persons with criminal histories.
 
	i.	Numerous other major businesses and organizations have voluntarily implemented their own policies removing barriers to the employment of those with criminal histories.
 
	j.	It is the intent and purpose of "The Opportunity to Compete Act" to improve the economic viability, health, and security of New Jersey communities and to assist people with criminal records to reintegrate into the community, become productive members of the workforce, and to provide for their families and themselves.
 
	L.2014, c.32, s.2.

34:6B-13  Definitions relative to certain employment rights of persons with criminal records.
  
	3.	As used in this act:

	"Advertisement" means any circulation, mailing, posting, or any other form of publication, utilizing any media, promoting an employer or intending to alert its audience, regardless of size, to the availability of any position of employment.
 
	"Applicant for employment" means any person whom an employer considers when identifying potential employees, through any means, including, but not limited to, recruitment, solicitation, or seeking personal information, or any person who requests to be considered for employment by an employer, or who requests information from an employer related to seeking employment, and shall include any person who currently is an employee of the employer.
 
	"Criminal record" means information collected by criminal justice agencies on individuals consisting of identifiable descriptions and notations of arrests, detentions, indictments, or other formal criminal charges, and any disposition arising therefrom, including acquittal, sentencing, correctional supervision, release or conviction, including, but not limited to, any sentence arising from a verdict or plea of guilty or nolo contendere, including a sentence of incarceration, a suspended sentence, a sentence of probation, or a sentence of conditional discharge.
 
	"Employee" shall mean a person who is hired for a wage, salary, fee, or payment to perform work for an employer, but excludes any person employed in the domestic service of any family or person at the person's home, any independent contractors, or any directors or trustees. The term also shall include interns and apprentices. 
 
	"Employer" means any person, company, corporation, firm, labor organization, or association which has 15 or more employees over 20 calendar weeks and does business, employs persons, or takes applications for employment within this State, including the State, any county or municipality, or any instrumentality thereof. The term shall include job placement and referral agencies and other employment agencies, but excludes the United States or any of its departments, agencies, boards, or commissions, or any employee or agent thereof.
 
	"Employment" means any occupation, vocation, job, or work with pay, including temporary or seasonal work, contingent work, and work through the services of a temporary or other employment agency; any form of vocational apprenticeship; or any internship.  The physical location of the prospective employment shall be in whole, or substantial part, within this State.
 
	"Employment application" means a form, questionnaire or similar document or collection of documents that an applicant for employment is required by an employer to complete.
 
	"Initial employment application process" means the period beginning when an applicant for employment first makes an inquiry to an employer about a prospective employment position or job vacancy or when an employer first makes any inquiry to an applicant for employment about a prospective employment position or job vacancy, and ending when an employer has conducted a first interview, whether in person or by any other means of an applicant for employment.
 
	L.2014, c.32, s.3.

34:6B-14  Prohibited actions by employer during initial employment application process.
 	 4. a. Except as otherwise provided in section 6 of P.L.2014, c.32 (C.34:6B-16):

	(1)	An employer shall not require an applicant for employment to complete any employment application that makes any inquiries regarding an applicant's criminal record, including an expunged criminal record, during the initial employment application process.
 
	(2)	An employer shall not make any oral or written inquiry regarding an applicant's criminal record, including an expunged criminal record, or use an online application that requires the disclosure of an applicant's criminal record, including an expunged criminal record, during the initial employment application process.
 
	 b.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection a. of this section, if an applicant discloses any information regarding the applicant's criminal record, by voluntary oral or written disclosure, during the initial employment application process, the employer may make inquiries regarding the applicant's criminal record during the initial employment application process.
 
	 c.	Nothing set forth in this section shall be construed to prohibit an employer from requiring an applicant for employment to complete an employment application that makes any inquiries regarding an applicant's criminal record after the initial employment application process has concluded or from making any oral or written inquiries regarding an applicant's criminal record after the initial employment application process has concluded.  The provisions of this section shall not preclude an employer from refusing to hire an applicant for employment based upon the applicant's criminal record, unless the criminal record or relevant portion thereof has been expunged or erased through executive pardon, provided that such refusal is consistent with other applicable laws, rules and regulations.
 
	L.2014, c.32, s.4; amended 2017, c.243, s.1.

34:6B-15  Prohibitions relative to employer advertisements.
 
 	5.	Unless otherwise permitted or required by law, an employer shall not knowingly or purposefully publish, or cause to be published, any advertisement that solicits applicants for employment where that advertisement explicitly provides that the employer will not consider any applicant who has been arrested or convicted of one or more crimes or offenses.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any advertisement that solicits applicants for a position in law enforcement, corrections, the judiciary, homeland security, or emergency management, or any other employment position where a criminal history record background check is required by law, rule or regulation, or where an arrest or conviction by the person for one or more crimes or offenses would or may preclude the person from holding such employment as required by any law, rule or regulation, or where any law, rule, or regulation restricts an employer's ability to engage in specified business activities based on the criminal records of its employees. Nothing set forth in this section shall be construed as prohibiting an employer from publishing, or causing to be published, an advertisement that contains any provision setting forth any other qualifications for employment, as permitted by law, including, but not limited to, the holding of a current and valid professional or occupational license, certificate, registration, permit or other credential, or a minimum level of education, training or professional, occupational, or field experience.
 
	L.2014, c.32, s.6.

34:6B-16  Exceptions to prohibited actions by employers.
  
	6.	The provisions of subsection a. of section 4 of this act shall not prohibit an employer from requiring an applicant for employment to complete an employment application that makes any inquiries regarding an applicant's criminal record during the initial employment application process or from making any oral or written inquiries regarding an applicant's criminal record during the initial employment application process if:
 
	a.	The employment sought or being considered is for a position in law enforcement, corrections, the judiciary, homeland security or emergency management;
 
	b.	The employment sought or being considered is for a position where a criminal history record background check is required by law, rule or regulation, or where an arrest or conviction by the person for one or more crimes or offenses would or may preclude the person from holding such employment as required by any law, rule or regulation, or where any law, rule, or regulation restricts an employer's ability to engage in specified business activities based on the criminal records of its employees; or
 
	c.	The employment sought or being considered is for a position designated by the employer to be part of a program or systematic effort designed predominantly or exclusively to encourage the employment of persons who have been arrested or convicted of one or more crimes or offenses.
 
	L.2014, c.32, s.6.

34:6B-17  Criminal histories relative to employment with local government.
  
	7. a. The governing body of a county or municipality shall not adopt any ordinance, resolution, law, rule or regulation regarding criminal histories in the employment context, except for ordinances adopted to regulate municipal operations.
 
	b.	The provisions of this act shall preempt any ordinance, resolution, law, rule or regulation adopted by the governing body of a county or municipality prior to the effective date of this act regarding criminal histories in the employment context, except for ordinances adopted to regulate municipal operations.
 
	L.2014, c.32, s.7.

34:6B-18  Penalties sole remedy; construction of act.
 
 	8.	The penalties set forth in section 9 of this act shall be the sole remedy provided for violations of this act. Nothing set forth in this act shall be construed as creating or establishing a standard of care or duty for employers with respect to any law other than this act. Evidence that an employer has violated, or is alleged to have violated, the provisions of this act, shall not be admissible in any legal proceeding with respect to any law or claim other than a proceeding to enforce the provisions of this act.  Nothing set forth in this act shall be construed as creating, establishing or authorizing a private cause of action by an aggrieved person against an employer who has violated, or is alleged to have violated, the provisions of this act.
 
	L.2014, c.32, s.8.

34:6B-19  Violations, penalties.
 
 	9.	Any employer who violates this act shall be liable for a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for the first violation, $5,000 for the second violation, and $10,000 for each subsequent violation collectible by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development in a summary proceeding pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	L.2014, c.32, s.9.

34:6B-20  Unlawful employment practice relative to salary history; exceptions.
	 1. a. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be an unlawful employment practice for any employer:
 
	(1)	to screen a job applicant based on the applicant's salary history, including, but not limited to, the applicant's prior wages, salaries or benefits; or
 
	(2)	to require that the applicant's salary history satisfy any minimum or maximum criteria.
 
	 b.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection a. of this section, an employer may:
 
	(1)	consider salary history in determining salary, benefits, and other compensation for the applicant, and may verify the applicant's salary history, if an applicant voluntarily, without employer prompting or coercion, provides the employer with salary history.  An applicant's refusal to volunteer compensation information shall not be considered in any employment decisions; and
 
	(2)	request that an applicant provide the employer with a written authorization to confirm salary history, including, but not limited to, the applicant's compensation and benefits, after an offer of employment that includes an explanation of the overall compensation package has been made to the applicant.
 
	 c.	This section shall not apply to:
 
	(1)	applications for internal transfer or promotion with an employee's current employer, or use by the employer of previous knowledge obtained as a consequence of prior employment with the employer;
 
	(2)	any actions taken by an employer pursuant to any federal law or regulation that expressly requires the disclosure or verification of salary history for employment purposes, or requires knowledge of salary history to determine an employee's compensation;
 
	(3)	any attempt by an employer to obtain, or verify a job applicant's disclosure of, non-salary related information when conducting a background check on the job applicant, provided that, when requesting information for the background check, the employer shall specify that salary history information is not to be disclosed. If, notwithstanding that specification, salary history information is disclosed, the employer shall not retain that information or consider it when determining the salary, benefits, or other compensation of the applicant; or
 
	(4)	employer inquiries regarding an applicant's previous experience with incentive and commission plans and the terms and conditions of the plans, provided that the employer shall not seek or require the applicant to report information about the amount of earnings of the applicant in connection with the plans, and that the employer shall not make any inquiry regarding the applicant's previous experience with incentive and commission plans unless the employment opening with the employer includes an incentive or commission component as part of the total compensation program.
 
	 d.	An applicant may provide salary history information, including information regarding the applicant's experience with incentive or commission plans, to an employment agency contacted by the applicant for assistance in searching for and identifying employment opportunities, but the employment agency shall not share the information with potential employers without the express written consent of the applicant.
 
	 e. (1) Any employer who violates this section shall be liable for a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for the first violation, $5,000 for the second violation, and $10,000 for each subsequent violation collectible by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development in a summary proceeding pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).  
 
	(2)	If an applicant for a job is a member of a protected class as defined in subsection t. of section 11 of P.L.1945, c.169 (C.10:5-12), an employer shall be subject to section 2 of P.L.2019, c.199 (C.10:4-12.12) for any violation of this section.
 
	 f.	Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting an employer from offering an applicant for a job information regarding wage or salary rates set for the job by collective bargaining agreements or by civil service or other laws, or from paying those rates if the applicant is hired.
 
	 g.	Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit an employer who does business, employs persons, or takes applications for employment in at least one state other than New Jersey, from including an inquiry regarding salary history on an employment application, so long as immediately preceding the salary history inquiry on the employment application it states that an applicant for a position the physical location of which will be in whole, or substantial part, in New Jersey is instructed not to answer the salary history inquiry.
 
	 h.	Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit an employer from acquiring salary history information that is publicly available, but an employer shall not retain or consider that information when determining the salary, benefits, or other compensation of the applicant unless the applicant voluntarily, without employer prompting or coercion, provides the employer with salary history.  An applicant's refusal to volunteer compensation information shall not be considered in any employment decisions. 
 
	L.2019, c.199, s.1.

34:6B-21  Certain offenses not to be considered in making employment decision; violations, penalties.
 	15. a. An employer shall not be permitted to, when making an employment decision, rely solely on, or require any applicant to disclose or reveal, or take any adverse action against any applicant for employment solely on the basis of, any arrest, charge, conviction, or adjudication of delinquency, for manufacturing, distributing, or dispensing, or possessing or having under control with intent to manufacture, distribute, or dispense, marijuana or hashish in violation of paragraph (11) of subsection b. of N.J.S.2C:35-5,or a lesser amount of marijuana or hashish in violation of paragraph (12) of subsection b. of that section, or a violation of either of those paragraphs and a violation of subsection a. of section 1 of P.L.1987, c.101 (C.2C:35-7) or subsection a. of section 1 of P.L.1997, c.327 (C.2C:35-7.1) for distributing, dispensing, or possessing with intent to distribute or dispense, on or within 1,000 feet of any school property, or on or within 500 feet of the real property comprising a public housing facility, public park, or public building, or obtaining, possessing, using, being under the influence of, or failing to make lawful disposition of marijuana or hashish in violation of paragraph (3) or (4) of subsection a., or subsection b., or subsection c. of N.J.S.2C:35-10, or a violation involving marijuana or hashish as described herein and a violation of N.J.S.2C:36-2 for using or possessing with intent to use drug paraphernalia with that marijuana or hashish, or an arrest, charge, conviction, or adjudication of delinquency under the laws of another state or of the United States of a crime or offense, which, if committed in this State, would be a violation of any of the aforementioned crimes or offenses, regardless of when any such arrest, charge, conviction, or adjudication of delinquency occurred, unless the employment sought or being considered is for a position in law enforcement, corrections, the judiciary, homeland security, or emergency management.
 
	b. Any employer who commits an act in violation of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for the first violation, $5,000 for the second violation, and $10,000 for each subsequent violation, which shall be collectible by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development in a summary proceeding pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).  The penalties set forth in this subsection shall be the sole remedy provided for violations of this section.  
 
	c.	Nothing set forth in this section shall be construed as creating or establishing a standard of care or duty for employers with respect to any other law.  Evidence that an employer has violated, or is alleged to have violated, the provisions of this section, shall not be admissible in any legal proceeding with respect to any law or claim other than a proceeding to enforce the provisions of this section.  Nothing set forth in this section shall be construed as creating, establishing, or authorizing a private cause of action by an aggrieved person against an employer who has violated, or is alleged to have violated, the provisions of this section.
 
	L.2021, c.19, s.15.

34:6B-22  Written notice for vehicle tracking device; penalties; definitions.
	1.	a.	As used in this act:
 
	"Electronic communications device" means any device that uses electronic signals to create, transmit, and receive information, including a computer, telephone, personal digital assistant, or other similar device.
 
	"Employer" means an employer or employer's agent, representative, or designee.  The term "employer" does not include the Department of Corrections, State Parole Board, county correctional facilities, any State or local government entity, or any public transportation system, including, but not limited to, scheduled or charter bus transportation, whether operated by a public or private company.
 
	"Tracking device" means an electronic or mechanical device which is designed or intended to be used for the sole purpose of tracking the movement of a vehicle, person, or device but shall not include devices used for the purpose of documenting employee expense reimbursement.
 
	b.	An employer who knowingly makes use of a tracking device in a vehicle used by an employee without providing written notice to the employee shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for the first violation and not to exceed $2,500 for each subsequent violation, collectible by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development in a summary proceeding pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	c.	Nothing in this act shall be construed to supersede regulations governing interstate commerce including, but not limited to, the usage of electronic communications devices as mandated by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration.

	L.2021, c.449.

34:6B-23  Notification of promotion, new job, transfer opportunities; violation, penalties.
	1. a. An employer shall make reasonable efforts to announce, post, or otherwise make known opportunities for promotion that are advertised internally within the employer or externally on internet-based advertisements, postings, printed flyers, or other similar advertisements to all current employees in the affected department or departments of the employer's business prior to making a promotion decision.  Any promotion for a current employee that is awarded on the basis of years of experience or performance shall not be subject to the notification requirements established in this subsection.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit an employer from making a promotion on an emergent basis due to an unforeseen event.
 
	b.	An employer shall disclose in each posting for new jobs and transfer opportunities that are advertised by the employer either externally or internally the hourly wage or salary, or a range of the hourly wage or salary, and a general description of benefits and other compensation programs for which the employee would be eligible.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit an employer from increasing the wages, benefits, and compensation identified in the job opening posting at the time of making an offer for employment to an applicant.
 
	c. (1) Any employer who violates this act shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $300 for the first violation, and $600 for each subsequent violation, collectible by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development in a summary proceeding pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	(2) An employer's failure to comply with subsection a. of this section for one promotional opportunity shall be considered one violation for all listings of a particular promotion, even if that promotion is listed on multiple forums.
 
	(3)	An employer's failure to comply with subsection b. of this section for all postings for a particular job opening or transfer opportunity shall be considered one violation regardless of the number of postings that list, or forums that advertise, that job opening or transfer opportunity, as appropriate.
 
	d. (1) Temporary help service firms and consulting firms registered with the Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Law and Public Safety shall not be required to provide on job postings that are posted for the purpose of identifying qualified applicants for potential future job openings and not for existing job openings: 
 
	(a) the hourly wage or salary, or range of hourly wage or salary; or 
 
	(b) a general description of benefits and other compensation programs for which the employee would be eligible.
 
	(2) Temporary help service firms or consulting firms shall be required to provide the pay and benefit information listed in paragraph (1) of this subsection to an applicant for temporary employment at the time of interview or hire for a specific job opening.
 
	e.	As used in this act: 
 
	"Employer" means any person, company, corporation, firm, labor organization, or association which has 10 or more employees over 20 calendar weeks and does business, employs persons, or takes applications for employment within this State, including the State, any county or municipality, or any instrumentality thereof. The term shall include job placement and referral agencies and other employment agencies.
 
	"Promotion" means a change in job title and an increase in compensation.
 
L.2024, c.91.

34:7-1.  License necessary;  emergencies;  exceptions;  administration; examinations
    No unlicensed person shall operate a steam generator, similar equipment potentially capable of generating steam having relief devices set over 15 psig.  and rated at or developing over 6 boiler horsepower or a steam power generator,  if over 6 horsepower;  a hoisting machine regardless of motive power, whenever  the boom length exceeds 99 feet;  a refrigerating plant of over 24 tons of  refrigerating capacity, utilizing refrigerants of a flammable or toxic nature;   or a steam or hot water heating plant of which the indicated or rated capacity  exceeds either 499 square feet of heating surface or 100 boiler horsepower or  1,000 kilowatts or 4,000,000 British thermal units input regardless of pressure  or temperature conditions;  and no owner, agent, superintendent, manager or  other person having charge of any building or work in which such equipment is  located, or used, shall use, or cause or allow to be used, any such equipment  described in this section unless the same is in charge of a properly licensed  person, except in emergency, and then for no longer than 15 days unless the  commissioner in writing extends such time, of which emergency the owner of such equipment, or the agent, superintendent, manager or other person in charge thereof shall promptly notify the mechanical inspection bureau in writing, stating fully the circumstances.

    The provisions of this chapter shall not require a license of any person in  charge of or operating the following:

    (1) any equipment installed for emergency purposes only, or

     (2) any equipment under the jurisdiction and control of the United States Government, the operation of which is actively regulated by a Federal agency, or

    (3) any railroad locomotive boiler or any type locomotive used in the service of a common carrier, or

    (4) any refrigerating plant utilizing refrigerants classified as being in Group 1 in the Safety Code for Mechanical Refrigeration of the American Society  of Refrigerating Engineers approved by the American Standards Association,  Inc., or

    (5) Any equipment having relief devices set at or under 15 pounds per square  inch gage or reliably regulated to operate at a temperature not greater than  200`F when serving a heating plant in a building which is unoccupied.  A  building shall not be deemed to be  "occupied"  solely on the basis of  attendance by custodial or security personnel, or

    (6) any steam generating equipment having relief devices set at or under 15  pounds per square inch gage or hot water equipment reliably regulated to operate automatically at a temperature not greater than 250`F, and having relief devices set at or under 160 pounds per square inch gage when serving a heating plant other than in a building of public assembly providing (a) the equipment shall be protected by such type of automatic safety control system which is approved by the State mechanical inspection bureau for automatic operation;  and (b) the boiler plant and its safety components are inspected operationally at reasonable intervals, when the building is occupied, by a person designated by the owner, agent, superintendent, or manager, which person's qualifications to operate such equipment have been certified by the State mechanical inspection bureau on the basis of 90 days' experience and reasonable examination by that bureau in respect of such equipment.  The "operational inspection"  referred to in this subparagraph shall mean visual inspection of all indicators, gages, thermometers, external connections and other items which may be viewed by an external inspection.  A log book shall be  maintained on the premises recording such inspections, which log book shall be  open to inspection by any designated representative of the State mechanical  inspection bureau.

    The provisions of this article shall be administered by the commissioner through the mechanical inspection bureau.  Examinations for license under this article shall be conducted by the examining board or by any member of said board.

     Amended by L.1946, c. 249, p. 883, s. 3;  L.1960, c. 132, p. 638, s. 1; L.1966, c. 182, s. 1, L.1967, c. 2, s. 1;  L.1967, c. 214, s. 1, eff. Oct. 5, 1967.

34:7-2.  Application
    Application for license shall be made on forms to be provided for that purpose by the mechanical inspection bureau and shall state clearly the name, residence, age and qualifying experience of the applicant.  An applicant must be a citizen of the United States or have officially declared his intention of becoming a citizen.

     Amended by L.1946, c. 249, p. 884, s. 4;  L.1960, c. 132, p. 640, s. 2; L.1969, c. 81, s. 1, eff. June 11, 1969.

34:7-2.1.  Declaration of becoming a citizen
    Every applicant qualifying for a license who is not a citizen of the United  States but who officially declared his intention of becoming a citizen shall be  issued a license and shall be entitled to annual renewals thereof during the  5-year period immediately following his declaration of said intention and  thereafter he shall be entitled to renewals only upon proof that he has become  a citizen of the United States.

     L.1969, c. 81, s. 2, eff. June 11, 1969.

34:7-3  Fees; revocation or suspension of license.

	34:7-3.  Each application for examination and for any license issued by the bureau shall be accompanied by fees as set forth in this section.  The fees, established hereunder pursuant to the amendatory provisions of P.L.2003, c.117 shall be in effect for State fiscal years 2003-04 and 2004-05.  Thereafter, such fees may be adjusted by the Commissioner of Labor in accordance with fee schedules adopted by regulation.  Such fees shall be made payable to the Commissioner of Labor.  There shall be no other charge for the initial examination or for one re-examination taken within six months of the original examination.  Failure to appear for examination or to obtain a passing grade shall not entitle the applicant to a refund of any fee.



	Original application		$50

	Raise of grade or additional

		classification application	$40

	Additional examinations, in excess of

		2, on any application	$20

	Annual license renewal if requested no

		later than expiration date	$20

	License renewal for 3 years if requested

		no later than expiration date	$40

	Application for renewal, if made not more

		than 3 years after expiration and if all

		penalties lawfully imposed upon the 

		applicant by the Mechanical Inspection 

		Bureau have been paid

			1 year			$30

			3 years		$60



	 Upon failure to so renew a license for a period of 3 years and 1 day after expiration date all records pertaining to such license may be destroyed pursuant to the "Destruction of Public Records Law (1953)," P.L.1953, c.410 (C.47:3-15 et seq.) and any application for renewal of the license will be treated as an original application for examination.  All fees collected under this article shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor.

	Any license may be revoked or suspended by the commissioner upon receiving evidence of incompetence, negligence, intoxication while on duty or other reason establishing that the licensee is unfit to hold a license, after notice is given to the licensee and a hearing afforded him before one or more members of the examining board.  In case revocation or suspension is recommended by the member or members conducting the hearing, it shall not be acted upon by the commissioner until at least 15 days' notice of the recommendation shall be given to the licensee and an opportunity afforded him within that time period to ask for a rehearing before the commissioner.  After rehearing, if requested, the commissioner may affirm, modify or dismiss such recommendation.  Pending a hearing or rehearing as provided in this paragraph, the commissioner may authorize the suspension of a license in the interest of health and safety.

	Amended 1946, c.249, s.5; 1960, c.132, s.3; 1966, c.193; 1982, c.54, s.1; 1991, c.205, s.7; 2003, c.117, s.1.

34:7-4.  Form of license
    The form of license shall be such as the commissioner shall approve.

34:7-5.  Production of license and equipment inspection certificates on demand
    Every engineer and fireman licensed under this chapter shall, while in charge of or operating any equipment described in section 34:7-1, produce all licenses and equipment inspection certificates required under this chapter upon  demand by the commissioner or any employee of the Department of Labor and  Industry.

     Amended by L.1946, c. 249, p. 885, s. 6;  L.1960, c. 132, p. 641, s. 4.

34:7-6  Penalties.

	34:7-6.  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $500 nor more than $5,000 per day for each violation, to be collected by suit or compromise.  An officer of a corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be personally liable, for the violation by such corporation.  Any manager, superintendent or other person in charge of any building or other places in which this article is violated shall be liable for such violation.  Any sum collected as a penalty pursuant to this section shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor.

	Amended 1946, c.249, s.7; 1991, c.205, s.8; 2003, c.117, s.2.

34:7-7.   Jurisdiction  
     34:7-7. The Superior Court and municipal court shall have jurisdiction of proceedings for the collection and enforcement of a penalty imposed because of the violation of any provision of this article. The proceedings shall be summary and in accordance with "the penalty enforcement law" (N.J.S.2A:58-1 et seq.) and may be brought in the municipality where the offense was committed, or where the offender may be summoned or arrested, or where he resides.  

    Amended 1953,c.33,s.18; 1991,c.91,s.350.  

34:7-8.   Complaint;  process
    All proceedings brought for a violation of this article shall be brought in  the name of the commissioner as plaintiff.  Process shall be either a summons  or warrant and shall issue only at the instance of the commissioner, or a  member of the bureau of engineers' and firemen's licenses or an employee of the  department.

     Amended by L.1953, c. 33, p. 586, s. 19.

34:7-9.   Service of process  
     34:7-9. Any process under the provisions of this article shall be served by the commissioner or a member of the engineers' and firemen's license bureau or by any officer authorized to serve process in the Superior Court, Law Division, Special Civil Part, or municipal courts.  

    Amended 1953,c.33,s.20; 1991,c.91,s.351.  

34:7-12.  Execution;  commitment
    If after issuance of execution against any person convicted of violating this article, sufficient goods and chattels be not found to satisfy the execution, the court shall commit the defendant to the common jail of the county where the conviction is had for a period not exceeding thirty days.

     Amended by L.1953, c. 33, p. 587, s. 23.

34:7-14  Inspection of boilers.

	34:7-14.  a.  All steam or hot water boilers or similar equipment potentially capable of generating steam, except steam boilers having adequate relief devices set to discharge at a pressure not greater than 15 pounds per square inch, gage, or hot water boilers having adequate relief devices set to discharge at a pressure not greater than 160 pounds per square inch, gage, and which hot water boilers are reliably limited to temperatures not exceeding 250 degrees Fahrenheit, when such steam or hot water boilers serve dwellings of less than six-family units or other dwellings with accommodations for less than 25 persons, shall be inspected and be subject to a hydrostatic test, if necessary, at least once in each year, at 12-month intervals, by an inspector of the Division of Workplace Standards, excepting, however, such as may be insured after having been regularly inspected in accordance with the terms of this article by insurance companies, whose inspectors shall have satisfactorily passed an examination or received certificates of competency approved by the commissioner.  Such inspection shall be as completely internal and external as construction permits, except that in the case of a steam or hot water boiler or similar equipment, the operation of which is an integral part of or necessary to a continuous processing operation, internal inspections may, at the discretion of the commissioner, be performed at intervals in excess of 12 months as permitted by the shutting down of the processing operation.  The inspection of any equipment described in this chapter by a certified inspector of an insurance company shall be acceptable in lieu of State inspection.  This article shall not apply to any boiler having less than 10 square feet of heating surface or a heat input of less than 10 kilowatts or 40,000 British Thermal Units per hour or to equipment under the jurisdiction and control of the United States Government, the inspection of which is actively regulated by a federal agency, or to equipment used solely for the propulsion of motor vehicles regulated by Title 39 of the Revised Statutes. 

	b.	All other pressure vessels may be inspected and be subject to test after installation and periodically at such intervals as the commissioner may by rule establish. Inspection and test shall be performed by an inspector of the Division of Workplace Standards excepting, however, such as may be insured after having been regularly inspected in accordance with the terms of this article, by insurance companies, whose inspectors shall have satisfactorily passed an examination or received certificates of competency approved by the commissioner, or such as may be regularly inspected by a certified user-inspector of a registered inspection agency approved by the commissioner. Such user-inspection shall have passed an examination or received a certificate of competency from the commissioner, and the inspection shall be conducted in such manner as the commissioner may by rule provide. The inspection of any equipment described in this subsection by a certified inspector of an insurance company or a certified user-inspector of a registered inspection agency shall be acceptable in lieu of State inspection where such inspections are recorded with the Division of Workplace Standards accompanied by fees in accordance with the following schedule; the fees established hereunder pursuant to the amendatory  provisions of P.L.2003, c.117 shall be in effect for State fiscal years 2003-04 and 2004-05, after which such fees may be adjusted by the Commissioner of Labor in accordance with fee schedules adopted by regulation: one to 25 vessels, $15.00 each; 26 to 100 vessels, $7.50 each; 101 to 500 vessels, $6.00 each; and over 500 vessels, $4.50 each. These fees are to be collected from the owner or user but payable by the inspection agency to the Department of Labor. 

	This subsection shall not apply to any pressure vessels: 

	(1)	Subject to internal or external pressure not exceeding 15 psig; or 

	(2)	Having inside diameter not exceeding 6 inches; or 

	(3)	Used for water storage purposes serving dwellings of less than

six-family units or other dwellings with accommodations for less than 25 persons, when none of the following limitations is exceeded: 

	(a)	200 degrees Fahrenheit

	(b)	120 gallons water containing capacity 

	(c)	160 psig; or 

	(4)	Under the jurisdiction and control of the United States Government, the inspection of which is actively regulated by a federal agency; or to equipment used solely for the propulsion of motor vehicles regulated by Title 39 of the Revised Statutes. 

	Amended 1946, c.92, s.1; 1960, c.133, s.1; 1967, c.211, s.1; 1971, c.154, s.9; 1971, c.348, s.1; 1982, c.54, s.2; 1985, c.109, s.1; 2003, c.117, s.3.

34:7-15  Fee for inspecting and testing; inspection of new vessels or vessels under construction.

	34:7-15.  a.  For each internal and external inspection of vessels specified in subsection a. of R.S.34:7-14, which shall include hydrostatic test if found necessary, the owner, lessee or operator of the vessel shall pay to the Department of Labor a fee of $40 for vessels having 10 and not over 60 square feet of heating surface, $55 for vessels over 60 and not over 1,000 square feet of heating surface and $75 for vessels over 1,000 square feet of heating surface; plus the actual travel expenses of the inspector.  The fees established under this subsection pursuant to the amendatory provisions of P.L.2003, c.117 shall be in effect for State fiscal years 2003-04 and 2004-05, and thereafter may be adjusted by the Commissioner of Labor in accordance with fee schedules adopted by regulation.

	b.	For each inspection of vessels specified in subsection b. of R.S.34:7-14, the owner, lessee or operator of the vessel shall pay to the Department of Labor a fee of $10.00 for vessels not over 30 square feet size, $20.00 for vessels over 30 but not over 60 square feet size, $30.00 for vessels over 60 but not over 100 square feet size, $40.00 for vessels over 100 square feet. In determining size rating, the extreme diameter multiplied by the vessel length, or equivalent dimensions, shall be used. The fees established under this subsection pursuant to the amendatory provisions of P.L.2003, c.117 shall be in effect for State fiscal years 2003-04 and 2004-05, and thereafter may be adjusted by the Commissioner of Labor in accordance with fee schedules adopted by regulation.

	c.	The Division of Workplace Standards shall maintain an inspection service for the purpose of providing shop inspection of those vessels regulated by Chapter 7 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes, which are under construction or new, or which are to be used for a purpose other than that for which originally approved, or which have never been subject to a previous inspection in New Jersey. This service shall be provided for New Jersey builders, owners or users of such vessels upon their request only. The fees for this serviceshall be set by the commissioner and shall be: (1) not more than $50.00 for each vessel inspected, provided that he may establish a charge for each visit, for the purpose of inspection, of not less than $100.00 nor more than $300; (2) for construction review of vessel not designed in accordance with standards set by the Board of Boiler, Pressure Vessel and Refrigeration Rules, not less than $500 nor more than $1,500.  The fees established under this subsection pursuant to the amendatory provisions of P.L.2003, c.117 shall be in effect for State fiscal years 2003-04 and 2004-05 and thereafter may be adjusted by the Commissioner of Labor in accordance with fee schedules adopted by regulation.

	Amended 1946, c.92, s.2; 1960, c.133, s.2; 1967, c.211, s.2; 1971, c.154, s.10; 1982, c.54, s.3; 1985, c.109, s.2; 1991, c.205, s.9; 2003, c.117, s.4.

34:7-16  Additional external inspection; fee.

	34:7-16.  In addition to the annual internal and external inspection, there may be an external inspection if found necessary of each vessel specified in subsection a. of  R.S.34:7-14, which shall be made as nearly as may be at the expiration of 6 months from each annual inspection and for which the owner, lessee or operator shall pay to the Department of Labor a fee of $50. The fees established hereunder pursuant to the amendatory provisions of P.L.2003, c.117 shall be in effect for State fiscal years 2003-04 and 2004-05  and thereafter may be adjusted by the Commissioner of Labor in accordance with fee schedules adopted by regulation.   Each vessel insured by an insurance company may also be given an external inspection by a certified inspector. 

	Amended 1946, c.92, s.3; 1967, c.211, ss.3,10; 1971, c.154, s.11; 1982, c.54, s.4; 1991, c.205, s.10; 2003, c.117, s.5.

34:7-17.  Commissioner may order additional inspections
    Whenever it shall be deemed necessary by the commissioner, additional inspections may be made of vessels specified in section 34:7-14a. of this Title, which shall be paid for in accordance with section 34:7-16 of this Title.

     Amended by L.1967, c. 211, s. 4;  L.1971, c. 154, s. 12, eff. May 20, 1971.

34:7-18.  Rules and regulations
    The commissioner may make such rules and regulations covering the manner of  conducting inspections, the method of collecting fees, the settlement of accounts and payment of money on the part of certified inspectors by insurance companies or registered inspection agencies as he may deem necessary.

     Amended by L.1971, c. 154, s. 13, eff. May 20, 1971.

34:7-19  Report by insurance company making inspection.

	34:7-19.  An insurance company making an inspection of any vessel specified in R.S. 34:7-14 shall make a report of such inspection to the commissioner in such manner and at such intervals as he may by rules provide, and shall pay the commissioner a fee of $20. The fee established hereunder pursuant to the amendatory provisions of P.L.2003, c.117 shall be in effect for State fiscal years 2003-04 and 2004-05, and thereafter may be adjusted by the Commissioner of Labor in accordance with fee schedules adopted by regulation.

	The fees shall be payable by and collected from the owner, lessee or operator by the insurer or inspector at the time of inspection for each boiler insured within the State. It is further provided that payment of these fees may be made by the insurer through other methods when required or allowed by the commissioner, as provided in R.S.34:7-18. 

	Amended 1946, c.92, s.4; 1967, c.211, s.5; 1991, c.205, s.11; 2003, c.117, s.6.

34:7-20.  Report by owner;  fees
    The owner of any vessel specified in section 34:7-14 of this Title shall within 30 days after service on him of written notice so to do, furnish to the commissioner a report of an inspection made in accordance with this article, in  default of which the commissioner shall assign an inspector to make the inspection in accordance with the terms of such notice.  The fees for any inspection made under this section shall be paid by the owner to the commissioner.  On the owner's failure to pay such fee within 30 days after the inspection the commissioner is authorized to sue for its collection in any court of competent jurisdiction.

     Amended by L.1967, c. 211, s. 6.

34:7-21.  Unfit vessel not to be used
    If after inspection it is found that any vessel specified in section 34:7-14  of this Title is unfit for use the inspector shall order its use to be  discontinued until properly repaired or replaced.  The owner before resuming  its use shall cause proper repairs or replacements to be made and shall on the  completion thereof notify the commissioner who shall cause a further inspection  to be made.  If the inspector finds such vessel fit for use he shall deliver to  the owner evidence of approval for further use.

     Amended by L.1967, c. 211, s. 7;  L.1971, c. 154, s. 14, eff. May 20, 1971.

34:7-22.  Reinspection
    The owner or operator of any vessel specified in section 34:7-14 of this Title, dissatisfied with the result of any inspection may appeal to the commissioner by mail.  Upon receipt of the appeal, the commissioner shall direct one of the members of the Mechanical Inspection Bureau to conduct an inspection of such vessel and make a report to him, and he shall thereupon render his decision, which shall be final.

     Amended by L.1967, c. 211, s. 8.

34:7-23.  Conformance to standards 
     34:7-23.  No steam boiler, pressure vessel or refrigeration system shall be sold, installed or used in this State unless it conforms to such rules, regulations and standards as are from time to time adopted by the Board of Boiler, Pressure Vessel and Refrigeration Rules and approval by the commissioner under authority of R.S. 34:1-47. 

    Amended by L. 1960,c.133,s.3; 1987,c.336,s.1. 

34:7-24.  Evidence of approval
    Upon payment of inspection fees and filing of inspection report, the commissioner shall deliver evidence of approval to the owner or operator of any  vessel passing inspection.

     Amended by L.1946, c. 92, p. 314, s. 5;  L.1967, c. 211, s. 9.

34:7-25   Refrigeration systems; inspection; fees; certificate.


	34:7-25. All refrigeration systems using flammable or toxic refrigerants of over three tons of refrigerating capacity or requiring over six driving horsepower, and all refrigeration systems using nonflammable and nontoxic refrigerants of over 18 tons of refrigerating capacity or requiring over 36 driving horsepower, having relief devices set over 15 pounds per square inch gage and used in a plant of any size or storage capacity, shall be inspected annually by an inspector of the Mechanical Inspection Bureau or of an insurance company, as provided in subsection a. of R.S.4:7-14; and the owner, lessee or operator shall comply with the recommendations of the inspector in conformity with the rules and regulations adopted by the Board of Boiler, Pressure Vessel and Refrigeration Rules of the Mechanical Inspection Bureau and approved by the commissioner.  

	The fees for such inspection by an inspector of the Mechanical Inspection Bureau shall be as follows: 

	a.	Refrigeration systems of 25 tons and over, but less than 300 tons of refrigerating capacity, the sum of $75 for each inspection;

	b.	Refrigeration systems under 25 tons and over 3 tons of refrigerating capacity, the sum of $50 for each inspection;

	c.	Refrigeration systems of 300 tons or over of refrigerating capacity, the sum of $100 for each inspection.

	The fees established hereinabove pursuant to the amendatory provisions of P.L.2003, c.117 shall be in effect for State fiscal years 2003-04 and 2004-05, and thereafter may be adjusted by the Commissioner of Labor in accordance with fee schedules adopted by regulation.

	The annual inspection and inspection reports of refrigeration systems by insurance companies licensed to do business within this State and otherwise complying with this chapter shall be accepted in lieu of other inspections. Each insurance company shall file with the commissioner a report of each inspection and shall pay to him a fee of $20 for each annual refrigeration system inspection, to be collected by the insurer from the owner or lessee of the plant inspected.  Such fee as established pursuant to the amendatory provisions of P.L.2003, c.117 shall be in effect for State fiscal years 2003-04 and 2004-05, and thereafter may be adjusted by the Commissioner of Labor in accordance with fee schedules adopted by regulation.  After the owner, lessee or operator has complied with the rules or regulations, a certificate shall be issued by the Mechanical Inspection Bureau, which certificate shall be valid for one year and be the authority for the operation of the refrigeration system during such time. Upon expiration, the certificate shall be renewed by the Mechanical Inspection Bureau if the refrigeration system is found to be in proper condition for operation within the prescribed rules of the Mechanical Inspection Bureau. All fees collected under chapter 7 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor. 

	Amended 1960, c.133, s.4; 1967, c.212, s.1; 1971, c.154, s.15; 1982, c.54, s.5; 1991, c.205, s.12; 2003, c.117, s.7.

34:7-26   Penalties; recovery.

	34:7-26.  Any owner, lessee, seller or operator of any steam or hot water boiler or similar equipment specified in R.S.34:7-14, pressure vessel or refrigeration system who shall sell, use, cause or allow to be used such steam or hot water boiler or similar equipment specified in R.S.34:7-14, pressure vessel or refrigeration system in violation of any provision of this article shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $500.00 nor more than $10,000.00 for each first offense and not less than $500.00 nor more than $25,000.00 for each subsequent offense, to be collected by a civil action or, in the commissioner's discretion, to be imposed by the commissioner as a compromise. All civil actions shall be brought by the Department of Labor as plaintiff, and may be brought in the Special Civil Part, Law Division of the Superior Court of the county, or municipal court of the municipality, wherein such violation shall occur. Any sum collected as a penalty pursuant to this section shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor. 

	Amended 1946, c.92, s.6; 1953, c.33, s.25; 1960, c.133, s.5; 1987, c.366, s.2; 1991, c.205, s.13; 2003, c.117, s.8.

34:8-43.  Definitions  
	1.	As used in P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-43 et al.):
 
	"Accepting employment" means that a job seeker has entered into an agreement with an employer which includes:
 
	(1) The terms and conditions of employment;
 
	(2) The salary or wages and any benefits to be paid to the job seeker as compensation for employment; and
 
	(3) The date, time and place employment will commence.
 
	"A career consulting or outplacement organization" means any person, required to be registered under section 24 of P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-65), providing or rendering services, with or without related products, in connection with advice, instruction, analysis, recommendation or assistance concerning past, present, or future employment or compensation for an individual's time, labor or effort.
 
	"Agent" means any individual who performs any function or activity for or on behalf of any person, the purpose of which is to provide services or products to individuals seeking employment, career guidance or counseling, or employment related services or products.
 
	"Applicant" means any person applying for licensing or registration under P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-43 et al.).
 
	"Attorney General" means the Attorney General of this State or a designee.
 
	"Baby sitter" means and includes any individual under 16 years of age, other than a registered nurse or a licensed nurse, entrusted temporarily with the care of children during the absence of their parents, guardians, or individuals standing in loco parentis to them.  This definition shall not include persons regularly employed by agencies, or institutions operated by or under the control or supervision of this State, or any of its political subdivisions, nor any child care facilities operated for the care of children when the facilities are similarly controlled or supervised.
 
	"Booking agency" means any person who procures, offers, promises, or attempts to procure employment for performing artists, or athletes, not under the jurisdiction of the Athletic Control Board, and who collects a fee for providing those services.
 
	"Bureau" means the Bureau of Employment and Personnel Services in the Division of Consumer Affairs within the Department of Law and Public Safety created pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1989, c.331 (C.52:17B-139.4).
 
	"Career counseling service" means any business that, through its agents or otherwise, procures or represents itself as procuring employment or employment assistance or advertises in any manner the following services for a fee: career counseling; vocational guidance; aptitude, achievement or vocational testing; executive consulting; personnel consulting; career management, evaluation, or planning; the development of resumes and other promotional materials relating to the preparation for employment; or referral services relating to employment or employment qualifications.  A career counseling service shall be licensed as an employment agency pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-43 et al.).  A career counseling service shall not include career consulting or outplacement organizations required to be registered under section 24 of P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-65).
 
	"Chief" means the Chief of the Bureau of Employment and Personnel Services.
 
	"Consulting firm" means any person required to be registered under section 23 of P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-64) that:
 
	(1) Identifies, appraises, refers or recommends individuals to be considered for employment by the employer; and
 
	(2) Is compensated for services solely by payments from the employer and is not, in any instance, compensated, directly or indirectly, by an individual who is identified, appraised, referred or recommended.
 
	"Director" means the Director of the Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Law and Public Safety, or his designee.
 
	"Employer" means a person seeking to obtain individuals to perform services, tasks, or labor for which a salary, wage, or other compensation or benefits are to be paid.
 
	"Employment agency" means any person who, for a fee, charge or commission:
 
	(1) Procures or obtains, or offers, promises or attempts to procure, obtain, or assist in procuring or obtaining employment for a job seeker or employees for an employer; or
 
	(2) Supplies job seekers to employers seeking employees on a part-time or temporary assignment basis who has not filed notification with the Attorney General pursuant to the provisions of section 14 of P.L.1981, c.1 (C.56:8-1.1); or 
 
	(3) Procures, obtains, offers, promises or attempts to procure or obtain employment or engagements for actors, actresses, performing artists, vocalists, musicians or models; or
 
	(4) Acts as a placement firm, career counseling service, or resume service; or
 
	(5) Acts as a nurses' registry.
 
	The director shall have the authority to determine, from time to time, that a particular employment agency or career-related service or product, not otherwise expressly subject to the provisions of P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-43 et al.), is subject to whichever requirements of P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-43 et al.) the director deems appropriate.
 
	"Fee, charge or commission" means any payment of money, or promise to pay money to a person in consideration for performance of any service for which licensure or registration is required by P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-43 et al.), or the excess of money received by a person furnishing employment or job seekers over what he has paid for transportation, transfer of baggage or lodging for a job seeker.  "Fee, charge or commission" shall also include the difference between the amount of money received by any person who either furnishes job seekers or performers for any entertainment, exhibition or performance, or who furnishes baby sitters for any occasion, and the amount paid by the person to the job seekers, performers or baby sitters.
 
	"Job listing service" means any person required to be registered under section 25 of P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-66) who, by advertisement or other means, offers to provide job seekers with a list of employers, a list of job openings or a similar publication, or prepares resumes or lists of applicants for distribution to potential employers, where a fee or other valuable consideration is exacted or attempted to be collected, either directly or indirectly.
 
	"Job seeker" means any individual seeking employment, career guidance or counseling or employment related services or products.
 
	"Job seeker contingent liability" means a provision in an agreement between an employment agency and a job seeker whereby the job seeker may become liable, in whole or in part, to pay a fee, charge or commission of any amount, directly or indirectly, on account of any service rendered by the employment agency.
 
	"Just cause for voluntary termination of employment by a job seeker" means and includes, but is not limited to, cases in which material misrepresentations of the terms or conditions of employment have been relied upon by a job seeker who would not have accepted the employment if the grounds for termination were known before acceptance of the employment.
 
	 "License" means a license issued by the director to any person to:
 
	(1) Carry on the business of an employment agency; and
 
	(2) Perform, as an agent of the agency, any of the functions related to the operation of the agency.
 
	"Performing artist" means a model, musical, theatrical or other entertainment performer employed or engaged individually or in a group.
 
	"Person" means any natural person or legal representative, partnership, corporation, company, trust, business entity or association, and any agent, employee, salesperson, partner, officer, director, member, stockholder, associate, trustee or cestuis que trustent thereof.
 
	"Prepaid computer job matching service" means any person required to be registered under section 25 of P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-66) who is engaged in the business of matching job seekers with employment opportunities, pursuant to an arrangement under which the job seeker is required to pay a fee in advance of, or contemporaneously with, the supplying of the matching, but which does not otherwise involve services for the procurement of employment by the person conducting the service.
 
	"Primary location" means an address used for 90 or more calendar days by a person for the conduct of an activity regulated under P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-43 et al.).
 
	"Principal owner" means any person who, directly or indirectly, holds a beneficial interest or ownership in an applicant or who has the ability to control an applicant.
 
	"Temporary employment" means employment in which the duration is fixed as some definite agreed period of time or by the occurrence of some specified event, either of which shall be clearly stated to all parties at the time of referral to the employment.
 
	"Temporary help service firm" means any person who operates a business which consists of employing individuals directly or indirectly for the purpose of assigning the employed individuals to assist the firm's customers in the handling of the customers' temporary, excess or special workloads, and who, in addition to the payment of wages or salaries to the employed individuals, pays federal social security taxes and State and federal unemployment insurance; carries worker's compensation insurance as required by State law; and sustains responsibility for the actions of the employed individuals while they render services to the firm's customers.  A temporary help service firm is required to comply with the provisions of P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-1 et seq.).

    L.1989, c.331, s.1; amended 2023, c.10, s.13. 

34:8-44.   Disclosure statement; hearing after denial of registration, license; notification, change, disclosure statement  
	3.  In addition to any other procedure, condition or information required by this act:
 
	a.  Every applicant shall file a disclosure statement with the chief stating whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, which for the purposes of this act shall mean a violation of any of the following provisions of the "New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice," Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes as amended and supplemented, or the equivalent under the laws of any other jurisdiction:
 
	(1) Any crime of the first degree;
 
	(2) Any crime which is a second or third degree crime and is a violation of chapter 20 or 21 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes; or
 
	(3) Any other crime which is a violation of N.J.S.2C:5-1, N.J.S.2C:5-2, N.J.S.2C:11-2 through 2C:11-4, N.J.S.2C:12-1, N.J.S.2C:12-3, N.J.S.2C:13-1, N.J.S.2C:14-2, N.J.S.2C:15-1, subsection a. or b. of N.J.S.2C:17-1, subsection a. or b. of N.J.S.2C:17-2, N.J.S.2C:18-2, section 1 of P.L.2024, c.83 (C.2C:18-2.1), section 2 of P.L.2024, c.83 (C.2C:18-2.2), N.J.S.2C:20-1, N.J.S.2C:20-2, N.J.S.2C:20-4, N.J.S.2C:20-5, N.J.S.2C:20-7, section 1 or 2 of P.L.2023, c.101 (C.2C:20-10.1 or C.2C:20-10.2), N.J.S.2C:20-9, N.J.S.2C:21-2 through 2C:21-4, N.J.S.2C:21-6, N.J.S.2C:21-7, N.J.S.2C:21-12, N.J.S.2C:21-14, N.J.S.2C:21-15, or N.J.S.2C:21-19, chapter 27 or 28 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes, N.J.S.2C:30-2, N.J.S.2C:30-3, N.J.S.2C:35-5, N.J.S.2C:35-10, or N.J.S.2C:37-1 through 2C:37-4.
 
	b.	Each disclosure statement may be reviewed and used by the director as grounds for denying licensure or registration, except that in cases in which the provisions of P.L.1968, c.282 (C.2A:168A-1 et seq.) apply, the director shall comply with the requirements of that act.
 
	c.	An applicant who is denied licensure or registration pursuant to this section shall, upon a written request transmitted to the director within 30 calendar days of the denial, be afforded an opportunity for a hearing in the manner provided for contested cases pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	d.	An applicant shall have the continuing duty to provide any assistance or information requested by the director, and to cooperate in any inquiry, investigation, or hearing conducted by the director.
 
	e.	If any of the information required to be included in the disclosure statement changes, or if any additional information should be added after the filing of the statement, the applicant shall provide that information to the chief, in writing, within 30 calendar days of the change or addition.

    L.1989, c.331, s.3; amended 2023, c.101, s.6; 2024, c.83, s.10.

34:8-45.   Applicability of act; licensure or registration required for court action  
     a.   The provisions of this act shall apply to any person engaging in any of the activities regulated by this act including persons whose residence or principal place of business is located outside of this State.

      b.   A person shall not bring or maintain an action in any court of this State for the collection of a fee, charge or commission for the performance of any of the activities regulated by this act without alleging and proving licensure or registration, as appropriate, at the time the alleged cause of action arose.  

    L.1989, c.331, s.4.  

34:8-45.1  Consideration of Health Care Service Firm; conditions for registration; terms defined.
  	1. a. Notwithstanding any other law or regulation to the contrary, an employment agency required to be licensed pursuant to P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-43 et al.), or any other firm, company, business, agency, or other entity that is not a home health care agency licensed pursuant to P.L.1971, c.136 (C.26:2H-1 et seq.) or a hospice licensed pursuant to P.L.1997, c.78 (C.26:2H-79 et seq.), which employs, places, arranges for the placement of, or in any way refers, an individual to provide companion services, health care services, or personal care services in the personal residence of a person with a disability or who is age 60 or older, regardless of the title by which the provider of the services is known, shall be registered as a Health Care Service Firm and shall be subject to the rules and regulations governing Health Care Service Firms adopted by the Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Law and Public Safety.  The Division of Consumer Affairs is authorized to enforce the health care service firm registration requirement, and the provisions of P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-43 et al.), upon any person whose operations are subject to this section, whether the operations include the direct employment of individuals, the use of an Internet website or application, or any other process or business model. 
 
	As used in this section:
 
	"Companion services" means non-medical, basic supervision and socialization services which do not include assistance with activities of daily living, and which are provided in the individual's home. Companion services may include the performance of household chores.
 
	"Health care services" means any services rendered for the purpose of maintaining or restoring an individual's physical or mental health or any health-related services, and for which a license or certification is required as a pre-condition to the rendering of such services.
 
	"Personal care services" means services performed by licensed or certified personnel for the purpose of assisting an individual with activities of daily living that may involve physical contact. Services include, but are not limited to, bathing, toileting, transferring, dressing, grooming, and assistance with ambulation, exercise, or other aspects of personal hygiene.
 
	b.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2014, c.29)
 
	c.	As a condition of being registered under P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-43 et al.), a health care service firm shall obtain within 12 months of registration accreditation from an accrediting body that is recognized by the Commissioner of Human Services as an accrediting body for homemaker agencies participating in the Medicaid program, as set forth at N.J.A.C.10:60-1.2.  For purposes of accreditation pursuant to this subsection, the accrediting body shall apply the standards set forth in N.J.A.C.13:37-14.1 et seq. and N.J.A.C.13:45B-13.1 et seq., as applicable.
 
	d.	As a condition of registration under P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-43 et al.) :
 
	(1)	All health care service firms shall annually submit to the director financial statements prepared by the firm, which shall be consistent with the firm's tax filing with the State for the year covered by the financial statements.
 
	(2)	In addition to the financial statements required pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection, a health care service firm that receives more than $250,000 for the provision of New Jersey Medicaid Personal Care Assistance services shall submit to the director an audit the third calendar year after the date of registration or on December 30, 2022, whichever date is later, and every third year thereafter.
 
	(3)	In addition to the financial statements required pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection, a health care service firm that generates $10 million or more in gross income in a year shall submit to the director an audit for that year, except that an audit required by this paragraph shall not be required to be submitted prior to December 30, 2022.
 
	(4) (a) In addition to the financial statements required pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection, a health care service firm that receives less than $250,000 for the provision of New Jersey Medicaid Personal Care Assistance services and that generates $1 million or more, but less than $10 million, in gross income in a year shall submit to the director a report for that year, except that a report required by this paragraph shall not be required to be submitted prior to December 30, 2022. The report shall be prepared by an independent third-party practitioner based on a review of the firm's financial statements and records, general management, and internal controls, which review shall be conducted in compliance with the standards and procedures developed by the director pursuant to subsection b. of section 2 of P.L.2014, c.29 (C.34:8-45.1a). 
 
	(b)	If the division makes adverse findings against a firm upon review of a report submitted pursuant to subparagraph (a) of this paragraph, the director shall order such corrective action as the director deems appropriate, and, upon compliance with or completion of the corrective action, shall require the firm to obtain a separate review of the firm's data for that year, which shall be conducted by a different independent third-party practitioner than the one that furnished the original report, and shall be based on the standards and procedures developed by the director pursuant to subsection b. of section 2 of P.L.2014, c.29 (C.34:8-45.1a).  The firm shall additionally be required to submit to the director an audit for the calendar year next following the year for which the adverse finding was made, regardless of the firm's gross income for the year.
 
	An audit required pursuant to this paragraph shall be conducted by a certified public accountant licensed by the State of New Jersey and shall encompass an examination of the subject firm's financial records, financial statements, the general management of its operations, and its internal control systems.  The audit shall include an audit report with an unqualified opinion and shall be accompanied by any management letters prepared by the auditor in connection with the audit commenting on the internal controls or management practices of the health care service firm. The audit shall be divided into two components: compliance and financial.  The compliance component of the audit shall evaluate the firm's compliance with relevant laws and regulations governing health care service firms.  The financial component shall include an audit of the financial statements and accompanying notes, as specified in the Statements on Auditing Standards issued by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants.
 
	e.	In addition to any other penalty provided by law, a person shall be liable for a penalty of $500 per day for each day that the person continues to operate a firm without registering as required under this section.  The penalty shall be collected by the Director of the Division of Consumer Affairs in a summary proceeding in accordance with the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	L.2002, c.126, s.1; amended 2014, c.29, s.1; 2019, c.48, s.1; 2020, c.132, s.1.

34:8-45.1a  Memorandum of understanding; standards, procedures for accreditation.
 	2. a. The Director of the Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Law and Public Safety shall enter into a memorandum of understanding with an accrediting body chosen by the director through appropriate procurement processes authorized to accredit a health care service firm pursuant to subsection c. of section 1 of P.L.2002, c.126 (C.34:8-45.1).  The memorandum of understanding shall establish the standards for accreditation and for reporting the results of audits performed pursuant to subsection d. of section 1 of P.L.2002, c.126 to the Division.
 
	b.	The director shall, in consultation with representatives of health care service firms registered with the division, develop an agreed-upon set of standards and procedures for independent third party practitioners to review health care service firm financial statements and records, general management, and internal controls pursuant to paragraph (4) of subsection d. of section 1 of P.L.2002, c.126 (C.34:8-45.1).  At a minimum, the standards and procedures developed pursuant to this subsection shall address:
 
	(1)	the minimum educational, training, and professional certification qualifications for independent third party practitioners performing reviews of health care service firm financial statements and records;
 
	(2)	the data points and metrics to be included in a review of a health care service firm's financial statements and records, general management, and internal controls which shall include, at a minimum, verification of the accreditation and licensing status of the firm; review of the firm's ownership structure; review of contracts and funding sources as well as payments, cash transactions, and reconciliation of account balances; review of the adequacy of the firm's insurance coverage; review of billing practices and invoices to ensure the adequacy of supporting documentation and the inclusion of appropriate authorizations; review of any history of litigation involving the firm, regulatory actions taken against the firm, or past audits of the firm; review of the use of independent contractors; and review of large transactions and liabilities that exceed a specified percentage of the firm's total billings or liabilities, as appropriate; and
 
	(3)	the thresholds and requirements for the division to make an adverse finding and take corrective action against a firm based upon a review of an independent third party report concerning the firm's financial statements and records.
 
	L.2014, c.29, s.2; amended 2020, c.132, s.2.

34:8-45.1b  Report to Governor, Legislature.
 
	3.	No more than three years after the enactment of P.L.2014, c.29, the Director of the Division of Consumer Affairs shall submit a written report to the Governor and to the Legislature pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), providing a comprehensive review and analysis on the effectiveness of the licensure, accreditation, and audit provisions of P.L.2014, c.29 and recommendations for any additional resources necessary to make such provisions more effective.
 
	L.2014, c.29, s.3.

34:8-45.1c  Rules, regulations.
 
 	4.	The Director of the Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Law and Public Safety, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), shall adopt rules and regulations necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act.
 
	L.2014, c.29, s.4.

34:8-45.2   Rules, regulations.

	2.	The Director of the Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Law and Public Safety shall, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), adopt rules and regulations necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act.

	L.2002,c.126,s.2.

34:8-46.     Cases where act not applicable  
     The provisions of this act shall not apply to:

      a.   A teachers' registry conducted by an association of certified teachers, whose membership is not less than 10 certified teachers, incorporated as a nonprofit organization under the laws of New Jersey, and operated under the supervision of a teacher recognized and approved as a certified teacher by the Department of Education of this State, or by the duly established authority of the state in which the employment is procured, which registry procures positions only for certified teachers who are recognized and approved as certified teachers by the Department of Education of this State; 

      b.   Any State, federal, municipal or charitable agency which does not charge fees;

      c.   Any department or bureau which is maintained by persons for the purpose of securing help for themselves and does not charge fees to job seekers.  The exemption from the provisions of this act provided by this subsection shall not be construed to exempt associations or organizations of employers from the requirement to procure the licenses or registration otherwise required under this act;  

    d.   The procuring of employment by any labor union for any of its members in any job coming under the jurisdiction of the union; provided, that no fee is charged any member for being furnished employment or information where employment may be procured;  

    e.   Any nurses' registry operated by any association of registered nurses, whose membership is not less than 10 registered nurses, duly incorporated as a nonprofit organization under the laws of New Jersey, and operated under the supervision of a registered nurse authorized to practice in the State of New Jersey; except that no nurses' registry shall furnish help or employment to anyone other than a registered nurse, a practical nurse licensed by the State, or a person, other than a baby sitter, who is approved by the registered nurse in charge of the nurses' registry and is sent by the agency to an employer to assist nonprofessionally in the care of the sick or ailing;      f.   Any association of farmers which:

      (1)  Is duly incorporated on a nonprofit basis, under the laws of New Jersey;

      (2)  Is certified to the director by the Secretary of Agriculture of New Jersey as being an association of bona fide farmers of New Jersey;

      (3)  Does not furnish job seekers to employers other than members of their association; and

      (4)  Does not charge fees to any job seeker for being furnished employment or information where employment may be procured.

      g.   Any person who furnishes farmers with field or harvest workers to be employed on a seasonal basis, and charges no fee either directly or indirectly to any worker, if the wages of the workers are paid directly to the workers by the farmers who employ them.  

    The exemptions established in this subsection and subsection f. of this section shall not apply to any person who induces or attempts to induce a person working under contract with an employer to leave the employment in which he is working under that contract before the contract is completed or the worker is no longer responsible for its completion; 

      h.   Any temporary help service firm which does not:

      (1)  Charge a fee or liquidated charge to any individual employed by the firm or in connection with employment by the firm;

      (2)  Prevent or inhibit, by contract, any of the individuals it employs from becoming employed by any other person;

  

    (3)  Knowingly send individuals it employs to, or knowingly continue to render services to, any plant or office where a strike or lockout is in progress for the purpose of replacing individuals who are striking or who are locked out.  Any person conducting a temporary help service firm which knowingly sends its employed individuals to, or knowingly continues to render services to, a plant or office where a strike or lockout is in progress for the purpose of replacing those individuals who are striking or who are locked out or, directly or indirectly counsels, aids or abets that action shall be liable to a penalty of $1,000 upon each occurrence. The penalty shall be sued for, and received by and in the name of the Attorney General and shall be collected and enforced by summary proceedings pursuant to "the penalty enforcement law" (N.J.S.2A:58-1 et seq.).  

    This exclusion shall apply to temporary help service firms operated by any person who also operates an employment agency as long as the businesses are independently operated as prescribed by rules and regulations promulgated by the Attorney General;  

    i.   Any news periodical which contains listings of or classified advertisements for jobs, positions, employers, or job seekers where the periodical also contains news stories of general interest, articles or essays of opinion, features and other advertising and which is offered to the general public for sale at a nominal fee;  

    j.   Any nonprofit educational, religious or charitable institution which provides career counseling, job placement or other employment-related services, skills evaluation, skills analysis, or testing for vocational ability in order to develop a vocational profile to counsel individuals and recommend placement opportunities as part of the fulfillment of its educational, religious or charitable purpose;  

    k.   Any copying, printing, duplicating or resume preparation service which in no instance charges a fee, directly or indirectly, for providing any employment-related service other than copying, printing, duplicating or assisting in arranging the layout of a resume.  

    L.1989, c.331, s.5.  

34:8-47.     Application for employment agency license  
     a.   An application for an employment agency license required by this act shall be made in writing to the chief in the form prescribed by the director. The application shall state the complete address, including street and number, of the building and place where the agency is to be conducted and shall enumerate the types of services which the applicant intends to provide.  The applicant shall furnish any additional information as may be required by the director for the purpose of investigating the character and responsibility of the applicant and its principal owners or its officers and directors.  

    b.   The chief shall act upon any application for a license within 30 days after receiving it, except that the director may extend the maximum time for acting upon an application to 60 days for the purpose of allowing an applicant to submit additional information or if a hearing on an application is required.  

    c.   The director shall provide for the issuance of, and shall prescribe the form for, the licenses to be issued pursuant to this act.

      d.   An employment agency license shall not be transferred by the licensee to another person or amended without the written consent of the director and the payment of the fee prescribed by this act.

      e.   All licenses shall expire on January 1 of the year following their issuance.

  

    L.1989, c.331, s.6.  

34:8-48.     Application for agent's license; cancellation of license; issuance of new license; conditional license  
     a.   An application for an agent's license shall state the name and address of the applicant and any other name used by the applicant in the last six years, the name of the holder of the employment agency license by whom the applicant expects to be employed, and any other information concerning the applicant required by the chief to assist in the determination of the applicant's qualifications to provide the services for which the applicant would be licensed.

  

    b.   An agent's license shall not be issued until the holder of the employment agency license named in the application confirms to the chief in writing that the applicant is or will be employed by the employment agency.  A license issued to an agent of an employment agency shall not authorize employment by any other employment agency.

  

    c.   An applicant for an agent's license under this act shall, by means of whatever written examination is required by the director, reasonably satisfy the chief that the applicant:

  

    (1)  Has knowledge of the provisions of this act and applicable rules and regulations which is sufficient to ensure that the applicant is able to comply with the applicable laws and regulations; and

  

    (2)  Has knowledge of and experience in the fields of employment specified in the application which is sufficient to ensure that the applicant is able to render adequate and efficient service to job seekers.

  

    d.   An applicant for an agent's license shall furnish information which will reasonably satisfy the chief that the applicant has sufficient knowledge of employment opportunities, career guidance or counseling, or employment-related services or products which the applicant intends to provide to job seekers.

  

    e.   Upon the termination of the employment of the holder of an agent's license, the holder of the employment agency license by whom the holder of the agent's license has been employed shall promptly notify the chief of the termination of employment.  The agent's license shall thereupon be canceled and the agent entitled to the issuance of a new license for the unexpired term of the old license without payment of an additional fee upon the written request of the agent, and the holder of the employment agency license who is to be named in the new license as the new employer, except  that the director may refuse to issue the new license for any good cause shown within the provisions of this act.

  

    f.   For the purpose of enabling individuals to secure experience and knowledge necessary to qualify them as an agent, the director may waive any of the requirements of this section which the director deems proper and issue a conditional license authorizing the holder to perform functions requiring a license, when acting under the direct supervision of a duly qualified licensed agent.  The conditional license shall remain in effect for not more than one year.

  

    g.   The director shall provide for the issuance of, and shall prescribe the form for, the licenses authorized to be issued pursuant to this act.

  

    h.   The director may require licenses to be posted and identification cards to be carried.

  

    i.   All licenses shall expire on January 1 of the year following their issuance.

  

    L.1989, c.331, s.7.  

34:8-49.     Posting of bond as surety; suit on bond; revocation of license  
     a.   Before an employment agency license is issued, the applicant shall post with the director a bond in the amount of $10,000, with a duly authorized surety company as surety, to be approved by the director.

      b.   The bond shall be retained by the chief until 90 days after either the expiration or revocation of the employment agency license, as appropriate.

  

    c.   The bond shall be payable to the State of New Jersey and upon the condition that the person applying for the license will comply with this act and will pay all damages occasioned to any person by reason of any misrepresentative, deceptive, or misleading act or practice, or any unlawful act or omission of any licensed person, agents, or employees, while acting within the scope of employment, made, committed or omitted in the business conducted under the license, or caused by any violation of this act in carrying on the business for which the license is granted.  

    d.   In case of a breach of the condition of any bond, application may be made to the director by the person injured by the breach for leave to sue upon the bond, which shall be granted by the director if it is proven that the condition of the bond has been breached and that the person has been injured. The person obtaining leave to sue shall be furnished with a certified copy of the bond and shall be authorized to institute suit on the bond in the person's name for the recovery of damages sustained by the breach.  

    e.   If at any time, in the opinion of the director, the surety on any bond shall become irresponsible, the person holding the license shall, upon notice from the director, give a new bond, subject to the provisions of this section.  The failure to give a new bond within 10 days after notice, at the direction of the director, shall operate as revocation of the license, and the license shall be returned to the director.  

    L.1989, c.331, s.8.  

34:8-50.     Annual fees  
     Any license issued in accordance with this act shall be issued upon an annual basis.  The fees therefor shall be nonrefundable and shall be charged as follows:

      a.   Employment agency license. . . . . . . . . .            $250

      b.   Agent's license . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             25

      c.   Transfer of agent's license . . . . . . . . . . .         10

  

    L.1989, c.331, s.9.  

34:8-51.     Requirements  
     a.   Every employment agency shall:

      (1)  Keep and make available to the chief, or a designee, during regular business hours, records containing information regarding services provided, products sold to job seekers or employers, and fees charged or collected, and other information required by rules and regulations to enable the chief to determine the status of compliance with the provisions of this act;  

    (2)  Require all job seekers applying for positions of trust or work with private families to furnish the agency with names and addresses of individuals available as character references, and shall communicate, orally or in writing, with at least one of the individuals given by the job seeker as a character reference.  If the job seeker has not furnished the name of any individuals available as character references, or if no favorable statement has been received from a character reference, the agency shall so advise the prospective employer to whom the job seeker is referred.  This information shall be written upon the referral slip given by the agency to the job seeker to present to the prospective employer. The written result of the verification to determine the character and responsibility of any job seeker shall be kept on file in the agency subject to examination by the chief.  If the employer voluntarily waives, in writing, a verification of references, the licensed agency shall not be required to make the verification; 

      (3)  Give to each job seeker a copy of every writing the job seeker has signed, the form of which complies with P.L.1980, c.125 (C.56:12-1 et seq.).

  

    (4)  Furnish to each job seeker, who is sent to a prospective employer for an interview concerning the job seeker's qualifications or future employment in a job for which no order has been given to the agency, a card or paper containing the names of the job seeker and prospective employer, the address of the prospective employer and any other particulars the agency may determine are necessary.  In each case, there shall be printed in bold-faced type on the card or paper the following:  

    "This card of introduction is given to . . . . . . . . . . .  (name of job seeker) with the understanding that there is no obligation to this employment agency for any fee until, as a result of the services rendered by this agency, . . . . . . . . .  (name of job seeker) is employed in a job with respect to which the agency received a bona fide order from an employer. . . . . . . . . . . (name of job seeker) has agreed to pay the fee under the foregoing conditions if the fee is not paid by an employer."  

    (5)  Post in the agency in the places that the chief, or a designee, directs, an abstract of this act and the rules and regulations promulgated by the director.  The chief shall provide the abstracts and charge for the printing of these abstracts.  

    b.   In addition to the requirements set forth in subsection a., each employment agency which charges or may charge the job seeker a fee shall:

      (1)  File with the chief, for the chief's approval, a schedule of fees proposed to be charged for any service rendered or product sold to job seekers and adhere to the schedule in charging for these services or products.  The chief shall not approve the fee schedule unless the chief is satisfied that the fee schedule is on a form which makes the schedule reasonably understandable by job seekers and that the fee schedule is in compliance with all other provisions of this section.  The schedule of fees may thereafter be changed or supplemented, by filing an amended or supplemental schedule with the bureau.  The changes shall not become effective until approval has been granted by the chief and the amended or supplemental fee schedule has been posted for not less than seven days in a conspicuous manner in the office of the agency.  It shall be unlawful for any employment agency to charge, demand, collect or receive a greater fee for any service rendered or product sold to a job seeker than is specified in the most recent schedule filed with the bureau; 

      (2)  Post the schedule of fees in a conspicuous manner in the office of the agency using forms provided by the chief;

      (3)  Compute fees paid by a job seeker seeking employment on the basis of permanent employment, unless the employment is temporary employment.  Where temporary employment merges into permanent employment, or where a job seeker accepts permanent employment within 30 days after the termination of temporary employment, the permanent employment may be considered the result of the references to the temporary position and the fee may be based on the permanent employment with due credit given for the payment made for the temporary employment;  

    (4)  Not charge to a job seeker who obtains employment and who is discharged without cause or who voluntarily terminates employment for just cause more than 1% of the scheduled fee for each day worked.  For purposes of this paragraph, the employment agency shall repay to any job seeker so discharged or terminated any excess of the maximum fee in accordance with the fee schedule, allowing three days' time to determine that the termination was not due to any fault on the part of the job seeker.  The employment agency may, however, by separate written agreement between the employment agency and the job seeker, retain the fee or any part of the fee which has been paid for the job from which the job seeker has been discharged without cause or terminated, if the agency furnishes the job seeker with another job and allows due credit for the retained payment; 

      (5)  Not charge a job seeker who either fails to report for duty after accepting employment or voluntarily terminates employment without just cause within 30 days more than 30% of the scheduled fee;

      (6)  Obtain a bona fide order for employment prior to collecting any fee from a job seeker or sending out a job seeker to any place of employment. Except as may be otherwise provided in rules and regulations, no charge or advance fee of any kind shall be charged, demanded, collected, or received by the agency from a job seeker seeking employment until employment has been obtained by or through the efforts of the agency;  

    (7)  Give to every job seeker from whom a fee is received, at the time payment is received, a receipt which shall state the name of the job seeker, the name and address of the employment agency and its agent, the date and amount of the fee and the purpose for which it was paid; and  

    (8)  Furnish each job seeker, who is sent to a prospective employer, with a card or similar paper containing the nature of the prospective employment, the names of the job seeker and prospective employer, and the address of the employer.  

    L.1989, c.331, s.10.  

34:8-52.     Violations  
     It shall be a violation of the provisions of this act for any person to:

      a.   Open, conduct, or maintain, either directly or indirectly, an employment agency or perform any of the functions of an employment agency without first obtaining a valid employment agency license from the director and complying with all requirements of this act regarding agents' licenses for the agents of the agency.  A license shall not authorize the furnishing of help or employment or the furnishing of information where help or employment may be procured in the capacity of baby sitters.  A license shall not authorize activities of any person other than the individual person or persons holding the license, except that a corporation may be the holder of an employment agency license.  A license shall not authorize activities at any place other than the place designated in the license except upon issuance of a special permit by the director.  A licensee may engage in activities requiring registration under sections 23, 24 and 25 of this act if it complies with the requirements of those sections. 

      b.   Conduct business, or any phase thereof, in any room or place where:

      (1)  An individual sleeps or conducts his or her household affairs, unless the business premises have separate ingress and egress from the residential premises;

      (2)  Premises are rented or leased on an hourly, daily, weekly, or other transient basis except as otherwise provided by regulation;

      c.   Charge or accept payment of any fees which are greater than those shown by any schedule of fees which is required to be filed with the chief and posted in the agency;

      d.   Accept and receive any gift as, or in lieu of, a fee;

      e.   Divide or offer to divide fees, directly or indirectly, with prospective or actual employers or any agent, employee, or representative;

      f.   Accept payment of a fee or attempt to collect any fee for a service rendered or product sold where employment has not been accepted, except that the requirements of this subsection shall not apply to any career counseling service if that service receives no prepayment for services or products and provides services or products strictly on an hourly basis, with no financial obligation required of the job seeker beyond the hourly fee for the services or products rendered; 

      g.   Falsely state or imply to a job seeker that the person is seeking to obtain individuals to perform services, tasks or labor for which salary, wages, or other compensation is to be paid;

      h.   Send or cause to be sent any individual to any place used for unlawful purposes;

      i.   Place or assist in placing an individual under 18 years of age into employment which is in violation of the laws of this State;

      j.   Induce or compel any individual to enter the agency, for any purpose, by the use of force or by taking forcible possession of the individual's property;

      k.   Publish or cause to be published any deceptive or misleading notice or advertisement.  All advertisements of any agency by any means, including, but not limited to, cards, circulars or signs, or in newspapers and other publications, and all letterheads, receipts and blanks, shall contain the name and address of the agency;  

    l.   Make a deceptive or misleading representation to a job seeker or employer, or enter into any contract with any job seeker or employer or induce or attempt to induce any job seeker or employer to make any agreement, the provisions of which contract or agreement, if fulfilled, violate this act; 

      m.   Require that a job seeker enter into a contract with the agency or any specific lender for the purpose of fulfilling a financial obligation to the employment agency;

      n.   Demand, charge, collect, or receive a fee unless in accordance with the terms of a written contract or agreement with a job seeker;

      o.   Engage in any act or practice in violation of P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-1 et seq.) and regulations promulgated thereunder.

  

    L.1989, c.331, s.11.  

34:8-53.     Refusal or revocation; suspension; renewal  
     The director may refuse to issue, and may revoke, any license for failure to comply with, or violation of, the provisions of this act or for any other good cause shown, within the meaning and purpose of this act.  A refusal or revocation shall not be made except upon reasonable notice to, and opportunity to be heard by, the applicant or licensee.  The director may, if he finds it to be in the public interest, suspend a license for any period of time that he determines to be proper or assess a penalty in lieu of suspension, or both, and may issue a new license, notwithstanding the revocation of a prior license, provided that he finds the applicant to have become entitled to the new license.  

    L.1989, c.331, s.12.  

34:8-54.     Powers of director  
     To accomplish the objectives and carry out the duties prescribed by this act, the director may issue subpoenas to any person, administer an oath or affirmation to any person, conduct hearings in aid of any investigation or inquiry, promulgate rules and regulations, and prescribe forms as may be necessary.  

    L.1989, c.331, s.13.  

34:8-55.     Investigation  
     Whenever it appears to the director that a person has engaged in, is engaging in, or is about to engage in, any practice declared to be unlawful by this act, or whenever the director believes it to be in the public interest that an investigation should be made to ascertain whether a person has engaged in, is engaging in, or is about to engage in, any unlawful practice, the director may:  

    a.   Require the person to file, on forms prescribed by him, a written statement or report, under oath or otherwise, concerning the facts and circumstances regarding the practice which is under investigation;

      b.   Examine under oath any person in connection with the practice under investigation;

      c.   Examine any record, book, document, account, contract, or paper as he deems necessary; and

      d.   Pursuant to an order of the Superior Court, impound any record, book, document, account, contract, or paper that is produced in accordance with this act, and retain it until the completion of all proceedings in connection with the materials produced.  

    L.1989, c.331, s.14.  

34:8-56.     Service of notice or subpoena  
     Service by the director of any notice requiring a person to file a statement or report, or of a subpoena upon the person, shall be made personally within this State, but if this cannot be done, substituted service may be made in the following manner: 

      a.   Personal service outside this State;

      b.   The mailing by registered or certified mail to the last known place of business or residence inside or outside the State of the person;

      c.   As to any person other than an individual, in accordance with the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey pertaining to service of process, provided, however, that service shall be made by the director; or

      d.   Any service as the Superior Court may direct in lieu of personal service within the State.

  

    L.1989, c.331, s.15.  

34:8-57.     Order from Superior Court  
     If a person fails or refuses to file any statement or report requested by the director, or obey any subpoena issued by the director, the director may seek and obtain an order from the Superior Court:

      a.   Adjudging the person in contempt of court;

      b.   Granting injunctive relief, without notice, restraining any and all acts and practices for which a license is required in the provisions of this act;

      c.   Directing the payment of reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of the investigation and suit; and

      d.   Granting any other relief as may be required, until the person files the statement or report, or obeys the subpoena.

  

    L.1989, c.331, s.16.  

34:8-58.     Injunction; other court actions  
     a.   Whenever it appears to the director that a person has engaged in, is engaging in, or is about to engage in, any practice which is a violation of the provisions of this act, the director may seek and obtain in a summary action in the Superior Court an injunction prohibiting the person from continuing the practices or engaging therein or doing any acts in furtherance thereof.  

    b.   In addition to any other remedy, the court may: enjoin an individual from managing or owning any business organization within this State, and from serving as an officer, director, trustee, member of any executive board or similar governing body, principal, manager, stockholder owning 10% or more of the aggregate outstanding capital stock of all classes of any corporation doing business in this State; vacate or annul the charter of a corporation created by or under the laws of this State; revoke the certificate of authority to do business in this State of a foreign corporation; and revoke any licenses issued pursuant to law to the person whenever the charter, authority, or license have been or may be used to engage in or to further unlawful practices.  The court may grant any relief as may be necessary to prevent the use or employment by a person of any unlawful practices, or which may be necessary to restore to any person in interest any moneys or property, real or personal, which may have been acquired by means of any practices declared to be unlawful.  

    L.1989, c.331, s.17.  

34:8-59.     Action authorized after finding of violation  
     Whenever it appears to the director that a person has engaged in, is engaging in, or is about to engage in, any practice which is a violation of the provisions of this act, the director may hold hearings on the violation and upon finding the violation to have been committed, may enter an order: 

      a.   Directing the person to cease and desist or refrain from committing the practice in the future;

      b.   Directing the person to restore to any person in interest any moneys or property, real or personal, which may have been acquired by means of any unlawful practice;

      c.   Assessing reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of investigation and suit;

      d.   Assessing a penalty in the amount authorized by the provisions of section 19 of this act, which the director deems proper under the circumstances; and

  

    e.   Directing the person to reimburse the job seeker for transportation expenses if no employment of the kind applied for exists at the place to which the job seeker is sent and the person did not have a bona fide order, either oral or written, from the prospective employer.  

    L.1989, c.331, s.18.  

34:8-60.     Penalties for violation of cease and desist order  
     Whenever it appears to the director that a person against whom a cease and desist order has been entered has violated the order, the director may bring a summary proceeding in the Superior Court based upon the violation.  A person found to have violated a cease and desist order shall be liable for civil penalties in the amount of not less than $1,000 or more than $25,000 for each violation of the order, together with reasonable attorneys' fees and cost of investigation and suit.  If any person fails to pay a civil penalty imposed by the court for violation of a cease and desist order, the court imposing the penalty is authorized, upon application of the director, to grant any relief which may be obtained under any statute or court rule governing the collection and enforcement of penalties.  

    L.1989, c.331, s.19.  

34:8-61.     Additional penalties  
     In addition to any other penalty provided by law, a person who violates any of the provisions of this act shall be liable for a penalty of not more than $2,000 for the first offense and not more than $5,000 for the second and each subsequent offense.  

    L.1989, c.331, s.20.  

34:8-62.     Director to recover attorneys' fees and costs  
     In any action or proceeding brought under this act the director may recover reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of investigation and suit.

  

    L.1989, c.331, s.21.  

34:8-63.     Certificate of indebtedness to clerk  
     Upon the failure of a person to comply within 10 days after service of any order of the director directing payment of penalties, costs, attorneys' fees, reimbursement, or restoration of moneys or property, the director may issue a certificate to the clerk of the Superior Court that the person is indebted to the State for these payments.  A copy of the certificate shall be served upon the person against whom the order was entered.  The clerk shall immediately enter upon his record of docketed judgments the name of the person so indebted, a designation of the statutes under which the payments are imposed, the amount of each payment imposed, and a listing of property ordered restored, and the date of the certification.  The entry shall have the same force and effect as the entry of the docketed judgment in the Superior Court. The entry, however, shall be without prejudice to the right of appeal to the Appellate Division of the Superior Court from the final order of the director.

    L.1989, c.331, s.22.  

34:8-64.     Registration of consulting firm; revocation; suspension  
     a.   Every consulting firm operating within this State shall, within 60 days following the effective date of this act and annually thereafter, register in writing with the chief on a form prescribed by regulation.

  

    b.   Each registration form shall state the firm's name, and any fictitious or trade name used in its operation, each primary location, including street and street number of the building and place where its business is to be conducted, and the names and residence addresses of its principal owners or officers.  

    c.   The director shall establish by rule and collect an annual fee from firm registrants, which shall not be more than the fee paid by employment agencies, to be used to the extent necessary to defray expenses incurred by the bureau in the performance of its duties under this section.  

    d.   In addition to any act or practice in violation of P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-1 et seq.), it shall be a violation of this act for any registrant or its agent to:

  

    (1)  Make, or cause to be made, publish or cause to be published, any false, misleading, or deceptive advertisement or representation concerning the services or products that the registrant provides to job seekers.  

    (2)  Disseminate information to a job seeker knowing or recklessly disregarding information that:

      (a)  The job does not exist or the job seeker is not qualified for the job;

      (b)  The job has been described or advertised by or on behalf of the registered firm in a false, misleading, or deceptive manner;

      (c)  The registrant has not confirmed the availability of the job at the time of dissemination of the information; or

      (d)  The registrant has not obtained written or oral permission to list the job from the employer or an authorized agent of the employer.

      e.   The director may refuse to issue, and may revoke, any registration for failure to comply with, or violation of, the provisions of this section or for any other good cause shown, within the meaning and purpose of this section.  A refusal or revocation shall not be made except upon reasonable notice to, and opportunity to be heard by, the applicant or registrant.  

    f.   The director, instead of revoking a registration, may suspend the registration for a period of time determined to be proper, or assess a penalty in lieu of suspension, or both, and may issue a new registration notwithstanding the revocation of a prior registration, provided that the applicant is found to have become entitled to the new registration. 

      g.   A registered consulting firm shall be permitted to provide temporary help services in the course of its business.

      h.   A registered firm may engage in activities requiring registration under sections 24 and 25 of this act if it complies with the requirements of those sections.

      i.   Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this section or rules and regulations promulgated by the director shall be subject to the provisions of sections 14 through 22 of this act.

  

    L.1989, c.331, s.23.  

34:8-65.     Registration of career consulting or outplacement organization; fee; bond; explanation of product or services; cancellation of contract; complaint  
     a.   Every career consulting or outplacement organization operating within this State shall, within 60 days following the effective date of this act and annually thereafter, register in writing with the chief on a form prescribed by regulation.  

    b.   Each registration form shall state the organization's name, and any fictitious or trade name used in its operation, each primary location, including street and street number of the building and place where its business is to be conducted, and the names and residence addresses of its principal owners or officers.  

    c.   In addition to registering pursuant to this section, each career consulting or outplacement organization shall notify the chief, in writing, whenever it utilizes any location, including mobile units, other than its primary location for services rendered to job seekers.  

    d.   Every agent, duly authorized and empowered by the owner of the registered organization to solicit business or otherwise act as an agent of the registered organization, shall, within 60 days following the effective date of this act and annually thereafter, register, in writing, with the chief on a form prescribed by regulation.  

    e.   The director shall establish by rule and collect an annual fee from organization and agent registrants, which shall not be more than that paid by employment agencies or agents, to be used to the extent necessary to defray all expenses incurred by the bureau in the performance of its duties under this section.  

    f.   Each registered organization shall, at the time of its initial registration with the director and annually thereafter, post a bond in the amount of $10,000 with a duly authorized surety company as surety, to be approved by the director.  The bond shall be retained by the chief until 90 days after either the expiration or revocation of the registration. The director shall promulgate rules and regulations setting forth the terms and conditions of this bond and supply the prospective registrant firm with an approved form.  

    g.   Every career consulting or outplacement organization registered under this section shall provide each prospective job seeker desiring its services or products with a written explanation of each service or product which it provides or makes available to job seekers and the price for each service or product which shall be made available to the job seeker at the time of the signing of any contract for services or products.  

    h.   Any job seeker who signs a contract with any registered organization shall have the right to cancel the contract within three calendar days of the time of its signing and, upon the return of any materials provided to the job seeker by the registered organization, shall be entitled to receive a full refund of any fee, charge, or commission paid by the job seeker.  

    i.   Not more than one-third of any fee, charge or commission shall be collected by the registered organization for its services or products more than 60 days in advance of the date on which the registrant provides its services or products as stated in its contract.  

    j.   Every registered organization shall respond, in writing, within nine calendar days of receipt of any written complaint by a job seeker, stating the registered organization's position with respect to the complaint.  Copies of a job seeker's complaint and the response shall be kept in a separate file by the registered organization for a period of one year after the date of the resolution of the complaint, or two years after the date of the complaint, whichever is later.  

    k.   If a demand for refund is denied by a registered organization and if the denial is found to have been in bad faith or if the registered organization fails to respond to a demand for a refund, a court in an action instituted by the job seeker shall award damages to the job seeker in an amount not to exceed $200 in addition to actual damages sustained by the job seeker, together with reasonable attorneys' fees, filing fees, and reasonable costs of suit.  If the registered organization refuses or is unable to pay the amount awarded by the court, the award may be satisfied out of the registered organization's bond. 

      l.   A registered organization shall not:

      (1)  Negotiate a job seeker's compensation and demand or receive a percentage therefrom as a fee, charge, or commission unless the percentage fee, charge, or commission has been disclosed to and accepted by the job seeker in the contract;

      (2)  Contract with employers on behalf of a job seeker; or

      (3)  Solicit job openings from employers or otherwise act as an intermediary for job seekers.

      m.   Every contract for career consulting or outplacement organizations shall be in writing.  A copy of the contract shall be given to the job seeker at the time the job seeker signs the contract.  The contract shall contain all of the following: 

      (1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the organization and the name of the organization's agent.

      (2)  The name and address of the individual signing the contract and the job seeker to whom the services are to be provided.

      (3)  A description of the services or products to be provided; a statement of when those services or products are to be provided and by which organizations, if other than the contracting organization; the term of the contract; and refund provisions, as applicable, if the described services or products are not provided according to the contract.  

    (4)  The amount of the fee to be charged to or collected from the job seeker receiving the services or products or from any other individual, and the date or dates when that fee is required to be paid. 

      (5)  The following statements, in at least 10-point bold-faced type:

      "No verbal or written promise or guarantee of any job or employment is made or implied under the terms of this contract.

      This organization is registered with the Bureau of Employment and Personnel Services of the State of New Jersey, (current address of the bureau).  Inquiries concerning your contract may be sent to this address." 

      (6)  The following statement, in at least 10-point bold-faced type:

                            "YOUR RIGHT TO CANCEL

      You may cancel this contract for services or products, without any penalty or obligation, if notice of cancellation is given, in writing, within three calendar days after you have signed this contract.

  

    To cancel this contract, just mail or deliver a signed and dated copy of the following cancellation notice or any other written notice of cancellation, or send a telegram containing a notice of cancellation, to (name of registrant) at (address of its place of business), not later than midnight of the third calendar day after you signed this contract. 

                             CANCELLATION NOTICE

      I hereby cancel this contract.

 Dated: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

                   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

                   Job seeker's Signature

                   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

                   Job seeker's Name (print)

                   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

                   Address"

      The requirement that the contract include this statement regarding the right to cancel shall not apply when time is of the essence and the services or products must be performed or provided within three calendar days of the date that the contract is entered into pursuant to the request of the job seeker, if the job seeker furnishes the registered organization with a separate dated and signed personal statement in the job seeker's own handwriting, describing the situation requiring the immediate provision of services or products and expressly acknowledging and waiving the right to cancel the contract within three calendar days.  

    (7)  Any further information specified in regulations adopted by the director.

      n.   The requirements of this section shall not apply to any person who receives no prepayment for services or products from a job seeker and who:

      (1)  Provides services or products strictly on an hourly basis, with no financial obligation required of the job seeker beyond the hourly fee for services or products rendered; or

      (2)  Provides outplacement services exclusively as part of a job seeker's benefit or severance package with a current or former employer.

      o.   Newspaper advertising pertaining to services offered or provided in this State by career consulting or outplacement organizations appearing within or adjacent to help-wanted advertising shall contain the phrase "not an employment agency" in a clear, conspicuous, and prominent manner. 

      p.   In addition to any act or practice in violation of P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-1 et seq.), it shall be a violation of this act for any registrant or its agent to:

      (1)  Make, or cause to be made, publish or cause to be published, any false, misleading, or deceptive advertisement or representations concerning the services or products that the registrant provides to job seekers.

      (2)  Disseminate information to a job seeker knowing or recklessly disregarding information that:

      (a)  The job does not exist or the job seeker is not qualified for the job;

      (b)  The job has been described or advertised by or on behalf of the registered organization in a false, misleading, or deceptive manner;

      (c)  The registrant has not confirmed the availability of the job at the time of dissemination of the information; or

      (d)  The registrant has not obtained written or oral permission to list the job from the employer or any authorized agent of the employer.

      q.   The director may refuse to issue, and may revoke, any registration for any failure to comply with, or violation of, the provisions of this section or for any other good cause shown, within the meaning and purpose of this section.  A refusal or revocation shall not be made except upon reasonable notice to, and opportunity to be heard by, the applicant or registrant.  The director, instead of revoking any registration, may suspend the registration for a period of time as shall be determined to be appropriate, or assess a penalty in lieu of suspension, or both, and may issue a new registration notwithstanding the revocation of a prior registration provided that the applicant is found to have become entitled to the new registration.  

    r.   A registered organization may engage in activities requiring registration under sections 23 and 25 of this act if it complies with the requirements of those sections.

      s.   Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this section or rules and regulations promulgated by the director shall be subject to sections 14 through 22 of this act.

  

    L.1989, c.331, s.24.  

34:8-66.     Registration of prepaid computer job matching service or job listing service; annual fee; bond; contract; refund conditions; violations  
     a.   Every prepaid computer job matching service or job listing service operating or providing services or products within this State shall, within 60 days following the effective date of this act and annually thereafter, register, in writing, with the chief on a form prescribed by regulation.  

    b.   Each registration form shall state the service's name and fictitious or trade name used in its operation, each primary location, including street and street number of the building and place where its business is to be conducted, and the names and residence addresses of its principal owners or officers.  

    c.   In addition to registering pursuant to this section, a prepaid computer matching service or job listing service shall notify the bureau in writing whenever it utilizes any location, including mobile units, other than its primary location for the provision of services or products to job seekers.

    d.   Every agent, duly authorized and empowered by the owner of the registered service to solicit business or otherwise act as an agent of the registered service, shall, within 60 days following the effective date of this act and annually thereafter, register, in writing, with the chief on a form prescribed by regulation.  

    e.   The director shall establish by rule and collect an annual fee from service and agent registrants, which shall not be more than that paid by employment agencies or agents, to be used to the extent necessary to defray all expenses incurred by the bureau in the performance of its duties under this section.  

    f.   Each service applicant shall at the time of its initial registration with the director and annually thereafter, post a bond in the amount of $10,000 with a duly authorized surety company as surety, to be approved by the director.  The bond shall be retained by the chief until 90 days after either the expiration or revocation of the registration. The director shall promulgate rules and regulations setting forth the terms and conditions of this bond and supply the service applicant firm with an approved form.  

    g.   Prior to the acceptance of a fee from a job seeker, a registered service shall provide the job seeker with a written contract which shall include the following:

      (1)  The name of the registered service and the address and telephone number of each primary or other location of the registered service providing the listing to the job seeker.

      (2)  Acknowledgement of receipt of the registered service's fee schedule.

      (3)  A description of the service or product to be performed or product to be provided by the registered service, including significant conditions, restrictions, and limitations where applicable. 

      (4)  A description of the job seeker's specifications for the employment opportunity, including, but not limited to, the following:

      (a)  Type of job.

      (b)  Interests of job seeker.

      (c)  Qualifications of job seeker.

      (d)  Salary, benefits, and other conditions of employment.

      (e)  Location of job.

      (5)  The contract expiration date, which shall not be later than 90 days from the date of execution of the contract.

      (6)  A clause setting forth the right to a full refund of the fee paid in advance.

      (7)  The signature of the registered service's agent.

      (8)  The following statement, printed on the face of the contract in type no smaller than 10-point bold-faced type:

      "This service is registered with the Bureau of Employment and Personnel Services of the State of New Jersey, (current address of bureau).  Inquiries concerning your contract may be sent to this address."

  

    (9)  At the bottom of the contract a notice to the effect that the contract is the property of the job seeker and shall not be taken from the job seeker.

  

    h.   Every contract or receipt shall be made and numbered consecutively in original and duplicate, both to be signed by the job seeker and the service's agent.  The original shall be given to the job seeker and the duplicate shall be kept on file at the service's primary location.  

    i.   The form of contract proposed to be used by a registrant to effect compliance with this section shall be filed with the bureau prior to use.  Any modification of a form previously filed with the bureau, including a change in the name or a primary location of the registered service, shall also be filed prior to use.  

    j.   A registered service shall refund in full the advance fee paid by a job seeker if the service does not, within five calendar days after execution of the contract, supply at least three employment opportunities then available to the job seeker and meeting the specifications of the contract.  A registered service will be deemed to have supplied information meeting the specifications of the job seeker if the information supplied meets the contract specifications with reference to:  

    (1)  Name of employer and type of job;

  

    (2)  Interests of job seeker;

  

    (3)  Qualifications of job seeker;

  

    (4)  Salary, benefits, and other conditions of employment;

  

    (5)  Location of job; and

  

    (6)  Any other specification expressly set forth in the contract.

  

    A demand for the return of the fee shall be made by or on behalf of the job seeker within 10 calendar days following the expiration of the five-day period referred to above by delivery or by registered or certified mail to the address of the office or location set forth in the contract.  

    k.   A registered service shall refund any amount in excess of a $25 service charge to the job seeker if the job seeker does not obtain a job, provided that the job seeker demands a return of that part of the fee within 10 calendar days after the expiration of the contract.  

    l.   If employment, once obtained, lasts less than 90 days, the fee paid shall be refunded as specified in subsection b. of section 10 of this act.

  

    m.   Each contract shall also contain refund provisions, approved by the bureau, which shall, unless different language is approved in writing by the bureau prior to use, read as follows: 

                              "RIGHT TO REFUND

      If within five calendar days after payment of any advance fee, the registrant has not supplied the job seeker with at least three available employment opportunities meeting the specifications of the contract as to (1) name of the employer and type of job; (2) interest of job seeker; (3) qualifications of job seeker; (4) salary, benefits, and other conditions of employment; (5) location of job; and (6) any other specification expressly set forth in the contract, the full amount of the fee paid shall be refunded to the job seeker within 10 calendar days after the expiration of the five-day period."  

    If the job seeker does not obtain a job through the services of the registered service, any amount paid in fees in excess of a $25 service charge shall be refunded to the job seeker, upon demand by the job seeker made within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the contract.  

    n.   Every registered service shall respond, in writing, within nine calendar days of receipt of any written complaint by a job seeker, stating the registered service's position with respect to that complaint.  A copy of a job seeker's complaint and the response shall be kept in a separate file by the registered service for a period of one year after the date of the resolution of the complaint, or two years after the date of the complaint, whichever is later.  

    o.   If a demand for refund is denied by a registered service, and if the denial is found to have been in bad faith or if the registered service fails to respond to a demand for a refund, a court in an action instituted by the job seeker shall award damages to the job seeker in an amount not to exceed $200.00 in addition to actual damages sustained by the job seeker, together with reasonable attorneys' fees, filing fees, and reasonable costs of suit. If the registered service refuses or is unable to pay the amount awarded by the court, the award may be satisfied out of the registered service's bond.  

    p.   In addition to any act or practice in violation of P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-1 et seq.), it shall be a violation of this act for any registrant or its agent to:

  

    (1)  Make, or cause to be made, publish or cause to be published, any false, misleading, or deceptive advertisement or representations concerning the services or products that the registrant provides to job seekers; or  

    (2)  Disseminate information to a job seeker knowing or recklessly disregarding information that:

  

    (a)  The job does not exist or the job seeker is not qualified for the job;

  

    (b)  The job has been described or advertised by or on behalf of the registered service in a false, misleading, or deceptive manner;

      (c)  The registrant has not confirmed the availability of the job at the time of dissemination of the information; or

      (d)  The registrant has not obtained written or oral permission to list the job from the employer or an authorized agent of the employer.

  

    q.   The director may refuse to issue, and may revoke, any registration for any failure to comply with, or any violation of, the provisions of this section or for any other good cause shown, within the meaning and purpose of this section.  A refusal shall not be made except upon reasonable notice to, and opportunity to be heard by, the applicant or registrant as the case may be.  The director instead of revoking any registration may suspend the registration for a period of time as determined to be proper, or assess a penalty in lieu of suspension, or both; and may issue a new registration notwithstanding the revocation of a prior registration provided that the applicant is found to have become entitled to the new registration.  

    r.   Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this section or rules and regulations promulgated by the director shall be subject to the provisions of sections 14 through 22 of this act.  

    L.1989, c.331, s.25.  

34:8-67  Definitions relative to employee leasing companies.
 
	1.	For the purposes of this act:
	"Assurance organization" means an independent and qualified entity approved by the commissioner to certify the qualifications of an employee leasing company or employee leasing company group for registration under P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.).
	"Client company" means a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation or other business entity, which enters into an employee leasing agreement and is assigned employees by the employee leasing company.
	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.
	"Covered employee" means an individual co-employed by an employee leasing company and a client company pursuant to an employee leasing agreement.
	"Department" means the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
	"Employee leasing agreement" or "professional employer agreement" means an arrangement, under written contract, whereby:
	(1)	An employee leasing company and a client company co-employ covered employees; and
	(2)	The arrangement is intended to be, or is, ongoing rather than temporary in nature, and not aimed at temporarily supplementing the client company's work force.
	"Employee leasing company" or "professional employer organization" means a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation or other business entity, which devotes a substantial portion of its business to providing the services of employees pursuant to one or more employee leasing agreements and provides services of a nature customarily understood to be employer responsibilities including, but not limited to, those responsibilities provided in section 2 of this act.

	L.2001, c.260, s.1; amended 2011, c.118, s.1.

34:8-68  Provision of leasing agreements.
	2. a. Every employee leasing agreement shall provide that the employee leasing company:
 
	(1)	Reserves a right of direction and control over each covered employee assigned to the client company's location.  However, a client company may retain sufficient direction and control over the covered employee as is necessary to conduct the client company's business and without which the client company would be unable to conduct its business, discharge any fiduciary responsibility that it may have, or comply with any applicable licensure, regulatory or statutory requirement of the client company;
 
	(2)	Assumes responsibility for the payment of wages to each covered employee without regard to payments by the client company to the employee leasing company, except that the provisions of this paragraph shall not affect the client company's obligations with respect to the payment of wages to covered employees;
 
	(3)	Assumes responsibility for the payment of payroll taxes and collection of taxes from payroll on each covered employee;
 
	(4)	Retains authority to hire, terminate, discipline, and reassign each covered employee.  However, no covered employee shall be reassigned to another client company without that covered employee's consent and the client company may have the right to accept or cancel the assignment of any covered employee;
 
	(5)	Has given written notice of the relationship between the employee leasing company and the client company to each covered employee it assigns to perform services at the client company's work site;
 
	(6)	Shall, except for newly established business entities, hire its initial employee complement from among employees of the client company at the time of execution of the employee leasing agreement at comparable terms and conditions of employment as are in existence at the client company at the time of execution of the employee leasing agreement and as designated by the client company.  Throughout the term of the employee leasing agreement the covered employees shall be considered employees of the employee leasing company and the client company and upon the termination of the employee leasing agreement, the covered employees shall be considered employees of the client company;
 
	(7)	Continue to honor and abide by existing collective bargaining agreements applicable to covered employees.  The client company shall also continue to honor and abide by all collective bargaining agreements applicable to covered employees.  Every employee leasing company which enters into a contract with a client company, which has a collective bargaining representative for the covered employees, shall require that client company to enter into an agreement with the employee leasing company containing the following language:
 
	"The client company shall continue to honor and abide by the terms of any applicable collective bargaining agreements, and upon expiration thereof, any obligations of the client company to bargain in good faith in connection with such collective bargaining agreements shall not be affected in any manner by the employee leasing agreement."
 
	(8)	Shall provide workers' compensation insurance for their covered employees, unless the client company, in agreement with the employee leasing company elects to assume the responsibility of providing the workers' compensation insurance coverage for those employees in an arrangement with an employee leasing company, and the employee leasing company provides notice of the election and proof of coverage to the department within 30 days of the election or once forms or procedures are decided by the department.
 
	A client company that assumes the responsibility to provide workers compensation insurance required by an employee leasing agreement, shall provide a copy of the agreement to the insurance carrier licensed in the State of New Jersey that issues the policy for the covered employees prior to the issuance of the policy or upon entering an employee leasing agreement as appropriate.  The agreement shall contain a legal mailing address for the employee leasing company and the client company shall be obligated to update that address should it change over the policy period.
 
	In the event that a policy issued to a client company is cancelled pursuant to R.S.34:15-81, the insurance carrier licensed in the State of New Jersey that issues the policy shall provide the employee leasing company copies of all notices required to be issued to the client company pursuant to R.S.34:15-81 with at least 10 days' notice by regular mail at the address set forth in the employee leasing agreement, as updated.
 
	Notwithstanding the provisions of this paragraph (8), if the client company, having elected to assume the responsibility of providing the workers' compensation insurance coverage for covered employees in an arrangement with an employee leasing company, fails to provide workers' compensation insurance coverage as required by law during the period of the agreement, then the employee leasing company shall provide workers' compensation insurance for the covered employees under the employee leasing agreement.
 
	b.	Every employee leasing agreement shall allocate responsibility between the employee leasing company and the client company regarding the right of direction and control over management of safety, risk and hazard control at the work site or sites affecting each covered employee including:
 
	(1)	Responsibility for performing safety inspections of client company equipment and premises; 
 
	(2)	Responsibility for the promulgation and administration of employment and safety policies; and
 
	(3)	Responsibility for the management of workers' compensation claims, the filings thereof, and procedures related thereto.
 
	c.	Nothing in this section or any other section of P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.) shall alter the rights or obligations of client companies, employee leasing companies or covered employees under the National Labor Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. s.151 et seq.
 
	d. (1) Nothing in P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.) or in any employee leasing agreement shall diminish, abolish or remove any obligations of covered employees to a client company or any obligations of any client company to a covered employee existing prior to the effective date of an employee leasing agreement, or create any new or additional enforceable right of a covered employee against an employee leasing company that is not specifically provided by the appropriate employee leasing agreement or P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.).
 
	(2)	Nothing in P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.) or in any employee leasing agreement shall affect, modify, or amend any contractual relationship or restrictive covenant between a covered employee and any client company in effect at the time an employee leasing agreement becomes effective; nor shall it prohibit or amend any contractual relationship or restrictive covenant that is entered into subsequently between a client company and a covered employee.  An employee leasing company shall have no responsibility or liability in connection with, or arising out of, any such existing or new contractual relationship or restrictive covenant unless the employee leasing company has specifically agreed otherwise in writing.
 
	e. (1) Nothing in P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.) or in any employee leasing agreement shall affect, modify or amend any state or local registration or certification requirement applicable to any client company or covered employee. 
 
	(2)	A covered employee who is required to be licensed, registered, or certified pursuant to any State law or regulation shall be considered solely an employee of the client company for purposes of that license, registration, or certification requirement.
 
	(3)	An employee leasing company shall not be deemed to engage in any occupation, trade, profession, or other activity that is subject to licensing, registration, or certification requirements, or is otherwise regulated by a governmental entity, solely by entering into an employee leasing agreement with a client company who is subject to those requirements or regulations. 
 
	(4)	A client company shall have the sole right of direction and control of the professional or licensed activities of covered employees and the client company's business.  Those covered employees and client companies shall remain subject to regulation by the regulatory or governmental entity responsible for licensing, registration, or certification of those covered employees or client companies. 
 
	f.	A client company's certification as a small, minority-owned, disadvantaged, woman-owned business enterprise or an historically underutilized business for the purposes of any bid, contract, purchase order, or agreement entered into with the State or a political subdivision of the State, shall not be affected because the client company has entered into an employee leasing agreement with an employee leasing company. 
 
	g.	Any benefit that a client company is required to provide to covered employees that is provided to covered employees by an employee leasing company through an employee leasing agreement shall be credited against the client company's obligation to fulfill the requirement.
 
	L.2001, c.260, s.2; amended 2011, c.118, s.2; 2017, c.233, s.1.

34:8-68.1  Responsibilities of client company.
	6. a. Except to the extent otherwise expressly provided by an applicable employee leasing agreement, a client company shall be solely responsible for the quality, adequacy, or safety of the goods or services produced or sold in the client company's business; for directing, supervising, training, and controlling the work of the covered employees with respect to the business activities of the client company; for the acts, errors, or omissions of covered employees with regard to those activities; and for accurately reporting wages to the employee leasing company. 
 
	b.	Except to the extent otherwise expressly provided by an applicable employee leasing agreement, a client company shall not be liable for the acts, errors, or omissions of an employee leasing company, or of any covered employee when the covered employee is acting under the express direction and control of the employee leasing company, and an employee leasing company shall not be liable for the acts, errors, or omissions of a client company or of any covered employee when the covered employee is acting under the express direction and control of the client company.
 
	c.	Except to the extent otherwise expressly provided by an applicable employee leasing agreement or other employment contract, insurance contract, or bond, a covered employee shall not be considered, solely as the result of being a covered employee, an employee of the employee leasing company for purposes of general liability insurance, fidelity bonds, surety bonds, employer's liability which is not covered by workers' compensation, or other liability insurance carried by the employee leasing company.
 
	d.	Notwithstanding any provisions of R.S.43:21-6 and R.S.43:21-16 to the contrary, a client company shall be solely responsible for complying with the reporting requirements concerning a separation from employment imposed on employers pursuant to subsection (a) of R.S. 43:21-6, and shall be solely liable for any penalty for failure to provide information concerning a separation from employment imposed pursuant to subsection (b) of R.S. 43:21-16.
 
	L.2011, c.118, s.6; amended 2017, c.233, s.2; 2025, c.130.

34:8-69  Relationship between leasing company, client company.

	3.	The employee leasing company and the client company shall not be owned or controlled by the same interests or be a part of a "controlled group of corporations" as that term is defined in section 1563 of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 26 U.S.C. s.1563

	L.2001,c.260,s.3.

34:8-70  Registration of leasing company.
 	4. a. An employee leasing company shall register with the commissioner and provide a list of its client companies with covered employees in this State, both upon the initial registration of the employee leasing company, and thereafter, annually by January 31st, listing all client companies as of the immediately preceding December 31st.  The list shall include the following information with regard to each client company:
 
	(1)	Client company's name;
 
	(2)	Client company's physical location address;
 
	(3)	Description of client company's economic activity;
 
	(4)	Client company's state tax identification number;
 
	(5)	Percent of client company's workforce being leased;
 
	(6)	Effective date and duration of employee leasing agreement;
 
	(7)	A copy of the standard form of agreement entered into between the employee leasing company and the client company;
 
	(a)	The standard form of agreement shall be accompanied by a certified list of all client companies with covered employees in this State contracting with the employee leasing company for its services.
 
	(b)	The employee leasing company shall be required to notify the Department of Labor and Workforce Development on an annual basis of any material changes in the standard form of agreement which relate to the requirements set forth in section 2 of P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-68), and when any particular client company has agreed to terms which deviate from the standard form of agreement;
 
	(8)	Proof of written disclosure to client companies upon the signing of an employee leasing agreement, as required in section 8 of P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-74);
 
	(9)	Proof of current workers' compensation coverage, which may be in the form of a letter from the insurance carrier, and which shall include the name of the carrier, date of commencement of coverage under the policy, term of the coverage, and verification of premiums paid, except that, if the employee leasing company has entered into an employee leasing agreement with a client company who elects to maintain its own workers' compensation insurance, the client company shall provide that proof to the commissioner; and
 
	(10) Confirmation that all leased employees are covered by workers' compensation insurance, except that, if the employee leasing company has entered into an employee leasing agreement with a client company who elects to maintain its own workers' compensation insurance, the client company shall provide that confirmation to the commissioner.
 
	If an employee leasing company enters into an employee leasing agreement with a client company who elects to maintain its own workers' compensation insurance, the employee leasing company shall notify the department within 30 days of the election and provide the department with the name of the client company, name of the carrier and policy number.
 
	b.	Employee leasing companies shall also report to the department, on a quarterly basis, wage information regarding each covered employee as required by law, rule or regulation.
 
	c.	All records, reports and other information obtained from employee leasing companies under P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.), except to the extent necessary for the proper administration by the department of that act and all applicable labor laws, shall be confidential and shall not be published or open to public inspection other than to public employees in the performance of their public duties.
 
	d.	The department shall establish a limited registration and renewal process and appropriate forms for an employee leasing company that (1) is not domiciled in this State; (2) is licensed or registered as an employee leasing company or professional employer organization in another state; (3) does not maintain an office in this State or directly solicit client companies located or domiciled in this State; and (4) is not responsible for more than 50 covered employees employed in this State on the date of registration or renewal.  If during the term of a limited registration an employee leasing company becomes responsible for more than 50 covered employees, the employee leasing company shall re-register with the department pursuant to subsection a. of this section within 30 days of the end of the quarter in which the employee leasing company became responsible for more than 50 covered employees, but shall not be charged any additional registration fee, if a registration fee is required.  An employee leasing company requesting a limited registration pursuant to this subsection shall provide the department with a list of client companies and the number of covered employees at each of those companies and such other information as the department shall prescribe.  Any employee leasing company receiving a limited registration from the department shall not be required to comply with the provisions of subsections a. and b. of section 5 of P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-71).
 
	e.	Two or more employee leasing companies that are majority owned by the same ultimate parent company, entity or person may register as an employee leasing company group, and may satisfy the registration requirements imposed pursuant to this section and the financial reporting required pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-71), and any other filing requirements authorized by the department, on a combined or consolidated basis, provided that the employee leasing company group demonstrates positive working capital pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-71).  Each employee leasing company covered under an employee leasing company group registration shall guarantee the financial capacity obligations of each other employee leasing company covered under the employee leasing company group registration.
 
	f.	The department may require that every initial application and subsequent annual reporting submitted pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by a fee of up to $500.  If such a fee is required, every initial application and subsequent annual reporting submitted by an employee leasing company group pursuant to subsection e. of this section shall be accompanied by a fee of the required amount for each employee leasing company included in the employee leasing company group.
 
	L.2001, c.260, s.4; amended 2011, c.118, s.3; 2017, c.233, s.3.

34:8-71  Registration, annual reporting.
 
	5. a. (1) Every initial registration and subsequent annual reporting shall be accompanied by a financial statement prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and audited by an independent certified public accountant, which statement shall show a positive working capital, computed as current assets minus current liabilities.  The financial statement shall be without qualification as to the going concern status of the employee leasing company.
	(2)	At the time of an application for an initial registration an employee leasing company shall submit to the department an audited financial statement prepared within 13 months of the application.  Thereafter, an employee leasing company shall file with the department on an annual basis, within 180 days of the end of the employee leasing company's fiscal year, a current audited financial statement.  An employee leasing company may request the department for an extension for this filing, which shall be accompanied by a letter from the employee leasing company's independent certified public accountant stating the reasons for the requested extension and the anticipated date of the completion of the audited financial statement. 
	b. (1) An employee leasing company that does not have a positive working capital may provide to the department, in lieu thereof, a bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or securities with a minimum market value equaling the amount necessary to achieve a positive working capital plus up to $100,000, such additional amount to be determined by the commissioner or his designee.  The securities so deposited shall include authorizations to the commissioner, or his designee, to sell those securities in an amount sufficient to pay any taxes, wages, benefits or other entitlement due a covered employee, if the employee leasing company does not make those payments when due.  The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to an employee leasing company group registered pursuant to subsection e. of section 4 of P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-70).
	(2)	The commissioner, or his designee, may also require that bond or deposit if the commissioner finds that the leasing company has had its license or registration suspended, denied, or limited in any other jurisdiction; or that there have been instances in which the employee leasing company has not paid covered employees' wages or benefits when due, or failed to make timely payment of any federal or state payroll taxes or unemployment compensation contributions when due, or for other good cause.
	(3)	Any bond or securities deposited under this subsection shall not be included for the purpose of the calculation of positive working capital required by subsection a. of this section.
	c.	An employee leasing company shall submit to the commissioner, or his designee, within 60 days after the end of each calendar quarter, a certification by an independent certified public accountant that all applicable federal and state payroll taxes for covered employees in this State have been paid on a timely basis for that quarter.  If the commissioner or his designee does not receive that certification within the 60-day period, the department shall notify the employee leasing company within five business days of the expiration of the 60-day period.  If that certification is not received within 10 business days following the notification by the department, the department shall notify the client companies listed on the employee leasing company's annual report required pursuant to section 4 of this act that the certification was not received. 
	d.	Two or more employee leasing companies that are majority owned by the same ultimate parent company, entity or person may comply with the provisions of this section pursuant to subsection e. of section 4 of P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-70).
	e.	The department may adopt, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) rules and regulations to permit, to the extent authorized pursuant to the "Uniform Electronic Transactions Act," P.L.2001, c.116 (C.12A:12-1 et seq.), employee leasing companies to electronically file applications, documents, reports and other filings required by P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.).  The department may also adopt, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), rules to provide for the acceptance of electronic filings and other assurance by an assurance organization that provides satisfactory assurance of compliance acceptable to the department consistent with or in lieu of the requirements of section 4 of P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-70) and of this section and other requirements of P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.) or the rules promulgated pursuant to it.  The rules may permit an employee leasing company or an employee leasing company group to authorize an assurance organization to act on behalf of an employee leasing company or an employee leasing company group in complying with P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.) and any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, including electronic filings of information and payment of fees that may be required.  The rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this subsection may include, but need not be limited to, an identification of those other provisions of P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.) that may be complied with through an independent assurance organization.  Use of an approved assurance organization shall be optional and not mandatory for an employee leasing company or an employee leasing company group.  Nothing in this subsection shall limit or change the department's authority to register or rescind the registration of an employee leasing company or to investigate or enforce any provision of P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.).

	L.2001, c.260, s.5; amended 2011, c.118, s.4.

34:8-72 Co-employment of covered employees.
  	6. a. An employee leasing company registered under this act and the respective client companies with which it has entered into employee leasing agreements shall be the co-employers of their covered employees for the payment of wages and other employment benefits due, including the obligation under the workers' compensation law, R.S.34:15-1 et seq., to maintain insurance coverage for covered employees for personal injuries to, or for the death of, those employees by accident arising out of and in the course of employment through policies issued by an insurance carrier licensed in the State of New Jersey. Such policies shall state the name of the employee leasing company as the labor contractor for each client company, by name.
 
	b.	For purposes of P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-67 et seq.), the agreement between the employee leasing company and the client company shall be one of co-employment, whereby the employee leasing company, having accepted the responsibilities set forth in section 2 of P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-68), may submit reports to the department and make contributions to the Unemployment Compensation and State Disability Benefits Funds in the manner prescribed in section 7 of P.L.2001, c.260 (C.34:8-73), on behalf of those covered employees covered by the employee leasing agreement. In addition, the provisions of R.S.34:15-8, regarding the exclusivity of the remedy under the workers' compensation law for personal injuries to, or for the death of, employees by accident arising out of and in the course of their employment, shall apply to the employee leasing company and the client company, and their employees.
 
	c.	The employee leasing company shall file reports prescribed under the "unemployment compensation law," R.S.43:21-1 et seq. on behalf of its covered employees as set forth in section 3 of P.L.2013, c.225 (C.43:21-7.8).
 
	L.2001, c.260, s.6; amended 2011, c.118, s.5; 2013, c.225, s.1.

34:8-73 Actions upon entry, dissolution of leasing agreement.
  
	7. a. Upon entering into the employee leasing agreement:

	(1)	If the employee leasing company acquires the client company's total workforce, the employee leasing company shall report wages and pay contributions pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2013, c.225 (C.43:21-7.8).

	(2)	If the employee leasing company acquires less than all of the client company's total workforce, the employee leasing company shall report wages and pay contributions pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2013, c.225 (C.43:21-7.8) with respect to that portion of the workforce so acquired.
 
	b.	Upon dissolution of the employee leasing agreement:
 
	(1)	If, under the dissolved employee leasing agreement, the employee leasing company used the Entity Level Reporting Method under subsection b. of section 3 of P.L.2013, c.225 (C.43:21-7.8) to report and pay all required contributions to the unemployment compensation fund as required under R.S.43:21-7, and the client company had leased all or a portion of its total workforce, the employee leasing company shall, at the time of dissolution, provide the department with the data necessary to calculate the benefit experience of the client company for purposes of determining the client company's separate benefit experience.
 
	(2)	If, under the dissolved employee leasing agreement, the employee leasing company elected to use the Client Level Reporting Method under subsection c. of section 3 of P.L.2013, c.225 (C.43:21-7.8), to report and pay all required contributions to the unemployment compensation fund as required under R.S. 43:21-7, and the client company had leased all or a portion of its total workforce, the department shall compute its benefit experience in accordance with subparagraph (f) of paragraph (4) of subsection c. of section 3 of P.L.2013, c.225 (C.43:21-7.8).
 
	(3)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2013, c.225)
 
	(4)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2013, c.225)
 
	(5)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2013, c.225).

 	L.2001, c.260, s.7; amended 2013, c.225, s.2.

34:8-74  Calculation of unemployment benefit experience.


	8.	The employee leasing company shall provide to each client company, upon signing of an employee leasing agreement, written disclosure as to the method to be utilized for calculation of unemployment benefit experience contribution rates and temporary disability contribution rates upon both the inception and dissolution of the employee leasing relationship.

	L.2001,c.260,s.8.

34:8-75  Inapplicability to temporary help service firms, unit operating as cooperative.

	9.  a.  The provisions of this act shall not apply to temporary help service firms, as defined in section 1 of P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-43), or farm labor crew leaders who are subject to P.L.1971, c.192 (C.34:8A-7 et seq.).

	b.	The provisions of this act shall not apply to an employing unit operating as a cooperative subject to the provisions of Subchapter T of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 26 U.S.C.s.1381 et seq.

	c.	Nothing in this act shall exempt either a client company or the covered employees leased to a client company from any applicable State, local, or federal licensing, registration or certification statutes and regulations.

	d.	Any covered employee who must be licensed, registered or certified, according to law, shall be treated as a covered employee of the client company for the purposes of the license, registration or certification.

	e.	The provisions of the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) shall remain applicable in all respects to those client companies of the employee leasing company who participate in public construction contracts as set forth in that  act.

	L.2001,c.260,s.9; amended 2001,c.282,s.1.

34:8-76  Noncompliance, rescinding of registration.


	10. a. If an employee leasing company fails to comply with any of the requirements set forth in this act, the department may rescind the registration of that employee leasing company, thereby also rescinding the employee leasing company's co-employer status for purposes of the act, but not relieving the employee leasing company or client company from liabilities accrued.

	b.	If the department rescinds the registration of an employee leasing company, all client companies of the employee leasing company thereafter shall file reports and make contributions separately, as provided in R.S.43:21-1 et seq.  The department shall calculate the respective unemployment benefit experience contribution rates and temporary disability contribution rates of the employee leasing company and client company, thereafter, as set forth in subsection b. of section 7 of this act, and the exclusive remedy provision of R.S.34:15-8 shall, as of the date upon which the department has rescinded the registration of the employee leasing company, no longer apply to the employee leasing company relative to personal injuries to, or the death of, any employee formerly covered by the employee leasing agreement, by accident arising out of and in the course of employment, as otherwise provided in the workers' compensation law.

	c.	Notwithstanding any provisions of this act to the contrary, repeated and egregious violations by an employee leasing company of the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.), the "unemployment compensation law," R.S.43:21-1 et seq., the "Temporary Disability Benefits Law," P.L.1948, c.110 (C.43:21-25 et seq.), the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq., or other applicable State or federal tax laws, the "New Jersey State Wage and Hour Law," P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a et seq.), the laws  concerning the regulation of child labor, Chapter 2 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes, the "Construction Safety Act," P.L.1962, c.45 (C.34:5-166 et seq.), the "Worker and Community Right to Know Act," P.L.1983, c.315 (C.34:5A-1 et seq.), the "Worker Health and Safety Act," P.L.1965, c.154 (C.34:6A-1 et seq.), the laws concerning the regulation of employment agencies, including P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-43 et seq.), the laws concerning suppliers of labor, including P.L.1971, c.192 (C.34:8A-7 et seq.), the Seasonal Farm Labor Act, P.L.1945, c.71 (C.34:9A-1 et seq.), the "Construction Workers' Fringe Benefit Security Act," P.L.1987, c.150 (C.34:11A-1 et seq.), the "Family Leave Act," P.L.1989, c.261 (C.34:11B-1 et seq.), the laws  concerning the regulation of labor unions, including chapter 12 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes, the laws concerning the regulation of labor disputes in general, including P.L.1960, c.193 (C.34:13C-1 et seq.), the workers' compensation law, chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes, the "Conscientious Employee Protection Act," P.L.1986, c.105 (C.34:19-1 et seq.), "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.), the federal "Occupational Safety and Health Act," 29 U.S.C. s.651 et seq., the "Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938," 29 U.S.C. s.201 et seq., or the "National Labor Relations Act," 29 U.S.C. s.151 et seq., shall result in rescission of registration of an employee leasing company by the commissioner.

	d.	Whenever the department shall find cause to rescind the registration of an employee leasing company, it shall notify the registrant in writing of the reasons therefor, and provide the registrant with an opportunity for a hearing in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).

	e.	Whenever the department rescinds a registration, it shall simultaneously notify the client companies listed on the annual report required pursuant to section 4 of this act of that action.

	L.2001,c.260,s.10.


34:8-77  Compliance with C.17:22A-1 et seq.


	11.	Nothing in this act shall exempt an employee leasing company or any employee thereof from compliance with the provisions of P.L.1987, c.293 (C.17:22A-1 et seq.) if its activities fall within the scope of that act or any regulation promulgated pursuant to that act.

	L.2001,c.260,s.11.


34:8-78  Rules, regulations.
	12.	The commissioner shall, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), promulgate those rules and regulations necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act.

	L.2001,c.260,s.12.

34:8-79.  Information provided to patients receiving home care services regulated by Division of Consumer Affairs
	2.  a. The Director of the Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Law and Public Safety, in consultation with the Commissioner of Health and Senior Services, shall require that, no later than the 180th day after the date of enactment of this act, each health care service firm regulated by the Division of Consumer Affairs shall provide the following information to each patient receiving home-based services from that firm, or to a person designated by the patient:

	(1)	`the name and certification or licensure title, as applicable, of the homemaker-home health aide or other health care professional whose practice is regulated pursuant to Title 45 of the Revised Statutes, to be displayed on an identification tag as required by regulation of the New Jersey Board of Nursing, or as otherwise to be prescribed by regulation of the director for other health care professionals, that the homemaker-home health aide or other health care professional shall wear at all times while examining, observing or caring for the patient; and

	(2)	a copy of the most current edition of the consumer guide to homemaker-home health aides published by the New Jersey Board of Nursing.

	b.	The Director of the Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Law and Public Safety, in consultation with the Commissioner of Health and Senior Services, shall require that, no later than the 180th day after the date of enactment of this act, each health care service firm, employment agency or registry and temporary help service firm or personnel consultant regulated by the Division of Consumer Affairs shall provide the following information in writing to each consumer receiving home-based services, including, but not limited to, domestic, companion, sitter and live-in services, from a person who is employed by that firm, agency, registry or consultant and is not a certified homemaker-home health aide or other health care professional whose practice is regulated pursuant to Title 45 of the Revised Statutes, or to a person designated by the consumer:

	(1)  notification that the person is not a certified homemaker-home health aide or other health care professional whose practice is regulated pursuant to Title 45 of the Revised Statutes;

	(2)	any training received by that person which the firm, agency, registry or consultant deems relevant to the provision of those services that the person is assigned to provide to the consumer;

	(3)	proof that the person is a United States citizen or legally documented alien; and

	(4)	evidence of employment history verification or character references for that person.

	c.	The information provided pursuant to subsections a. and b. of this section shall be provided:

	(1)	in advance of the provision of services to the patient or consumer, as applicable, whenever possible; and

	(2)	otherwise upon the initial visit to the patient's or consumer's home of the person assigned to provide services to the patient or consumer.

	d.	Beginning on the first day of the 13th month after the date of enactment of this act, the identification tag required pursuant to subsection a. of this section shall include a photograph of the homemaker-home health aide or other health care professional.

	e.	The director, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), shall adopt rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this section.

	L.2002,c.81,s.2.

34:8A-7.  Definitions
    As used in this act:

    a.   "Crew leader"  means any person who transports, recruits, supplies or hires farm or food processing laborers and who, for any money or other valuable  consideration paid, anticipated or promised to be paid, directly or indirectly  by any farm operator or laborer, directs all or any part of the work of such  workers, or any person who recruits, supplies, or hires farm or food processing  laborers for any money or other valuable consideration paid, anticipated or  promised to be paid, directly or indirectly by any farm operator or laborer,  but shall not include any owner or lessee of a farm or food processing plant  who recruits or hires laborers for work on his farm or in his plant.

    b.   "Commissioner"  means the Commissioner of the Department of Labor and Industry or his authorized representative.

    c.   "Seasonal farm worker"  means any person who is engaged in seasonal or  temporary farm work and is a term that may be used interchangeably with the  terms  "migrant laborer"  and  "temporary farm worker."

     L.1971, c. 192, s. 1, eff. June 7, 1971.  Amended by L.1975, c. 49, s. 2, eff.  April 7, 1975.

34:8A-8.  Crew leader;  certificate of registration;  necessity; duration; nontransferability;  display;  agents;  responsibility of registrant
    No person shall act as a crew leader, nor shall any person employ a crew leader unless he possesses a current and valid certificate of registration issued by the Department of Labor and Industry.  The application and certificate of registration forms shall be prescribed by the commissioner.

    A certificate of registration shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the  year for which it is granted unless sooner revoked or suspended by the commissioner.  A certificate of registration may be renewed each year upon the filing of an application of renewal on a form prescribed by the commissioner. The certificate of registration, once issued, shall not be transferable, shall be kept by the registrant in his immediate personal possession and shall be displayed by the registrant upon request of the commissioner or any properly designated representatives of the commissioner or upon the request of the person by whom the crew leader is employed or upon the request of any seasonal farm worker or prospective seasonal farm worker.

    Any person holding a valid certificate of registration pursuant to this act,  or any regular employee of such a person, shall wear and display when engaging  in activities as a crew leader such identification as the commissioner may  require, showing such registration to be duly certified by the State and such  regular employee to be the agent of such registrant.

    Every such regular employee shall be subject to the provisions of this act and of any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this act to the same extent as if he were required to obtain a certificate of registration in his own name.  For the purpose of this act, every registrant shall be responsible for the activities of every agent designated by him, and shall be subject to any penalties under this act, including the refusal, suspension or revocation of a certificate of registration, proceeding from any act of any agent designated by him, while such agent is engaged in activities as crew leader.

     L.1971, c. 192, s. 2, eff. June 7, 1971.  Amended by L.1975, c. 49, s. 3, eff.  April 7, 1975.

34:8A-9.  Requirements of applicants for certificate;  rules and regulations;  grounds for refusal to issue
    All applicants for a crew leader certificate of registration shall furnish evidence satisfactory to the commissioner of his good character, knowledge of and experience with the labor laws applicable to crew leaders and farmers and food processing laborers and any other evidence which the commissioner may establish by rule and regulation.  In addition, any applicant transporting seasonal farm workers shall furnish proof satisfactory to the commissioner of compliance with the statutory and regulatory requirements of the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles.  The commissioner may refuse to issue a certificate  of registration to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of this  section or any applicable rules or regulations issued hereunder.

    The commissioner may, however, at his discretion and upon receipt of a signed application from a crew leader stating seasonal farm workers will not be  transported by him issue a registration certificate on which the words "not  authorized to transport"  are conspicuously placed.

     L.1971, c. 192, s. 3, eff. July 7, 1971.

34:8A-10.  Duties of crew leader
    In addition to any other responsibilities imposed by law upon the crew leader, he shall:

    a.  Keep records of place of work, gross payments, deductions, and names and  addresses of all workers to whom payments are made, in those instances where a  crew leader is party to the disbursement of any wages or other compensation due  and payable to any seasonal farm worker for time, labor or employment.  In  addition, for workers employed on a time basis, the number of units of time  employed and the rate per unit of time shall be recorded on the payroll  records, and for workers employed on a piece rate basis, the number of units of  work performed, the number of units of time employed and the rate per unit  shall be recorded on such records;

    b.  Ascertain and disclose to each seasonal farm worker at the time the worker is recruited the following information to the best of his knowledge and belief:  (1) the area of employment, (2) the crops and operations on which he may be employed, (3) the transportation, housing and insurance to be provided him, (4) the wage rates to be paid him, and (5) the charges to be made by the crew leader for his services;

    c.  File with the commissioner a correct change of address immediately upon  each occasion such crew leader permanently changes his address;

    d.  Display conspicuously at all times and offer a copy thereof to each seasonal farm worker or head of a seasonal farm worker household a bilingual (Spanish/English) handbill or similar notice stating the terms and conditions of employment in such form and in such manner as the commissioner may prescribe  and which shall include the information required in subsection b. of this  section, and in addition the name and address of the crew leader, the name and  address of the employer upon whose premises the work is to be performed, and  the date or period for which such employment is offered. Every such handbill  shall have printed thereon a schematic pay schedule, columnizing on the left  under the heading  "Hours Worked"  the numbers 1 through 10 and to the right  under the heading "Minimum Wage"  the corresponding total minimum wages for  each number of hours worked, and preceded by the words,  "Even if you work by  piece rate, you must receive no less than the following:"

    e.  Designate an agent, in such a manner and on such forms as the commissioner may prescribe, which agent may be the commissioner but who in any case shall be available to accept service of summons in any action against such  crew leader at any and all times during which such crew leader is absent from  the jurisdiction of the State or otherwise unavailable to accept service.

    In those instances where a crew leader is party to the disbursement of any wages or other compensation due and payable to any seasonal farm worker for time, labor or employment, he shall make, immediately upon termination of the period of employment for which the worker was employed, such payment or compensation to such seasonal farm worker on the same premises where said labor  or employment was performed or provided.

     L.1971, c. 192, s. 4, eff. June 7, 1971.  Amended by L.1975, c. 49, s. 4, eff.  April 7, 1975.

34:8A-10.1.  Retaliatory action against worker for exercise of legal right;   prohibition;  presumption;  liability
    It shall be unlawful for any crew leader to terminate, suspend, demote, transfer, or take adverse action against any past, present or prospective seasonal farm worker in retaliation for the exercise by such seasonal farm worker of any right secured under the laws and regulations of the State or Federal Government.

    A rebuttable presumption that an action is retaliatory shall arise from any  termination, suspension, demotion or taking of adverse action on the part of  the crew leader which action occurs within a period of 60 days following any  act by a seasonal farm worker to exercise any right secured under the provisions of this act or under the laws and regulations of the State or any agency or political subdivision thereof which establish the rights of persons engaged in farm labor or which establish duties of employers of persons engaged  in farm labor.

    Any person aggrieved hereunder may maintain a civil action against the crew  leader.  Any crew leader found to have violated this act shall be liable to  such person aggrieved for full reinstatement and for back wages accumulated  during the period of such unlawful retaliation and to exemplary damages in  treble the amount of back wages found due, and for costs and attorney's fees.

     L.1975, c. 49, s. 6, eff. April 7, 1975.

34:8A-11.  Refusal to renew, revocation or suspension of certificate; hearing;  notice;  grounds
    The commissioner may refuse to renew and may revoke or suspend any certificate of registration after a hearing upon reasonable notice if the applicant:

    a.  Fails to comply with the provisions of this act or any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder;

    b.  Knowingly misrepresents to any seasonal farm worker facts relating to working conditions and hours or to the wages to be paid;

    c.  Knowingly misrepresents any material fact in his application for a crew  leader certificate of registration;

    d.  Violates any State or Federal labor or criminal law;  or

     e.  Is not in fact the real party in interest in holding such certificate of  registration and that the real party in interest in any such application or  certificate of registration is a person, firm, partnership, association, or  corporation which previously has applied for such certification and has been  denied such certification, or which previously has been issued a certificate of  registration which was subsequently revoked, suspended, or not renewed in this  or any other state requiring the registration of crew leaders.

    Such action by the commissioner shall be in addition to any other penalties  provided by law.

     L.1971, c. 192, s. 5, eff. June 7, 1971.  Amended by L.1975, c. 49, s. 5, eff.  April 7, 1975.

34:8A-11.1.  Duties of commissioner
    The commissioner or his designated representative shall investigate and gather data with respect to matters which may aid in carrying out the provisions of this act.  In any case in which a complaint has been filed with the commissioner regarding a violation of this act or with respect to which the  commissioner has reasonable grounds to believe that a crew leader has violated  any provisions of this act, the commissioner or his designated representative  shall investigate and gather data respecting such case, and may, in connection  therewith, issue subpenas requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses  or the production of any evidence in connection with such investigation.  The  commissioner or any agent designated by him for such purposes may administer  oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses, and receive evidence.

    In addition, the commissioner shall affirmatively monitor and investigate the activities and operations of crew leaders as described in this act without respect to specific complaints, at such frequency and in such a manner as is reasonably necessary to assure the enforcement of the provisions of this act by  adopting and implementing a plan to include, as a minimum, (1) the interviewing  each month, April through November, of a representative cross section of  seasonal farm workers employed by virtue of the services of crew leaders  registered with the State, and (2) the making of periodic inspections of  records such as those required by subsection a. of section 4 (C. 34:8A-10) of  the act hereby supplemented.

     L.1975, c. 49, s. 7, eff. April 7, 1975.

34:8A-12.    Penalties  
     6.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this act or of the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder shall be a disorderly person and upon conviction, for each violation, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both.  Any sum collected as a fine pursuant to this section shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor.  

    L.1971,c.192,s.6; amended 1991,c.205,s.24.  

34:8A-13.  Violation of act;  injunction;  parties
    Upon a violation of any of the provisions of this act, any aggrieved seasonal farm worker, the commissioner or the Attorney General are specifically  authorized to institute a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction for  injunctive relief to restrain the violation and for such other further relief  as the court shall deem proper.  In such an action the court may proceed in a  summary manner.  Neither the institution of the action, nor any of the  proceedings therein, shall relieve any party to such proceedings from the  penalty prescribed for a violation of this act.

     L.1971, c. 192, s. 7, eff. June 7, 1971.

34:8A-14.    Additional penalties  
     8.   In addition to any other sanctions herein or otherwise provided by law, the commissioner, upon notice and hearing, may impose a penalty not exceeding $500.00 for any violation of this act or of any rule or regulation duly issued hereunder.  Such penalty shall be used for, and recovered by and in the name of the commissioner in a civil action by a summary proceeding under "the penalty enforcement law" (N.J.S.2A:58-1 et seq.). Where any violation of this act or of any rule or regulation duly issued hereunder is of a continuing nature, each day during which such violation continues after the date fixed by the commissioner in any order or notice for the correction or termination of such violation, shall constitute an additional separate and distinct offense, except during the time an appeal from said order or notice may be taken or is pending.  It shall be a complete defense to any action for a penalty pursuant to this section for the defendant to prove that the violation complained of is solely the result of the willful destruction by the occupants of any camp; provided, that proof of such fact shall not alter any duty to correct or terminate said violation as ordered by the commissioner. Any sum collected as a penalty pursuant to this section shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor.  

    L.1971,c.192,s.8; amended 1991,c.205,s.25.  

34:8A-15.  Commissioner of department of labor and industry; enforcement of  act;  promulgation of rules and regulations
    The Commissioner of the Department of Labor and Industry is specifically authorized to enforce the provisions of this act and to promulgate all rules and regulations which, in his discretion, are necessary to carry out the provisions of this act.

     L.1971, c. 192, s. 9, eff. June 7, 1971.

34:8A-16.  Agreement by employee to waive or modify rights;  invalidity
    Any agreement by an employee purporting to waive or to modify his rights hereunder, shall be void as contrary to public policy.

     L.1975, c. 49, s. 8, eff. April 7, 1975.

34:8A-17.  Severability
    If any provision of this act, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, shall be held invalid, the remainder of the act and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

     L.1975, c. 49, s. 9, eff. April 7, 1975.

34:8B-1  Provisions prohibited in advertisements for job vacancies.

	1.	Unless otherwise permitted by the provisions of Title 11A of the New Jersey Statutes or any other law, rule or regulation, no employer or employer's agent, representative, or designee shall knowingly or purposefully publish, in print or on the Internet, an advertisement for any job vacancy in this State that contains one or more of the following:
 
	a.	Any provision stating that the qualifications for a job include current employment;
 
	b.	Any provision stating that the employer or employer's agent, representative, or designee will not consider or review an application for employment submitted by any job applicant currently unemployed; or
 
	c.	Any provision stating that the employer or employer's agent, representative, or designee will only consider or review applications for employment submitted by job applicants who are currently employed.
 
	Nothing set forth in this section shall be construed as prohibiting an employer or employer's agent, representative, or designee from publishing, in print or on the Internet, an advertisement for any job vacancy in this State that contains any provision setting forth any other qualifications for a job, as permitted by law, including, but not limited to, the holding of a current and valid professional or occupational license, certificate, registration, permit or other credential, or a minimum level of education, training or professional, occupational or field experience.
 
	In addition, nothing set forth in this section shall be construed as prohibiting an employer or employer's agent, representative, or designee from publishing, in print or on the Internet, an advertisement for any job vacancy that contains any provision stating that only applicants who are currently employed by such employer will be considered.
 
	L.2011, c.40, s.1.

34:8B-2  Violations, penalties.
 
	2. a. Any employer who violates this act shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for the first violation, $5,000 for the second violation and $10,000 for each subsequent violation, collectible by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development in a summary proceeding pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	b.	Nothing set forth in this act shall be construed as creating, establishing or authorizing a private cause of action by an aggrieved person against an employer who has violated, or is alleged to have violated, the provisions of this act.
 	L.2011, c.40, s.2.

34:8C-1  Definitions relative to labor contracts.
	1.	As used in this act:

	"Client employer" means a business entity in the construction industry, regardless of its form, that obtains or is provided workers, directly from a labor contractor or indirectly from a subcontractor, to perform labor or services in the construction industry and within its usual course of business, but does not include a client employer employing workers pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement.

	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.

	"Labor contractor" means any individual, consulting firm, or other entity that supplies, either directly or indirectly, a client employer with workers to perform labor or services in the construction industry and within the client employer's usual course of business, except that "labor contractor" does not include a contractor employing workers pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement, a bona fide labor organization or apprenticeship program, or a hiring hall operated pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement.

	"Usual course of business" means the regular and customary work of a business, performed within or upon the premises or worksite of the client employer, or any other place of business of the client employer for which services or labor are performed.

	L.2021, c.271, s.1.

34:8C-2  Responsibilities of labor contractor; certifications.
	2.	a.	Any labor contractor that provides workers to a client employer in the construction industry shall:

	(1)	certify that the labor contractor has not charged recruitment fees to the workers;

	(2)	certify that the contractor is in compliance with all State and federal labor laws and regulations applicable to the contractor, including laws concerning wages, unemployment and temporary disability insurance, workers' compensation insurance, workplace safety and health, and the payment of payroll taxes; and

	(3)	certify that the owner or owners, and any employee of the labor contractor entity engaged in providing workers to client employers, have had criminal background checks in compliance with standards promulgated by the commissioner.

	b.	All certifications required by this act shall, in compliance with standards promulgated by the commissioner, be kept in written form on file by the contractor for not less than three years after the period of time to which they apply and be provided to the commissioner upon request, and provided to any client employer to whom the contractor provides workers at the time that the workers are provided.  The client employer shall also keep the written certifications on file for a period of not less than three years after the period to which they apply and provide them to the commissioner upon request.

	L.2021, c.271, s.2.

34:8C-3  Violations, penalties.
	3.	Any labor contractor or client employer who violates this act shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000 per worker supplied to a client employer by the labor contractor for the first violation, $5,000 per worker supplied to a client employer by the labor contractor for the second violation and $10,000 per worker supplied to a client employer by the labor contractor for each subsequent violation, collectible by the commissioner in a summary proceeding pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).  Each worker that a labor contractor supplies to a client employer without complying with the certification requirements of this act shall constitute a separate violation.  Each worker that a client employer obtains from a labor contractor without obtaining certification from the contractor as required by this act shall constitute a separate violation.

	L.2021, c.271, s.3.

34:8D-1  Findings, declarations.
	1.	The Legislature finds and declares:
 
	a.	At least 127,000 individuals work for temporary help service firms, sometimes referred to as temp agencies or staffing agencies, in New Jersey.  Approximately 100 temporary help service firms with several branch offices are licensed throughout the State.  Moreover, there are a large, though unknown, number of unlicensed temporary help service firms that operate outside the purview of law enforcement.
 
	b.	Recent national data indicate that the share of Black and Latino temporary and staffing workers far outstrips their proportion of the workforce in general.  In addition to a heavy concentration in service occupations, temporary laborers are heavily concentrated in the production, transportation, and material moving occupations and manufacturing industries.  Further, full-time temporary help service firm workers earn 41 percent less than workers in traditional work arrangements, and these workers are far less likely than other workers to receive employer-sponsored retirement and health benefits.
 
	c.	Recent studies and a survey of low-wage temporary laborers themselves find that, generally, these workers are particularly vulnerable to abuse of their labor rights, including unpaid wages, failure to pay for all hours worked, minimum wage and overtime violations, unsafe working conditions, unlawful deductions from pay for meals, transportation, equipment, and other items, as well as discriminatory practices.
 
	d.	This act is intended to further protect the labor and employment rights of these workers.
 
L.2023, c.10, s.1.

34:8D-2  Definitions.
	2.	As used in P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.):
 
	"Commissioner" means Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, or a designee of the commissioner.
 
	"Director" means Director of the Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Law and Public Safety, or a designee of the Director.
 
	"Employ" means to suffer or permit to work for compensation, including by means of ongoing, contractual relationships in which the employer retains substantial direct or indirect control over the employee's employment opportunities or terms and conditions of employment.
 
	"Employer" means any person or corporation, partnership, individual proprietorship, joint venture, firm, company, or other similar legal entity who engages the services of an employee and who pays the employee's wages, salary, or other compensation, or any person acting directly or indirectly in the interest of an employer in relation to an employee.
 
	"Hours worked" means all of the time that the employee is required to be at the employee's place of work or on duty.  Nothing in P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.) requires an employer to pay an employee for hours the employee is not required to be at the employee's place of work because of holidays, vacation, lunch hours, illness, and similar reasons.  "Designated classification placement" means an assignment of a temporary laborer by a temporary help service firm to perform work in any of the following occupational categories as designated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor: 33-90000 Other Protective Service Workers; 35-0000 Food Preparation and Serving Related Occupations; 37-0000 Building and Grounds Cleaning and Maintenance Occupations; 39-0000 Personal Care and Service Occupations; 47-2060 Construction Laborers; 47-30000 Helpers, Construction Trades; 49-0000 Installation, Maintenance, and Repair Occupations; 51-0000 Production Occupations; 53-0000 Transportation and Material Moving Occupations; or any successor categories as the Bureau of Labor Statistics may designate.
 
	"Person" means any natural person or their legal representative, partnership, corporation, company, trust, business entity, or association, and any agent, employee, salesman, partner, officer, director, member, stockholder, associate, trustee, or beneficiary of a trust thereof.
 
	"Temporary laborer" means a person who contracts for employment in a designated classification placement with a temporary help service firm.  Temporary laborer does not include agricultural crew leaders who are registered under the federal Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act, 29 U.S.C. s.1801 et seq., P.L.1971, c.192 (C.34:8A-7 et seq.), or P.L.1945, c.71 (C.34:9A-1 et seq.).
 
	"Temporary help service firm" means any person or entity who operates a business which consists of employing individuals directly or indirectly for the purpose of assigning the employed individuals to assist the firm's customers in the handling of the customers' temporary, excess or special workloads, and who, in addition to the payment of wages or salaries to the employed individuals, pays federal social security taxes and State and federal unemployment insurance; carries workers' compensation insurance as required by State law; and sustains responsibility for the actions of the employed individuals while they render services to the firm's customers.  A temporary help service firm is required to comply with the provisions of P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-1 et seq.).
 
	"Third party client" means any person who contracts with a temporary help service firm for obtaining temporary laborers in a designated classification placement.  Third party client does not include the State or any office, department, division, bureau, board, commission, agency, or political subdivision thereof that utilizes the services of temporary help service firms.
 
L.2023, c.10, s.2.

34:8D-3  Temporary help service firm, statement provided, time of dispatch, information, certain.
	3. a. Whenever a temporary help service firm agrees to send a person to work as a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement, the temporary help service firm shall provide the temporary laborer, at the time of dispatch, a statement, in writing in English and in the language identified by the employee as the employee's primary language, containing the following items on a form approved by the commissioner, in a manner appropriate to whether the assignment is accepted at the temporary help service firm's office, or remotely by telephone, text, email, or other electronic exchange:
 
	(1) the name of the temporary laborer;
 
	(2) the name, address, and telephone number of:
 
	(a) the temporary help service firm, or the contact information of the firm's agent facilitating the placement;
 
	(b) its workers' compensation carrier;
 
	(c) the worksite employer or third party client; and
 
	(d) the Department of Labor and Workforce Development;
 
	(3) the name and nature of the work to be performed;
 
	(4) the wages offered;
 
	(5) the name and address of the assigned worksite of each temporary laborer;
 
	(6) the terms of transportation offered to the temporary laborer, if applicable;
 
	(7) a description of the position and whether it shall require any special clothing, protective equipment, and training, and what training and clothing will be provided by the temporary help service firm or the third party client; and any licenses and any costs charged to the employee for supplies or training;
 
	(8) whether a meal or equipment, or both, are provided, either by the temporary help service firm or the third party client, and the cost of the meal and equipment, if any;
 
	(9) for multi-day assignments, the schedule;
 
	(10) the length of the assignment, if known; and
 
	(11) the amount of sick leave to which temporary workers are entitled under P.L.2018, c.10 (C.34:11D-1 et seq.), and the terms of its use.
 
	In the event of a change in the schedule, shift, or location of an assignment for a multi-day assignment of a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement, the temporary help service firm shall provide notice of the change not less than 48 hours in advance to the temporary laborer, when possible, in a manner appropriate to whether the assignment is accepted at the temporary help service firm's office, or remotely by telephone, text, email, or other electronic exchange.  The temporary help service firm shall bear the burden of showing that it was not possible to provide the required notice.  In the event that the commissioner imposes a civil penalty under subsection d. of this section and the temporary help service firm requests a hearing to challenge the penalty, any dispute concerning whether it was possible for the temporary help service firm to provide the required notice shall be adjudicated during that hearing.
 
	If a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement is assigned to the same assignment for more than one day, the temporary help service firm shall be required to provide the employment notice only on the first day of the assignment and on any day that any of the terms listed on the employment notice are changed.
 
	If the temporary laborer is not placed with a third party client or otherwise contracted to work for that day, the temporary help service firm shall, upon request, provide the temporary laborer with a confirmation that the temporary laborer sought work, signed by an employee of the temporary help service firm, which shall include the name of the firm, the name and address of the temporary laborer, and the date and the time that the temporary laborer receives the confirmation.
 
	b.	No temporary help service firm shall send any temporary laborer to any designated classification placement where a strike, a lockout, or other labor dispute exists without providing, at the time of dispatch, a statement, in writing, informing the temporary laborer of the labor dispute, and the laborer's right to refuse the assignment.
 
	c.	Temporary help service firms that make designated classification placements shall make available, whether through its own employees or the service of a vendor, personnel to effectively communicate the information required in subsections a. and b. of this section to temporary laborers in Spanish or in any other language that is generally understood in the locale of the temporary help service firm.
 
	d.	Any temporary help service firm that makes designated classification placements and that violates this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $500 and not to exceed $1,000 for each violation found by the commissioner.  That penalty shall be collected by the commissioner in a summary proceeding in accordance with the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	e.	The commissioner, in consultation with the Office of the New Americans within the Department of Human Services, shall develop and implement a multilingual outreach program to inform temporary laborers in a designated classification placement about their rights pursuant to P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.).  The program shall develop written materials in various languages based on the 10 most prevalent language access needs in the State, and may periodically reevaluate the language access needs and adjust translation efforts accordingly.  The program shall include the distribution of written materials to qualifying organizations who work with temporary workers in a designated classification placement, and shall engage in regular outreach to these organizations to determine how the commissioner can better inform temporary laborers of their rights.  For purposes of this subsection, qualifying organizations are organizations that have a minimum of five years of experience working with temporary laborers or hiring entities, and organizations that work with nonprofit organizations that have a minimum of five years of experience working with temporary laborers or hiring entities.
 
L.2023, c.10, s.3.

34:8D-4  Temporary help service firm, designated classification placements, recordkeeping, information, certain.
	4. a. Whenever a temporary help service firm sends one or more persons to work as temporary laborers in designated classification placements, the temporary help service firm shall keep the following records relating to that transaction:
 
	(1) the name, address, and telephone number of the third party client, including each worksite, to which temporary laborers were sent by the temporary help service firm and the date of the transaction;
 
	(2) for each temporary laborer: the name and address, the specific location sent to work, the type of work performed, the number of hours worked, the hourly rate of pay, and the date sent.  The third party client shall be required to remit all information required under this paragraph to the temporary help service firm no later than seven days following the last day of the work week worked by the temporary laborer;
 
	(3) the name and title of the individual or individuals at each third party client's place of business responsible for the transaction;
 
	(4) any specific qualifications or attributes of a temporary laborer, requested by each third party client;
 
	(5) copies of all contracts, if any, with the third party client and copies of all invoices for the third party client;
 
	(6) copies of all employment notices provided in accordance with subsection a. of section 3 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-3);
 
	(7) the amounts of any deductions to be made from each temporary laborer's compensation by either the third party client or by the temporary help service firm for the temporary laborer's food, equipment, withheld income tax, withheld contributions to the State unemployment compensation trust fund and the State disability benefits trust fund withheld Social Security deductions, and every other deduction;
 
	(8) verification of the actual cost of any equipment or meal charged to a temporary laborer; and
 
	(9) any additional information required by the commissioner.
 
	b.	The temporary help service firm shall maintain all records under this section for a period of six years from their creation.  The records shall be open to inspection by the commissioner during normal business hours.  Records described in paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (6), (7), and (8) of subsection a. of this section shall be available for review and copying by that temporary laborer at no cost or an authorized representative of the temporary laborer during normal business hours within five days following a written request.  For purposes of this subsection, an authorized representative of the temporary laborer is a person as to whom the temporary laborer has presented to the temporary help service firm an authorization signed by the temporary laborer that expressly permits the person to review and copy the subject records.
 
	In addition, a temporary help service firm that makes designated classification placements shall make records related to the number of hours billed to a third party client for that individual temporary laborer's hours of work available for review or copying, at no cost, during normal business hours within five days following a written request.  The temporary help service firm shall make forms, in duplicate, for those requests available at no cost to temporary laborers at the dispatch office.  The temporary laborer shall be given a copy of the request form.  It shall be a violation of this section to make any false, inaccurate, or incomplete entry into, or to delete required information from, any record required by this section.
 
	c. (1) Failure by the third party client to maintain and remit accurate time records to the temporary help service firm as provided in paragraph (2) of subsection a. of this section shall constitute a violation by a third party client under section 11 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-11), unless the third party client has been precluded from submitting those time records for reasons beyond its control.  A third party client that violates paragraph (2) of subsection a. of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $500 for each violation found by the commissioner.  The penalty shall be collected in a summary proceeding in accordance with the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	(2) A failure by the third party client to provide time records in accordance with subsection b. of this section shall not be a violation and shall not be the basis for a suit or other action under section 11 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-11), against the temporary help service firm.
 
	(3) Failure of a third party client to remit any information required by this section to a temporary help service firm shall not be a defense to the temporary help service firm recordkeeping requirements of this section.
 
L.2023, c.10, s.4.

34:8D-5  Fee charge, transportation, designated work site, prohibited.
	5. a. A temporary help service firm or a third party client, or a contractor or agent of either, shall charge no fee to a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement to transport a temporary laborer to or from the designated work site.
 
	b.	A temporary help service firm shall be jointly and severally liable for the conduct and performance of any person who transports a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement from the firm to a work site, unless the transporter is:
 
	(1) a public mass transportation system;
 
	(2) a common carrier;
 
	(3) the temporary laborer providing his or her own transportation; or
 
	(4) selected exclusively by and at the sole choice of the temporary laborer for transportation in a vehicle not owned or operated by the temporary help service firm.
 
	If any temporary help service firm provides transportation to a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement or refers a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement as provided in subsection d. of this section, the temporary help service firm shall not allow a motor vehicle to be used for the transporting of temporary laborers if the temporary help service firm knows or should know that the motor vehicle used for the transportation of temporary laborers is unsafe or not equipped as required by P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.), unless the vehicle is:
 
	(1) the property of a public mass transportation system;
 
	(2) the property of a common carrier;
 
	(3) the temporary laborer's personal vehicle; or
 
	(4) a vehicle of a temporary laborer used to carpool other temporary laborers and which is selected exclusively by and at the sole choice of the temporary laborer for transportation.
 
	c.	A temporary help service firm shall not require a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement to use transportation provided by the firm or by another provider of transportation services.
 
	d.	A temporary help service firm shall not refer a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement to any person for transportation to a work site unless that person is:
 
	(1) a public mass transportation system; or
 
	(2) providing the transportation at no fee to the temporary laborer.
 
	Directing a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement to accept a specific car pool as a condition of work shall be considered a referral by the temporary help service firm.  Any mention or discussion of the cost of a car pool shall be considered a referral by the temporary help service firm.  Informing a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement of the availability of a car pool driven by another temporary laborer shall not be considered a referral by the temporary help service firm.
 
	The temporary help service firm shall obtain, and keep on file, documentation that any provider of transportation to a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement that the temporary help service firm makes referrals to or contracts with is in compliance with the requirements of subsections e., f., and g. of this section.  The commissioner may randomly audit a temporary help service firm to ensure that the firm is maintaining the documentation required by this subsection.
 
	e.	Any motor vehicle that is owned or operated by a temporary help service firm that makes designated classification placements or a third party client of such a firm, or a contractor or agent of either, or to which a temporary help service firm refers a temporary laborer in a designated classification, which is used for the transportation of temporary laborers in a designated classification placement, shall comply with minimum insurance requirements set by the State of New Jersey.  The driver of the vehicle shall hold a valid license to operate motor vehicles in the correct classification and shall be required to produce the license immediately upon demand by the commissioner or any other person authorized to enforce P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.).  The commissioner shall forward a violation of this subsection to the appropriate law enforcement authority or regulatory agency.
 
	f.	A motor vehicle that is owned or operated by the temporary help service firm that makes designated classification placements or a third party client of such a firm, or a contractor or agent of either, or to which a temporary help service firm refers a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement, which is used for the transportation of temporary laborers in a designated classification placement, shall have a seat and a safety belt for each passenger.  The commissioner shall forward a violation of this subsection to the appropriate law enforcement authority or regulatory agency.
 
	g.	Unless the temporary laborer in a designated classification placement requests otherwise, when a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement has been transported to a work site, the temporary help service firm or a third party client, or a contractor or agent of either, shall provide transportation back to the point of hire at the end of each work day.
 
	h.	The obligations imposed by this section shall be in addition to those set forth in subsection d. of section 14 of P.L.1981, c.1 (C.56:8-1.1) and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder.
 
	i.	The commissioner may promulgate regulations under this section in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	j.	The commissioner may assess a penalty against a temporary help service firm that violates this section or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant to this section of up to $5,000 for each violation, except that the penalty for a violation of the recordkeeping requirements of this section shall not exceed $500 for each violation.  Each day that a temporary help service firm fails to comply with this section shall constitute a separate offense.  Any penalty assessed under this section shall be collected by the commissioner in a summary proceeding in accordance with the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
L.2023, c.10, s.5.

34:8D-6  Wage payment, temporary help service firm, itemized statement, listing information, certain.
	6. a. At the time of payment of wages, a temporary help service firm shall provide each temporary laborer in a designated classification placement with a detailed itemized statement, on the temporary laborer's paycheck stub or on a form approved by the commissioner, listing the following:
 
	(1) the name, address, and telephone number of each third party client at which the temporary laborer worked.  If this information is provided on the temporary laborer's paycheck stub, a code for each third party client may be used so long as the required information for each coded third party client is made available to the temporary laborer;
 
	(2) the number of hours worked by the temporary laborer at each third party client each day during the pay period.  If the temporary laborer is assigned to work at the same work site of the same third party client for multiple days in the same work week, the temporary help service firm may record a summary of hours worked at that third party client's worksite so long as the first and last day of that work week are identified as well;
 
	(3) the rate of payment for each hour worked, including any premium rate or bonus.  Overtime pay shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of subsection b. of section 5 of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a4);
 
	(4) the total pay period earnings;
 
	(5) the amount of each deduction made from the temporary laborer's compensation made by the temporary help service firm, and the purpose for which each deduction was made, including for the temporary laborer's food, equipment, withheld income tax, withheld Social Security deductions, withheld contributions to the State unemployment compensation trust fund and the State disability benefits trust fund, and every other deduction; the current maximum amount of a placement fee which the temporary help service firm may charge to a third party client to directly hire the temporary laborer pursuant to subsection a. of section 7 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-7); and
 
	(6) any additional information required by the commissioner.
 
	For each temporary laborer in a designated classification placement who is contracted to work a single day, the third party client shall, at the end of the work day, provide such temporary laborer with a work verification form, approved by the commissioner, which shall contain the date, the temporary laborer's name, the work location, and the hours worked on that day.  Any third party client who violates this section shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $500 for each violation found by the commissioner.  The maximum civil penalty shall increase to $2,500 for a second or subsequent violation.  Each violation of paragraph 1 of this subsection for each temporary laborer and for each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.  That penalty shall be collected by the commissioner in a summary proceeding in accordance with the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	b.	A third party client shall not withhold or divert the wages of a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement for any reason.  Except as otherwise authorized pursuant to this section, a temporary help service firm shall not withhold or divert the wages of a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement for any reason.  A temporary help service firm shall provide each temporary laborer with an annual earnings summary within a reasonable time after the preceding calendar year, but in no case later than February 1 of each year.  A temporary help service firm shall, at the time of each wage payment, give notice to temporary laborers in a designated classification placement of the availability of the annual earnings summary or post such a notice in a conspicuous place in the public reception area.
 
	c.	At the request of a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement, a temporary help service firm shall hold the daily wages of the temporary laborer and make bi-weekly payments.  The wages shall be paid in a single check, or, at the temporary laborer's sole option, by direct deposit or other manner approved by the commissioner, representing the wages earned during the period in accordance with P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.1 et seq.).
 
	Vouchers or any other method of payment which are not negotiable shall be prohibited as a method of payment of wages.  Temporary help service firms that make daily wage payments shall provide written notification to all temporary laborers in a designated classification placement of the right to request bi-weekly checks.  The temporary help service firm may provide this notice by conspicuously posting the notice at the location where the wages are received by the temporary laborers.
 
	d.	No temporary help service firm shall charge any temporary laborer in a designated classification placement for cashing a check issued by the temporary help service firm for wages earned by a temporary laborer who performed work through that temporary help service firm.  No temporary help service firm or third party client shall charge any temporary laborer in a designated classification placement for the expense of conducting any consumer report, as that term is defined in the "Fair Credit Reporting Act," (15 U.S.C. s.1681 et seq.), any criminal background check of any kind, or any drug test of any kind.
 
	e.	Temporary laborers in a designated classification placement shall be paid no less than the wage rate stated in the notice as provided in section 3 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-3), for all the work performed on behalf of the third party client in addition to the work listed in the written description.
 
	f. (1) The total amount deducted for meals and equipment shall not cause the hourly wage of a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement to fall below the State or federal minimum wage, whichever is greater.
 
	(2) A temporary help service firm may deduct the actual market value of reusable equipment provided to a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement by the temporary help service firm which the temporary laborer fails to return, if the temporary laborer provides a written authorization for that deduction at the time the deduction is made.  For any additional equipment, clothing, accessories, or other items which are not required by the nature of the work, either by law, custom, or as a requirement of the third party client that a temporary help service firm makes available to temporary laborers in designated classification placements for purchase, the temporary help service firm shall charge no more than actual market value.
 
	(3) A temporary help service firm shall not charge a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement for any meal not consumed by the temporary laborer and, if consumed, no more than the actual cost of a meal.  The purchase of a meal shall not be a condition of employment for a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement.
 
	g.	A temporary laborer who is contracted by a temporary help service firm to work at a third party client's worksite in a designated classification placement but who is not utilized by the third party client, shall be paid by the temporary help service firm for a minimum of four hours of pay at the agreed upon rate of pay.  However, in the event the temporary help service firm contracts the temporary laborer to work at another location during the same shift, the temporary laborer shall be paid by the temporary help service firm for a minimum of two hours of pay at the agreed upon rate of pay.
 
	h.	A third party client is required to reimburse a temporary help service firm wages and related payroll taxes for services performed for a third party client by a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement according to payment terms outlined on invoices, service agreements, or stated terms provided by the temporary help service firm.  A third party client who fails to comply with this subsection is subject to the penalties provided in section 11 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-11).
 
	The commissioner shall review a complaint filed by a temporary help service firm that makes designated classification placements against a third party client.  The commissioner shall review the payroll and accounting records of the temporary help service firm and the third party client for the period in which the violation of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.) is alleged to have occurred to determine if wages and payroll taxes have been paid to the temporary help service firm and that the temporary laborer has been paid the wages owed.
 
	i.	Any temporary help service firm that violates this section shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $500 for each violation found by the commissioner.  That penalty shall be collected by the commissioner in a summary proceeding in accordance with the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
L.2023, c.10, s.6.

34:8D-7  Restriction, temporary laborer, permanent position acceptance, prohibited.
	7. a. (1) No temporary help service firm shall restrict the right of a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement to accept a permanent position with a third party client to whom the temporary laborer has been referred for work, restrict the right of a third party client to offer employment to a temporary laborer, or restrict the right of a temporary laborer to accept a permanent position for any other employment.  A temporary help service firm may charge a placement fee to a third party client for employing a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement for whom a contract for work was effected by the temporary help service firm not to exceed the equivalent of the total daily commission rate the temporary help service firm would have received over a 60-day period, reduced by the equivalent of the daily commission rate the temporary help service firm would have received for each day the temporary laborer has performed work for the temporary help service firm in the preceding 12 months.
 
	(2) Any temporary help service firm which charges a placement fee to a third party client for employing a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement shall include on the wage payment and notice form of each affected temporary laborer the maximum amount of a fee that shall be charged to a third party client by the temporary help service firm, and the total amount of actual charges to the third party client for the temporary laborer during each pay period compared to the total compensation cost for the temporary laborer, including costs of any benefits provided.  Failure to provide the required information shall constitute a separate violation for each day the temporary help service firm fails to provide the required information.  No fee provided for under this section shall be assessed or collected by the temporary help service firm when a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement is offered permanent work following the suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of the temporary help service firm's certification by the director.
 
	b.	Any temporary laborer assigned to work at a third party client in a designated classification placement shall not be paid less than the average rate of pay and average cost of benefits, or the cash equivalent thereof, of employees of the third party client performing the same or substantially similar work on jobs the performance of which requires equal skill, effort, and responsibility, and which are performed under similar working conditions for the third party client at the time the temporary laborer is assigned to work at the third party client.  Each violation of this subsection for each affected temporary laborer shall constitute a separate violation under section 11 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-11).
 
	c.	Any temporary help service firm that violates this section shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $5,000 for each violation found by the commissioner.  That penalty shall be collected by the commissioner in a summary proceeding in accordance with the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	d.	If a third party client leases or contracts with a temporary help service firm for the services of a temporary laborer in a designated classification requirement, the third party client shall be, with the temporary help service firm, jointly and severally responsible for any violation of this section, including with respect to relief provided by section 11 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-11) and civil penalties found by the commissioner.
 
L.2023, c.10, s.7.

34:8D-8  Temporary help service firm, designated classification placements, certified by director.
	8. a. A temporary help service firm which is located, operates, or transacts business within this State shall not make any designated classification placements unless it is certified by the director to do so, in accordance with rules adopted by the director and shall be subject to P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.).  Each temporary help service firm seeking certification to make designated classification placements shall provide proof of an employer account number issued by the commissioner for the payment of unemployment insurance contributions as required under the "unemployment compensation law," R.S.43:21-1 et seq.; proof of valid workers' compensation insurance in effect at the time of certification covering all of its employees; on a form created by the director, the number of temporary laborers previously in designated classification placements whom the temporary help service firm has placed in a permanent position with a third party client in the preceding 12 months as well as the percentage those permanent placements represent of the total number of temporary laborers in designated classification placements contracted by the temporary help service firm during the same period; and such other information as the director may require pursuant to rules adopted under this section.  If, at any time, the workers' compensation insurance coverage for a temporary help service firm that makes designated classification placements lapses, the temporary help service firm shall have an affirmative duty to report the lapse of coverage to the director and the temporary help service firm's certification shall be suspended until the firm's workers' compensation insurance is reinstated.  A temporary help service firm shall inform the director of any change or addition to the information required under this subsection within 30 days of the change or addition.
 
	The director shall assess each temporary help service firm seeking certification to make designated classification placements a non-refundable certification fee not exceeding $2,000 per year per temporary help service firm and a non-refundable fee not to exceed $750 per year for each branch office or other location where the temporary help service firm regularly conducts its business, including but not limited to contracting with and recruiting with temporary laborers for designated classification placement services.  The fee shall be paid by check or money order, and the director may not refuse to accept a check on the basis that it is not a certified check or a cashier's check.  The director may charge an additional fee to be paid by a temporary help service firm that makes designated classification placements if the firm, or any person on the firm's behalf, issues or delivers a check to the director that is not honored by the financial institution upon which it is drawn.  The director shall adopt rules for violation hearings and penalties for violations of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.).  The director shall give the commissioner access to any information that the director receives pursuant to this section.
 
	b.	It is a violation of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.) to operate a temporary help service firm that makes designated classification placements without being certified by the director in accordance with subsection a. of this section.  The Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Law and Public Safety shall create and maintain on its Internet website, accessible to the public:
 
	(1) a list of all certified temporary help service firms in the State that make designated classification placements whose certification is in good standing;
 
	(2) a list of temporary help service firms in the State that make designated classification placements whose certification has been suspended, including the reason for the suspension, the date that the suspension was initiated, and the date, if known, that the suspension is to be lifted; and
 
	(3) a list of temporary help service firms in the State that make designated classification placements whose certification has been revoked, including the reason for the revocation and the date that the certification was revoked.
 
	The director shall assess a penalty against any temporary help service firm that makes designated classification placements and that fails to obtain a certification from the director in accordance with P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.) or any rules adopted under P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.) of $5,000 for each violation.  Each day during which a person operates as a temporary help service firm that makes designated classification placements without being certified as a temporary help service firm with the director pursuant to this section shall be a separate and distinct violation of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.).  That penalty shall be collected by the director in a summary proceeding in accordance with the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	A temporary help service firm that makes designated classification placements shall obtain a surety bond issued by a surety company admitted to do business in this State.  The principal sum of the bond shall not be less than $200,000.  A copy of the bond shall be filed with the director.
 
	The bond required by this section shall be in favor of, and payable to, the people of the State of New Jersey, and shall be for the benefit of any temporary laborer damaged by the temporary help service firm's failure to pay wages, interest on wages, or fringe benefits, or damaged by violation of this section.
 
	Thirty days prior to the cancellation or termination of any surety bond required by this section, the surety shall send written notice to both the temporary help service firm and the director identifying the bond and the date of the cancellation or termination.
 
	A temporary help service firm that makes designated classification placements shall not conduct any business until it obtains a new surety bond and files a copy of it with the director.
 
	This subsection shall not apply to a temporary help service firm whose temporary laborers are covered by a valid collective bargaining agreement, if the agreement expressly provides for:
 
	(1) Wages;
 
	(2) Hours of work;
 
	(3) Working conditions;
 
	(4) An expeditious process to resolve disputes concerning nonpayment of wages;
 
	(5) Documentation of its current workers' compensation insurance policy in effect for the temporary laborers; and
 
	(6) Compliance with all provisions of this section.
 
	c.	The principal executive officer of a temporary help service firm that makes designated classification placements shall certify under oath at the time of certification of the temporary help service firm each year on a form created by the director that:
 
	(1) the signing officer has reviewed the certification form of the temporary help service firm and confirmed the information is true and accurate to the best of the officer's knowledge;
 
	(2) the signing officer has reviewed the recordkeeping practices of the temporary help service firm and confirmed that the recordkeeping practices comply with the requirements of section 4 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-4) to the best of his or her knowledge;
 
	(3) the signing officer has reviewed the temporary help service firm's filing as required by subsection a. of section 8 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-8), related to the placement of temporary laborers in permanent positions with third party clients and has confirmed that those practices comply with the requirements of section 7 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-7) and section 14 of P.L.1981, c.1 (C.56:8-1.1), to the best of the officer's knowledge;
 
	(4) the signing officer has reviewed the temporary help service firm's practices related to the transportation of temporary laborers and has confirmed that those practices comply with the requirements of section 5 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-5) to the best of the officer's knowledge;
 
	(5) the signing officer has reviewed and is responsible for the surety bond posted by the temporary help service firm and its renewals; and
 
	(6) the signing officer:
 
	(a) is responsible for establishing and maintaining internal controls to comply with the recordkeeping requirements; and
 
	(b) has evaluated the effectiveness of the internal controls.
 
	d.	An applicant is not eligible to obtain or renew a certification to operate a temporary help service firm that makes designated classification placements under P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.) if the applicant or any of its officers, directors, partners, or managers or any owner having 25 percent or greater beneficial interest:
 
	(1) has been involved, as owner, officer, director, partner, or manager, of a temporary help service firm the registration or certification of which has been revoked or suspended without being reinstated within the five years immediately preceding the filing of the application; or
 
	(2) is under the age of 18.
 
	e.	Every temporary help service firm that makes designated classification placements shall post and keep posted at each location, in a position easily accessible to all employees, notices as supplied and required by the commissioner containing a copy or summary of the provisions of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.), and a notice which informs the public of a toll-free telephone number operated by the commissioner for temporary laborers in designated classification placements and the public to file wage dispute complaints and other alleged violations by temporary help service firms that make designated classification placements.  The notices shall be in English or any other language generally understood in the locale of the temporary help service firm.
 
	f.	No temporary help service firm shall be permitted to obtain or renew a certification to make designated classification placements in New Jersey until it has complied with the requirements of this section.
 
	g.	Notwithstanding any law, rule, or regulation to the contrary, any person or entity that meets the definition of temporary help service firm and that makes designated classification placements as those terms are defined in section 2 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-2), shall obtain a certification pursuant to this section and otherwise comply with the provisions of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.), regardless of whether the person or entity is licensed or registered as one or more of the entities identified in section 1 of P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-43).
 
	h.	The requirements of this section shall be in addition to those imposed by any other applicable law, rule, or regulation, including section 14 of P.L.1981, c.1 (C.56:8-1.1) and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder.  A temporary help service firm shall not receive a certification under this section unless it is either registered as a temporary help service firm pursuant to section 14 of P.L.1981, c.1 (C.56:8-1.1) and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, or licensed or registered as an entity authorized by any other law, rule, or regulation to provide temporary help services.
 
L.2023, c.10, s.8.

34:8D-9  Violation, uncertified temporary help service firm, contract.
	9.	It is a violation of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.) for a third party client to enter into a contract with a temporary help service firm not certified under section 8 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-8), for the assignment of a temporary laborer to a designated classification placement.  A third party client shall verify a temporary help service firm's status with the director before entering into a contract with the temporary help service firm for the assignment of a temporary laborer to a designated classification placement, and on March 1 and September 1 of each year.
 
	A temporary help service firm shall provide each of its third party clients with proof of valid certification issued by the director at the time of entering into a contract for the assignment of a temporary laborer to a designated classification placement.  A temporary help service firm shall be required to notify, both by telephone and in writing, each temporary laborer it assigns to a designated classification placement and each third party client with whom it has a contract for the assignment of a temporary laborer to a designated classification placement within 24 hours of any denial, suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of its certification by the director.  All contracts between any temporary help service firm and any third party client for the assignment of a temporary laborer to a designated classification placement shall be considered null and void from the date any denial, suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of certification becomes effective and until such time as the temporary help service firm becomes certified and considered in good standing by the director as provided in section 8 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-8).
 
	Upon request, the director shall provide to a third party client a list of entities certified as temporary help service firms pursuant to section 8 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-8).  A third party client may rely on information provided by the director or maintained on the Division of Consumer Affair's website pursuant to section 8 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-8), and shall be held harmless if such information maintained or provided by the director or the division was inaccurate.  Any third party client that violates this section shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $500.  Each day during which a third party client contracts with a person operating as a temporary help service firm but not certified as a temporary help service firm under section 8 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-8), shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
 
L.2023, c.10, s.9.

34:8D-10  Violation, temporary help service firm, third party client, retaliation, exercising rights granted.
	10. a. It is a violation of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.) for a temporary help service firm or third party client, or any agent of a temporary help service firm or third party client, to retaliate through discharge or in any other manner against any temporary laborer in a designated classification placement for exercising any rights granted under P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.).  The termination or disciplinary action by a temporary help service firm against a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement within 90 days of the person's exercise of rights protected under P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.) shall raise a rebuttable presumption of having done so in retaliation for the exercise of those rights.  Such retaliation shall subject a temporary help service firm or third party client, or both, to civil penalties pursuant to P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.) or a private cause of action.
 
	b.	It is a violation of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.) for a temporary help service firm or third party client to retaliate against a temporary laborer in a designated classification placement for:
 
	(1) making a complaint to a temporary help service firm, to a third party client, to a co-worker, to a community organization, before a public hearing, or to a State or federal agency that rights guaranteed under P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.) have been violated;
 
	(2) instituting any proceeding under or related to P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.); or
 
	(3) testifying or preparing to testify in an investigation or proceeding under P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.).
 
	c.	When the commissioner finds that a temporary help service firm or third party client has violated this section, the commissioner is authorized to assess and collect administrative penalties, up to a maximum of $250 for a first violation and up to a maximum of $500 for each subsequent violation, specified in a schedule of penalties to be promulgated as a rule or regulation by the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).  When determining the amount of the penalty imposed because of a violation, the commissioner shall consider factors which include the history of previous violations by the employer, the seriousness of the violation, the good faith of the employer and the size of the employer's business.  No administrative penalty shall be levied pursuant to this section unless the commissioner provides the alleged violator with notification of the violation and of the amount of the penalty by certified mail and an opportunity to request a hearing before the commissioner or his designee within 15 days following the receipt of the notice.  If a hearing is requested, the commissioner shall issue a final order upon such hearing and a finding that a violation has occurred.  If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order upon expiration of the 15-day period.  Payment of the penalty is due when a final order is issued or when the notice becomes a final order.  Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding commenced by the commissioner pursuant to "the penalty enforcement law" (N.J.S. 2A:58-1 et seq.).  Any sum collected as a fine or penalty pursuant to this section shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
L.2023, c.10, s.10.

34:8D-11  Aggrieved person, temporary help service firm, third party client violation, civil action, Superior Court.
	11. a. A person aggrieved by a violation of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.) by a temporary help service firm or a third party client may institute a civil action in the Superior Court, in the county where the alleged offense occurred or where any temporary laborer who is party to the action resides, without regard to exhaustion of any alternative administrative remedies provided in P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.).
 
	A temporary help service firm aggrieved by a violation of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.) by a third party client may institute a civil action in the Superior Court, in the county where the alleged offense occurred or where the temporary help service firm which is party to the action is located.
 
	An action may be brought by one or more temporary laborers employed by the temporary help service firm for and on behalf of themselves and other temporary laborers similarly situated against the temporary help service firm or a third party client.
 
	Notwithstanding any other relief provided under any other provision of law, a temporary laborer whose rights have been violated under P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.) by a temporary help service firm or a third party client or a temporary help service firm whose rights have been violated under P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.) by a third party client is entitled to the following relief:
 
	(1) in the case of any violation of subsection a. of section 7 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-7) relating to any unlawful restrictions by a temporary help service firm on the right of a temporary laborer to accept a permanent position for any other employment or the right of a third party client to offer such employment to a temporary laborer, $50 for each temporary laborer affected by the temporary help service firm 's policy, practice, or agreement and for each day that policy, practice, or agreement is in effect, plus actual damages;
 
	(2) in the case of unlawful retaliation, the greater of all legal or equitable relief as may be appropriate or liquidated damages equal to $20,000 per incident of retaliation, at the selection of the aggrieved temporary laborer, and reinstatement, if appropriate; and
 
	(3) attorney's fees and costs.
 
	b.	The right of an aggrieved person to bring an action under this section terminates upon the passing of six years from the final date of employment by the temporary help service firm or the third party client or upon the passing of six years from the date of termination of the contract between the temporary help service firm and the third party client.
 
L.2023, c.10, s.11.

34:8D-12  Director, authority, suspend, revoke, refuse certification; notification.
	12. a. The director shall have the authority to deny, suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew any certification issued under section 8 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-8).
 
	b.	The director shall notify a temporary help service firm in writing by mail of the denial, suspension of, revocation of, or refusal to renew the certification and the reason for the denial, suspension of, revocation, or refusal.  The Division of Consumer Affairs shall update the list of temporary help service firms certified to make designated classification placements on its website to reflect any denial, suspension, revocation or refusal to renew the certification of a temporary help service firm.  The director may deny, suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew any certification issued under section 8 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-8) on the following grounds:
 
	(1) The temporary help service firm is in default of payment of the certification fee required under section 8 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-8), fails to obtain or maintain or terminates the surety bond required under section 8 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-8), or otherwise fails to comply with the requirements under section 8 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-8);
 
	(2) The certification required under section 8 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-8) was procured by fraud or false representation of fact;
 
	(3) The temporary help service firm is subject to a court order entering final judgment for violations of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.) or for violations of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a et seq.) and the judgment was not satisfied within 30 days of either:
 
	(a) the expiration of the time for filing an appeal from the final judgment order; or
 
	(b) if a timely appeal was made, the date of the final resolution of that appeal and any subsequent appeals resulting in final judicial affirmation of the findings of a violation;
 
	(4) The temporary help service firm has failed to comply with the terms of an administrative penalty or final order, within 30 days of issuance of that penalty or order, issued by the commissioner or the director pursuant to P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.) or issued by the commissioner pursuant to P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a et seq.) for which all appeal rights have been exhausted;
 
	(5) The temporary help service firm has been determined through a separate enforcement process to be operating in violation of any law; or
 
	(6) The temporary help service firm has committed one or more violations of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.), that have jeopardized the public health, safety, or welfare, or that call into question the firm's ability to operate as a temporary help service firm in compliance with P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.).
 
	c.	If a temporary help service firm's application for initial registration or renewal is denied pursuant to section 14 of P.L.1981, c.1 (C.56:8-1.1) or any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, or if a temporary help service firm's registration is suspended, revoked, or not renewed for any reason, the director shall take the same action against the temporary help service firm with respect to an application or a certification under section 8 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-8).  If a person or entity that holds or seeks a license or registration that authorizes the person or entity to provide temporary help services pursuant to any other law, rule, or regulation is denied such license or registration, or if such license or registration is suspended, revoked, or not renewed for any reason, the director shall take the same action against the temporary help service firm with respect to an application or a certification under section 8 of P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-8).
 
	d.	The director shall not deny, revoke, or refuse to renew a certification under this section except upon reasonable notice to, and opportunity to be heard by, the applicant or certification-holder.  The director may, if the director finds it to be in the public interest, suspend a certification for any period of time that the director determines to be proper, or assess a penalty in lieu of suspension, or both, and may issue a new certification, notwithstanding the revocation of a prior certification, provided the director finds the applicant to have become entitled to a new certification.
 
L.2023, c.10, s.12.

34:8D-13  Rights, obligations.
	14.	The rights and obligations established by P.L.2023, c.10 (C.34:8D-1 et al.) shall be in addition to those set forth in P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-1 et seq.) and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder; P.L.1989, c.331 (C.34:8-43 et seq.) and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder; and any other applicable law, rule, or regulation.
 
L.2023, c.10, s.14.

34:9-1.  Employment of aliens on public works forbidden;  penalty
    It shall be unlawful for the state or any county, municipality, board, committee, commission or officer thereof, officer, body or organization having charge of any public work or any construction, whether the same be a building, excavation, pipe-laying, bridge or dock-building, sewer or drainage construction, road building, paving, or any other form or kind of public work, which shall be undertaken and done at public expense or for any person or corporation, to employ as a mechanic or laborer upon such public work or construction, or any part thereof, any person who is not at the time of such employment a citizen of the United States.  Any contractor or officer who shall  violate the provisions of this section shall forfeit and pay the sum of one  hundred dollars, with costs, to be recovered in an action at law in any court  of competent jurisdiction, which penalty when recovered shall be paid into the  treasury of the state, or county or municipality within which and under whose  authority such officer or contractor claims to act.

34:9-2.  Resident citizens to be preferred in employment on public works
    In the construction of any public work for the state, or any county, city, town, township, or borough, or other municipal corporation or any board, committee, commission or officer thereof, whether the same be a building, excavation, sewer, or drainage construction, road building, paving, bridge, or any other form or kind of public work, preference in employment thereon shall be given to citizens of the state of New Jersey who have resided and maintained  domiciles within the state for a period of not less than one year immediately  prior to such employment.  Persons other than citizens of the state may be  employed when such citizens are not available.

    Every contract for the construction of public works shall provide that if this section is not complied with the contract shall be voidable at the instance of the state, county or municipality.

    All boards, officers, agents or employees having the power to enter into contracts which provide for the expenditure of public money on public works, shall file in the office of the commissioner of labor the names and addresses of all contractors holding contracts with the state, or any county, or municipal corporation, or with any board, committee, commission or officer thereof.  Upon the demand of the commissioner a contractor shall furnish a list  of the names and addresses of all his or its subcontractors.

    Each contractor performing work for the state, or for any county, or municipal corporation, or for any board, committee, commission, or officer thereof shall keep a list of his or its employees, stating whether they are native born citizens or naturalized citizens, and in case of naturalization, the date thereof and the name of the court in which granted.

    Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed and adjudged a disorderly person, and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars nor more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment of not less than thirty days nor more than ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

34:9A-1.  Short title
    This act shall be known as the Seasonal Farm Labor Act.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 350, s. 1.  Amended by L.1967, c. 91, s. 2, eff. June 7, 1967.

34:9A-2.  Definitions
    As used in this act, unless the context clearly requires a different meaning:

    (a)  " Farm labor camp,"  or  "Migrant labor camp"  shall mean one or more tents, vehicles, buildings or structures, together with the tract of land appertaining thereto, used as living quarters by seasonal, temporary or migrant  workers directly or indirectly in connection with any work or place where work  is being performed, whether or not rent is paid or reserved in connection with  the use or occupancy of such premises.

    (b)  "Commissioner"  shall mean the Commissioner of Labor and Industry or any of his authorized deputies, representatives, agents or employees.

    (c)  "Department"  shall mean the Department of Labor and Industry.

     (d)   "Bureau"  shall mean the bureau of migrant labor established by this act.

     (e) The terms  "seasonal worker,"   "temporary worker"  and  "migrant worker"  may be used interchangeably and shall include any person who is engaged in any seasonal or temporary work.

    (f) All other words and phrases shall be defined and construed as provided by chapter 1 of Title 1 of the Revised Statutes.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 350, s. 2.  Amended by L.1967, c. 91, s. 3, eff. June 7, 1967.

34:9A-3.  Bureau of migrant labor;  establishment
    There is hereby established in the Department of Labor and Industry a bureau  of migrant labor.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 351, s. 3.  Amended by L.1967, c. 91, s. 4, eff. June 7, 1967.

34:9A-4.1.  Migrant labor board;  abolition;  transfer of functions, powers  and duties
    The migrant labor board is hereby abolished and all of its functions, powers  and duties are vested in the Commissioner of Labor and Industry. Any rules or  regulations previously approved by the migrant labor board shall remain in full  force and effect unless or until modified by the commissioner.

     L.1967, c. 91, s. 12, eff. June 7, 1967.

34:9A-7.  Deputy commissioner of labor;  appointment
    The Commissioner of Labor and Industry shall have the duties and exercise the powers of the bureau through such deputy commissioner of labor as he may designate.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 352, s. 7.  Amended by L.1967, c. 91, s. 5, eff. June 7, 1967.

34:9A-7.1.  Seasonal worker defined
    As used in this act  "seasonal worker"  shall mean any person who is engaged  in any seasonal or temporary work.

     L.1971, c. 194, s. 1, eff. June 7, 1971.

34:9A-7.2.  Certified Spanish language interpreters;  permanent and temporary staff
    The Commissioner of the Department of Labor and Industry shall provide for and establish in the Bureau of Migrant Labor a permanent staff of certified Spanish language interpreters and other personnel as necessary to aid and assist seasonal workers in interpreting language in connection with matters involving any Federal, State, county or local governmental agency.

    In addition to said permanent staff, the commissioner shall maintain a roster of certified Spanish language interpreters to be available at such times  and places on a temporary basis as the commissioner determines.

     L.1971, c. 194, s. 2, eff. June 7, 1971.

34:9A-7.3.  Permanent staff employment under civil service;  employment and  compensation of temporary staff
    Interpreters and other employees for the permanent staff shall be appointed  and employed by the commissioner subject to the provisions of Title 11 of the  Revised Statutes.  Temporary interpreters shall not be appointed pursuant to  Title 11 of the Revised Statutes and they shall receive payment for their  services on a per diem or such other basis as the commissioner determines to be  appropriate.

     L.1971, c. 194, s. 3, eff. June 7, 1971.

34:9A-7.4.  Rules and regulations
    The commissioner is authorized to adopt, promulgate and enforce such rules and regulations pertaining to the qualification and certification of interpreters and their duties and such other matters as he determines necessary  to implement this act.

     L.1971, c. 194, s. 4, eff. June 7, 1971.

34:9A-9.  Duties and powers of bureau
    The bureau shall:

    (a) Enforce the provisions of article 2 of this act either directly or through interdepartmental agreements;

    (b) Enforce all other applicable labor laws, including, but not limited to,  those relating to private employment agencies, child labor, wage payments and  wage claims, with respect to migrant labor camps;

    (c) Provide inspectional services to encourage minimum standards of housing  and sanitation in migrant labor camps;

    (d) Advise and consult with employers of migrant labor as to the ways and means of improving living conditions of migrant workers;

    (e) In co-operation with the Department of Health, prescribe minimum standards of sanitation, and preventive and curative health services, not inconsistent with this act, for migrant workers;

    (f) In co-operation with the Department of Education, provide, so far as possible, educational facilities for the children of migrant workers;

    (g) In co-operation with the Department of State Police, provide for a minimum standard of protection for migrant workers;

    (h) In co-operation with the Department of Community Affairs, plan, locate and construct (as soon as conditions permit) experimental State camps for migrant workers;  provided, however, that no such camp shall be located or constructed in any municipality where there is not located an industry or farm employing migrant labor without the consent of the governing body of said municipality;

    (i) In co-operation with the Department of Agriculture, conduct an educational program for employers of migrant labor pertaining to the standards,  methods and objectives of the division of migrant labor;

    (j) In co-operation with the Department of Institutions and Agencies, help devise ways and means for resolving the welfare problems that require attention.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 353, s. 9.  Amended by L.1967, c. 91, s. 6, eff. June 7, 1967.

34:9A-10.  Inspectional services
    Each camp shall from time to time be inspected by the bureau. Inspectors shall be trained and authorized to consult with and assist camp owners and operators with respect to the requirements of this act. Inspectors shall also ascertain and report to the commissioner all violations of this act, and perform such other duties as the commissioner shall direct.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 354, s. 10.  Amended by L.1967, c. 91, s. 7, eff. June 7, 1967.

34:9A-11.  Preventive and curative public health services
    The bureau through the Department of Health shall make surveys to determine  the adequacy of preventive and curative health services available to occupants  of migrant labor camps, and where such services are found inadequate, to  determine desirable ways and means to make them available. The commissioner  shall arrange, to the extent of the available appropriations, through the  Department of Health for the provision of such supplementary services.  Said  services may be provided through the use of one or more traveling dispensaries,  by a contract with physicians, dentists, hospitals or clinics, or in such other  manner as may be recommended by the Department of Health.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 354, s. 11.  Amended by L.1967, c. 91, s. 8, eff. June 7, 1967.

34:9A-12.  Communicable diseases
    For the purpose of this act the commissioner may through the State Director  of Health exercise the powers of a local board or health officer with respect  to communicable diseases defined by chapter four of Title 26 of the Revised  Statutes.  The commissioner shall make such arrangements and agreements with  the Department of Health and other interested departments and agencies as will  facilitate the processing of notices of cases of communicable diseases in  migrant labor camps and expedite the treatment of such cases.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 355, s. 12.

34:9A-13.  Notice of communicable diseases;  quarantine;  food poisoning
    It shall be the duty of the person in charge of a camp to report immediately  to the local health authority the name and address of any individual in the  camp known to have or suspected of having a communicable disease.  Until  official action in such case has been taken, strict isolation shall be  maintained.

    The person in charge of a migrant camp shall co-operate and assist in the enforcement of any quarantine or isolation measures imposed by any public authority having jurisdiction.

    Whenever there shall occur in any camp an outbreak of suspected food poisoning or an unusual prevalence of any illness in which fever, diarrhea, sore throat, vomiting, or jaundice is a prominent symptom, it shall be the duty  of the person in charge of the camp to report immediately the existence of such  an outbreak or disease prevalence to the State Director of Health, district or  local health officer verbally, or by telegram or telephone;  such officer shall  forthwith investigate the outbreak and shall report by telegram or telephone  immediately the existence of such an outbreak to the commissioner or deputy  commissioner in charge of the division.  Local health officers shall exercise  due diligence in ascertaining the existence of such outbreaks or the unusual  prevalence of disease in camps.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 355, s. 13.

34:9A-14.  Construction and operation of camps;  field surveys and censuses
    The bureau in co-operation with the Department of Community Affairs, shall make field surveys and censuses adequate to determine the number, location and character of migrant agricultural workers, the needs of their employers, and the most desirable locations for public migrant labor camps. The commissioner may, as soon as a survey and census is completed and he finds a project to be feasible, contract with the public housing and development authority in the Department of Community Affairs for the acquisition or construction of one or more camps.  The bureau may operate such public camps or it may contract for their operation by such authority or by one or more municipalities.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 356, s. 14.  Amended by L.1967, c. 91, s. 9, eff. June 7, 1967.

34:9A-15.  Personnel;  appointments
    The commissioner may appoint such professional, technical and clerical assistants and employees as may be necessary for the performance of his functions under this act.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 356, s. 15.

34:9A-16.  Rules and regulations
    The commissioner may make, modify and repeal rules and regulations for the interpretation and application of the provisions of this act, and, in his discretion he may temporarily suspend the operation of one or more sections of this act whenever he finds that material priorities or manpower shortages make it impracticable to comply therewith.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 356, s. 16.  Amended by L.1967, c. 91, s. 10, eff. June 7, 1967.

34:9A-17.  Civil penalties
    In addition to any other sanctions herein or otherwise provided by law, the  commissioner, upon notice and hearing, may impose a penalty not exceeding $500.00 for any violation of this act or of any rule or regulation duly issued hereunder.  Such penalty shall be used for, and recovered by and in the name of  the commissioner in a civil action by a summary proceeding under the Penalty  Enforcement Law (N.J.S. 2A:58-1). Where any violation of this act or of any  rule or regulation duly issued hereunder is of a continuing nature, each day  during which such violation continues after the date fixed by the commissioner  in any order or notice for the correction or termination of such violation,  shall constitute an additional separate and distinct offense, except during the  time an appeal from said order or notice may be taken or is pending.  It shall  be a complete defense to any action for a penalty pursuant to this section for the defendant to prove that the violation complained of is solely the result of  the willful destruction by the occupants of any camp; provided, that proof of  such fact shall not alter any duty to correct or terminate said violation as  ordered by the commissioner.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 356, s. 17.  Amended by L.1967, c. 259, s. 1, eff. Dec. 26,  1967.

34:9A-18.  Entry and inspection
    The commissioner, his authorized officers and agents may, for the purpose of  this act:

    (a) Enter public or private property to determine whether there exists any camp to which this article applies;

    (b) Enter and inspect all camps wheresoever situated, and inspect all accommodations, equipment, or paraphernalia connected therewith;

    (c) Enter and inspect the land adjacent to the camp to determine whether the  sanitary and other requirements of this act have been or are being complied  with.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 357, s. 18.

34:9A-19.  Prohibition of violations
    No person, or any agent or officer thereof, shall construct, establish, maintain, operate, or occupy, or permit the construction, establishment, maintenance, operation, occupancy or use of any camp which does not fully comply with any of the requirements of this act.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 357, s. 19.  Amended by L.1967, c. 259, s. 2, eff. Dec. 26,  1967.

34:9A-20.  Certified labor camps;  application;  inspections;  erection, construction or alteration
    Each person employing any person to work in or at camps to which this article applies shall apply, not later than 60 days prior to the opening of any  such camp in any calendar year to the bureau for a certificate of compliance of  such camp with the requirements of this act.  Such application shall be made on  such forms and contain such information, drawings or photographs as the  commissioner may deem necessary to enable him to determine the fact of  compliance.  A separate application shall be made and a separate certificate  issued for each camp.  The commissioner shall cause each camp to be inspected  within 45 days of receipt of an application for a certificate of compliance.   If the commissioner finds from the application and inspection that a camp  fully complies with the requirements of this act, he shall issue a certificate  to that effect.   No camp shall be maintained, operated, used or occupied until  the commissioner shall have issued therefor a certificate as required by this  section; provided, that if no inspection of a camp has been made within 45  days of the receipt of an application for a certificate of compliance, such  camp may open but shall be closed by the commissioner if subsequent inspection discloses the fact that such camp does not substantially comply with the requirements of this act.

    No camp shall be erected, constructed or substantially altered subsequent to  the effective date of this act until the plans and specifications for such erection, construction or alteration have been submitted to, and approved by, the commissioner.  The commissioner shall approve any plans and specifications submitted to him pursuant to this section if he finds that such plans and specifications fully comply with the requirements of this act and any rule or regulation duly issued hereunder.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 357, s. 20.  Amended by L.1967, c. 91, s. 11, eff. June 7, 1967;  L.1967, c. 259, s. 3, eff. Dec. 26, 1967.

34:9A-21.  Use of certificate;  revocation
    No person shall display any certificate issued under this article in or about any premises other than the camp for which the certificate was issued; nor shall any person advertise, represent or describe any camp for which such a certificate has not been issued, or for which a certificate has been issued and subsequently revoked, as a certified labor camp.  Whenever the commissioner  finds that a camp for which a certificate has been issued no longer complies  with the requirements of this act he shall revoke the certificate upon  reasonable notice to the holder thereof.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 357, s. 21.

34:9A-22.  Shelter;  sleeping places, requirements
    Every camp shall provide sleeping places in reasonably good structural condition, including adequate provision against fire hazards, so as to shelter the occupants against the elements and to exclude ground dampness. Sleeping places shall be kept clean and free from vermin and matter of an infectious or contagious nature.  The grounds around sleeping places shall be properly drained and shall be kept clean and free from accumulations of dirt, filth, garbage, and deleterious matter.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 358, s. 22.

34:9A-23.  Beds or bunks
    Each sleeping place shall be equipped with beds or bunks made of steel, canvas, or other sanitary material, so constructed as to afford reasonable comfort to the user, and so arranged as to allow a clear space of at least twenty inches, extending from the floor to the ceiling or roof, between each bed or bunk or tier thereof.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 358, s. 23.

34:9A-24.  Air and privacy
    Every sleeping place erected or constructed subsequent to the effective date  of this act shall contain sufficient air space and partitions to insure an  adequate supply of fresh air, and reasonable privacy for each occupant; provided, that each such sleeping place shall conform to the standards prescribed by the Secretary of Labor of the United States pursuant to 48 United  States Statutes at Large 117, section 12, approved June 6, 1933 (29 U.S.C. 49k,  as amended and supplemented.

    Every sleeping place which, on the effective date of this act, is maintained, operated, occupied or used by persons working in or at camps to which this article applies, shall be made to conform, no later than January 1, 1970, to the standards prescribed by the Secretary of Labor of the United States pursuant to 48 United States Statutes at Large 117, section 12, approved  June 6, 1933 (29 U.S.C. 49k), as amended and supplemented; provided, that the  commissioner, upon proper application therefor, may grant exceptions from the  literal requirements of this section and any rule or regulation duly issued  hereunder, if he finds that strict compliance would cause undue hardship and  that the exception, if granted, will not unreasonably jeopardize the health of  safety of the intended occupants.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 358, s. 24.  Amended by L.1967, c. 259, s. 4, eff. Dec. 26,  1967.

34:9A-25.  Food preparation
    Every camp shall be provided with adequate stoves or similar cooking facilities.  Every tent, or structure where food is cooked, prepared or served in a camp shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and the openings thereof shall be screened.  All utensils, in which food is prepared or kept, or  from which food is to be eaten, and all implements used in the eating of food  shall be kept in a clean, unbroken, and sanitary condition.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 358, s. 25.

34:9A-26.  Water
    (a) The occupants of each camp shall be provided a potable water supply in accordance with the following requirements:

    (1) Each camp shall be provided with an adequate supply of potable water which is of safe sanitary quality.

    (2) Wells or springs used as sources of water supply shall have tight covers  and be so constructed and located as to preclude their pollution by seepage  from cesspools, privies, sewers, sewage treatment works, stables or manure  piles, or pollution from surface drainage.  The water from such sources shall  be obtained by free gravity flow or by a metal pump with watertight connection  to a concrete slab covering such well or spring.  If the pump is situated  adjacent to the well or spring, it shall be so located and connected as to  prevent pollution of the water.

    (3) Basins, pressure tanks or reservoirs used for the storage of drinking water subsequently distributed without treatment shall be so lined, curbed, covered, or otherwise protected as may be necessary to prevent pollution of the  supply by surface water, and to preclude pollution of an accidental, incidental  or willful nature.  Water therefrom shall be delivered to the camp fixtures, if  such fixtures are provided, by means of a watertight discharge pipe by gravity  or by pumping.

    (4) No common drinking cup shall be used.  If drinking fountains are provided they shall be of sanitary design and construction.

    (b) The occupants of each camp erected or constructed subsequent to the effective date of this act shall be provided a potable water supply system in accordance with the provisions of  "The Realty Improvement Sewerage and Facilities Act (1954),"  P.L.1954, chapter 199, and any standards or regulations duly issued pursuant thereto by the Commissioner of Health; provided, that the commissioner, for good cause shown, and upon consultation with the Commissioner of Health, is authorized to amend or revise any such standard or regulation for application to the camps to which this article applies.

    (c) The occupants of each camp which, on the effective date of this act, is  maintained, occupied or used by persons working in or at camps to which the  article applies, shall be provided, no later than January 1, 1970, with a potable water supply system in accordance with the provisions of  "The Realty Improvement Sewerage and Facilities Act (1954),"  P.L.1954, chapter 199, and any standards or regulations duly issued pursuant thereto by the Commissioner of Health;  provided, that the commissioner, for good cause shown and upon consultation with the Commissioner of Health, is authorized to amend or revise any such standard or regulation for application to the camps to which this article applies.

    (d) The commissioner, upon proper application therefor, may grant exceptions  from the literal requirements of this section and any rule or regulation duly  issued hereunder, it he finds that strict compliance would cause undue hardship  and that the exception, if granted, will not unreasonably jeopardize the health  or safety of the intended occupants.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 359, s. 26.  Amended by L.1967, c. 259, s. 5, eff. Dec. 26,  1967.

34:9A-27.  Bathing facilities
    (a) Convenient and suitable bathing facilities of a reasonable nature to suit conditions, kept clean and sanitary, shall be provided for every camp.

    (b) The occupants of each camp erected or constructed subsequent to the effective date of this act shall be provided convenient and suitable bathing facilities of a reasonable nature to suit conditions which shall be kept clean and sanitary, shall be constructed in accordance with regulations promulgated by the commissioner, and whose effluent shall be discharged into and treated by  sewerage facilities constructed in accordance with the provisions of  "The Realty Improvement Sewerage and Facilities Act (1954)," P.L.1954, chapter 199, and any standards and regulations duly issued pursuant thereto by the Commissioner of Health;  provided, that the commissioner for good cause shown and upon consultation with the Commissioner of Health, is authorized to amend or revise any such standard or regulation for application to the camps to which  this article applies.

    (c) The occupants of each camp which, on the effective date of this act, is  maintained, occupied or used by persons working in or at camps to which this  article applies, shall be provided, no later than January 1, 1970, convenient  and suitable bathing facilities of a reasonable nature to suit conditions which  shall be kept clean and sanitary, shall be constructed in accordance with  regulations promulgated by the commissioner, and whose effluent shall be  discharged into and treated by sewerage facilities constructed in accordance  with the provisions of  "The Realty Improvement Sewerage and Facilities Act  (1954),"  P.L.1954, chapter 199, and any standards or regulations duly issued  pursuant thereto by the Commissioner of Health;  provided, that the  commissioner, for good cause shown and upon consultation with the Commissioner  of Health, is authorized to amend or revise any such standard or regulation for  application to the camps to which this article applies.

    (d) The commissioner, upon proper application therefor, may grant exceptions  from the literal requirements of this section and any rule or regulation duly  issued hereunder, if he finds that strict compliance would cause undue hardship  and that the exception, if granted, will not unreasonably jeopardize the health  or safety of the intended occupants.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 359, s. 27.  Amended by L.1967, c. 259, s. 6, eff. Dec. 26,  1967.

34:9A-28.  Toilets and privies
    (a) Each camp to which this article applies shall provide privy or other toilet facilities and a sewage disposal system in accordance with the following  requirements:

    (1) An adequate number of convenient and suitable privy or other toilet facilities, kept clean and sanitary shall be provided for every camp.  A privy other than a water-closet shall consist of a pit at least 2 feet deep with a suitable shelter.  The openings of the shelter and pit shall be inclosed by screening or other suitable fly netting.  No privy pit shall be filled with excreta to nearer than 1 foot from the surface of the ground and the excreta in  the pit shall be covered with earth, ashes, lime or other similar substance.

    (2) Privies shall be so located, constructed and maintained that they shall  not be offensive to the users, nor permit access of flies to the privy vaults  nor by leakage or seepage offer a possible pollution of any water supply,  adjacent surface waters or ground surfaces.

    (3) Sewage disposal systems shall not allow exposure of sewage or sewage effluent on the surface of the ground.  All drainage from the kitchen sink shall be carried through a covered drain to a covered cesspool or septic tank or otherwise disposed of in such a way as not to become offensive or insanitary.

    (b) Each camp erected or constructed subsequent to the effective date of this act shall provide a water-carried sewerage disposal system in accordance with the provisions of  "The Realty Improvement Sewerage and Facilities Act (1954),"  P.L.1954, chapter 199, and any standards or regulations duly issued pursuant thereto by the Commissioner of Health; provided, that the commissioner, for good cause shown and upon consultation with the Commissioner of Health, is authorized to amend or revise any such standard or regulation for  application to the camps to which this article applies;  and provided further,  that the commissioner, for good cause shown and upon consultation with the  Commissioner of Health, may approve a nonwater carried sewerage disposal system  for use at a camp if, but only if, he finds that, by reason of location,  topography, soil permeability or ground water elevation, a nonwater carried  sewerage disposal system offers protection to the health and welfare of the  occupants of a camp superior to that offered by a water-carried sewerage  disposal system.

    (c) Each camp which, on the effective date of this act, is maintained, occupied or used by persons working in or at camps to which this article applies, shall provide, no later than January 1, 1970, a water-carried sewerage  disposal system in accordance with the provisions of  "The Realty Improvement  Sewerage and Facilities Act (1954),"  P.L.1954, chapter 199, and any standards  or regulations duly issued pursuant thereto by the Commissioner of Health;   provided, that the commissioner, for good cause shown and upon consultation  with the Commissioner of Health, is authorized to amend or revise any such  standard or regulation for application to the camps to which this article  applies;  and provided further, that the commissioner for good cause shown and  upon consultation with the Commissioner of Health, may approve a nonwater  carried sewerage disposal system for use at a camp if, but only if, he finds  that, by reason of location, topography, soil permeability or ground water  elevation, a nonwater carried sewerage disposal system offers protection to the  health and welfare of the occupants of a camp superior to that offered by a water-carried sewerage disposal system.

    (d) The commissioner, upon proper application therefor, may grant exceptions  from the literal requirements of this section and any rule or regulation duly  issued hereunder, if he finds that strict compliance would cause undue hardship  and that the exception, if granted, will not unreasonably jeopardize the health  or safety of the intended occupants.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 359, s. 28.  Amended by L.1967, c. 259, s. 7, eff. Dec. 26,  1967.

34:9A-29.  Garbage and wastes
    All garbage, kitchen wastes, and rubbish in camps shall be deposited in suitable covered receptacles which shall be emptied daily and the contents buried or otherwise disposed of in accordance with regulations duly issued by the commissioner.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 360, s. 29.  Amended by L.1967, c. 259, s. 8, eff. Dec. 26,  1967.

34:9A-30.  Milk, food and meals;  sales by concessionaires
    Wherever milk, food or meals are prepared, served, furnished or offered for  sale in a camp by the owner, operator or concessionaire,

    (a) The kitchen and dining rooms shall be separated from sleeping quarters and toilets.

    (b) The doors and windows of kitchens, dining rooms and mess halls shall be  adequately screened against insects.

    (c) The kitchen and dining rooms shall be adequately equipped for the preparation and serving of food.

    (d) Walls, floors and ceilings of kitchen and dining rooms shall be so constructed as to permit them to be readily cleaned and they shall be kept clean and in good repair.

    (e) Adequate provisions shall be made for sanitary storage, handling, and protection of food and milk supplies until served or used.

    (f) Adequate facilities, including a plentiful supply of hot water for washing of dishes and utensils, shall be provided;  dishes and utensils shall be washed, cleansed and effectively disinfected promptly after each use.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 360, s. 30.

34:9A-31.  Responsibility
    Every person, or the agent or officer thereof, employing persons to work in  or at camps to which this article applies and the superintendent or overseer in  charge of the work in or at such camps shall carry out the provisions of this  article.  Said person, or the agent or officer thereof, and said superintendent  or overseer, shall maintain a record of the names of the persons who work in or  at said camp, and shall produce such record upon the request of the  commissioner.  At every camp a responsible person shall be appointed to assist  in keeping the camp clean.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 361, s. 31.  Amended by L.1967, c. 259, s. 9, eff. Dec. 26,  1967.

34:9A-32.  Public nuisance
    Any camp which does not conform to this article shall be deemed a public nuisance and if not made to conform within five days or within such longer period of time as may be allowed by the commissioner by written notice, shall be abated by proper suit brought by the Attorney-General upon request of the commissioner.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 361, s. 32.

34:9A-33.  Peace officers
    For the purpose of securing the enforcement of this article the officers and  agents of the commissioner shall have the authority of peace officers to make  arrests, to serve any process or notice throughout the State, and may exercise  such other authority of peace officers as may become necessary in securing the  enforcement of this article.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 361, s. 33.

34:9A-34.  Penalties
    Any person, or the agent or officer thereof, who violates any provision of this article or of any rule or regulation duly issued under this act, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or imprisonment for not more than 1 year, or both.  It shall be a complete defense to any criminal proceeding pursuant to this section for the defendant to prove that the violation complained of is solely the result of the willful destruction by the occupants of any camp.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 362, s. 34.  Amended by L.1967, c. 259, s. 10, eff. Dec. 26,  1967.

34:9A-35.  Appropriations
    There is hereby appropriated to the division for the remainder of the current fiscal year ending June thirtieth, one thousand nine hundred and forty-five, for the purposes of this act, the sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), of which twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or so  much thereof as may be necessary shall be for the planning and construction of  public migrant labor camps, and seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) or  so much thereof as may be necessary shall be for personal and contractual  services, equipment and expenses;  and any unexpended balances thereof are  hereby appropriated, respectively, for the fiscal year ending June thirtieth,  one thousand nine hundred and forty-six.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 362, s. 35.

34:9A-36.  Effective dates
    Sections one to seventeen, inclusive, and sections twenty, twenty-one, thirty-three and thirty-five of this act shall take effect immediately.  The remaining sections of this act shall take effect September fifteenth, one thousand nine hundred and forty-five.

     L.1945, c. 71, p. 362, s. 36.

34:9A-37.  Definitions
    As used in this act:

    (a)  "Farm operator"  means any individual, corporation, partnership, joint  venture, firm, company, or other legal entity, or any officers or agents  thereof, in immediate possession of any farm as owner or lessee, and, as such,  responsible for its management and condition.

    (b)  "Seasonal farm worker"  means any person who is engaged in seasonal or  temporary farm work and is a term that may be used interchangeably with the  terms  "migrant laborer"  and  "temporary farm worker."

     L.1971, c. 193, s. 1.

34:9A-38.  Furnishing drinking water and toilet facilities in fields
    At any farm where seasonal farm workers labor in a field that is an unreasonable distance from central facilities, the farm operator shall provide in the working area a sufficient supply of cool, potable water, and for each sex sufficient, suitable and separate privies or other toilet facilities which shall be properly screened, ventilated and kept clean and suitable facilities for the washing of hands.

     L.1971, c. 193, s. 2.

34:9A-39.  Commissioner of department of labor and industry; enforcement of  act;  promulgation of rules and regulations
    The Commissioner of the Department of Labor and Industry is authorized to enforce this act and to promulgate all reasonable rules and regulations which, in his discretion, are necessary to carry out the provisions of this act.

     L.1971, c. 193, s. 3.

34:9A-40.    Violations; penalties; collection; defenses  
     4.   Any farm operator who violates any of the provisions of this act or the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 to be collected in a civil action commenced by the commissioner by a summary proceeding under "the penalty enforcement law" (N.J.S.2A:58-1 et seq.) in the Superior Court or a municipal court, which shall have jurisdiction to enforce said penalty enforcement law in connection with this act. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it continues after the date given by which the violation must be eliminated in accordance with the order of the department shall constitute an additional, separate and distinct offense.  

    It shall be a complete defense to any action for a penalty pursuant to this section for the defendant to prove that the violation complained of is solely the result of the willful destruction by the occupants of any camp; provided, that proof of such fact shall not alter any duty to correct or terminate said violation as ordered by the commissioner.  

    L.1971,c.193,s.4; amended 1991,c.91,s.352.  

34:9A-41.  Violations of act;  injunction;  parties
    Upon a violation of this act or of any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, any aggrieved seasonal farm worker and the Commissioner of the Department of Labor and Industry shall be entitled to institute a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief to restrain such violation and for such other relief as the court shall deem proper, and the court may proceed in a summary manner in such action. Neither the institution of such action, nor any of the proceedings therein shall relieve any party to such proceedings from the penalty proscribed for a violation of this act.

     L.1971, c. 193, s. 5.

34:10-3.  Twelve hours maximum day
    Twelve hours' labor to be performed within twelve consecutive hours with reasonable time for meals not less than one-half hour for each shall constitute  a day's labor for any employee in the operation of street railroads and  elevated railroads owned or operated by corporations incorporated under the  laws of this state.

34:10-4.  Penalty
    It shall be a misdemeanor for any officer or agent of any such corporation to exact from any employee more than twelve hours' labor within the twenty-four  hours of the natural day, and within twelve consecutive hours therein as in  section 34:10-3 of this title provided.  In case of accident or unexpected  contingency demanding more than the usual service by the corporation to the  public, or from its employees to the corporation, extra labor may be permitted  and exacted for extra compensation.

34:10-5.  Intent and purpose of law
    It is the true intent and purpose of this article to limit the usual hours of labor of the employees of such railroad corporations to twelve hours actual work a day, to be performed within a period of twelve consecutive hours as aforesaid, whether such employees be employed by the trip or trips, the job, the hour, the day, the week, the month, or in any other manner.

34:11-2.  Weekly payment of wages by railroad, express, car-loading and car-forwarding companies;  agreements to contrary;  action by employee
    Every railroad, express, car-loading, and car-forwarding company authorized  to do business by the laws of this State shall pay once each week to each  employee, the wages earned for the 7-day period ending not more than 14 days  prior to such payment.  Wages means those earnings derived from basic pro rata  rates of pay pursuant to a labor agreement, and shall not include incentives,  bonuses, and other similar types of fringe payments.

    If, at any time of payment, as required by this section, any employee of any  such railroad or other company shall be absent from his regular place of labor,  and shall not receive his wages through a duly authorized representative, he  shall be entitled to such payment at any time thereafter, upon demand upon the  proper paymaster at the place where such wages are usually paid and at the  place when the next pay is due.

    It shall not be lawful for any such railroad or other company to enter into  or make any agreement with any employee for the payment of the wages of any  such employee otherwise than as provided in this section, except to pay such  wages at shorter intervals than as herein provided.  Every agreement made in  violation of this section shall be deemed to be null and void, and shall not be  a defense to the action for the penalty provided for in section 34:11-3 of this  Title;  and each and every employee with whom any agreement in violation of  this section shall be made by such railroad or other company shall have his  action and right of action against such railroad or other company for the full  amount of his wages in any court of competent jurisdiction in this State.

     Amended by L.1974, c. 172, s. 1, eff. Jan. 1, 1975.

34:11-3.  Penalty for violation;  suit;  limitation of action; disposition of penalties
    Any railroad company which shall violate the provisions of section 34:11-2 of this title shall forfeit and pay the sum of twenty-five dollars for each violation to be recovered in any court of competent jurisdiction by any person who shall sue for the same, one-half of the penalty to go to the person suing therefor, and the remainder to go to the state;  provided, complaint of such violation be made within sixty days from the date the wages become payable according to the terms of said section 34:11-2.

34:11-4.1.   Definitions  
     1.   As used in this act:

  

    a.   "Employer" means any individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, the administrator or executor of the estate of a deceased individual, or the receiver, trustee, or successor of any of the same, employing any person in this State.  

    For the purposes of this act the officers of a corporation and any agents having the management of such corporation shall be deemed to be the employers of the employees of the corporation.  

    b.   "Employee" means any person suffered or permitted to work by an employer, except that independent contractors and subcontractors shall not be considered employees.  

    c.   "Wages" means the direct monetary compensation for labor or services rendered by an employee, where the amount is determined on a time, task, piece, or commission basis excluding any form of supplementary incentives and bonuses which are calculated independently of regular wages and paid in addition thereto.  

    d.   "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor.

  

    L.1965,c.173,s.1; amended 1991,c.205,s.1.  

34:11-4.2  Time and mode of payment; paydays.

	2.	Except as otherwise provided by law, every employer shall pay the full amount of wages due to his employees at least twice during each calendar month, on regular paydays designated in advance by the employer, in lawful money of the United States or with checks on banks where suitable arrangements are made for the cashing of such checks by employees without difficulty and for the full amount for which they are drawn.  An employer may establish regular paydays less frequently than semimonthly for bona fide executive, supervisory and other special classifications of employees provided that the employee shall be paid in full at least once each calendar month on a regularly established schedule.

	If a regular payday falls on a nonwork day, that is, a day on which the workplace of an employee is not open for business, payment shall be made on the immediately preceding work day, except where it is otherwise provided for in a collective bargaining agreement.

	The end of the pay period for which payment is made on a regular payday shall be not more than 10 working days before such regular payday, provided that if the regular payday falls on a nonwork day payment shall be made on the preceding work day.

	L.1965,c.173,s.2; amended 2002, c.93.

34:11-4.2a.  Payment by deposit in financial institution;  consent by employee;  cancellation;  notice
    In lieu of paying wages directly to employees as provided by P.L.1965, c. 173, s. 2 (C. 34:11-4.2), an employer may, with the consent of some or all his employees, arrange with a financial institution or financial institutions to pay the wages of each employee so consenting by causing the amount of such employee's wages to be deposited in an account maintained in any such financial  institution in the name of such employee, subject to withdrawal and other  disposition by such employee to the same extent and in the same manner as if  such deposit were made directly by such employee. Any such employee may, on  timely notice to the employer, elect not to have his wages deposited as  provided herein, and to be paid such wages directly in the manner otherwise  provided by law.  Financial institution as used herein means any State-chartered or Federally-chartered institution authorized to accept deposits in New Jersey.

     L.1975, c. 143, s. 1, eff. July 7, 1975.

34:11-4.3.  Termination or suspension of employment
    Whenever an employer discharges an employee, or when the work of an employee  is suspended as a result of a labor dispute, or when an employee for any reason  whatsoever is laid off, or whenever an employee quits, resigns, or leaves  employment for any reason, the employer shall pay the employee all wages due  not later than the regular payday for the pay period during which the  employee's termination, suspension or cessation of employment (whether temporary or permanent) took place, as established in accordance with section 2  of this act;  or in the case of employees compensated in part or in full by an  incentive system, a reasonable approximation of all wages due, until the exact  amounts due can be computed;  provided, however, that when any employee is  suspended as a result of a labor dispute and such labor dispute involves those  employees who make up payrolls, the employer may have an additional 10 days in  which to pay such wages.  Such payment may be made either through the regular  pay channels or by mail if requested by the employee.

     L.1965, c. 173, s. 3.

34:11-4.4  Withholding from wages.
 
	4.	No employer may withhold or divert any portion of an employee's wages unless: 

	a.	The employer is required or empowered to do so by New Jersey or United States law; or 
 
	b.	The amounts withheld or diverted are for:
 
	(1)	Contributions authorized either in writing by employees, or under a collective bargaining agreement, to employee welfare, insurance, hospitalization, medical or surgical or both, pension, retirement, and profit-sharing plans, and to plans establishing individual retirement annuities on a group or individual basis, as defined by section 408 (b) of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C.s.408(b)), or individual retirement accounts at any State or federally chartered bank, savings bank, or savings and loan association, as defined by section 408 (a) of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C.s.408(a)), for the employee, his spouse or both. 
 
	(2)	Contributions authorized either in writing by employees, or under a collective bargaining agreement, for payment into company-operated thrift plans; or security option or security purchase plans to buy securities of the employing corporation, an affiliated corporation, or other corporations at market price or less, provided such securities are listed on a stock exchange or are marketable over the counter. 
 
	(3)	Payments authorized by employees for payment into employee personal savings accounts, such as payments to a credit union, savings fund society, savings and loan or building and loan association; and payments to banks for Christmas, vacation, or other savings funds; provided all such deductions are approved by the employer. 
 
	(4)	Payments for company products purchased in accordance with a periodic payment schedule contained in the original purchase agreement; payments for employer loans to employees, in accordance with a periodic payment schedule contained in the original loan agreement; payments for safety equipment; payments for the purchase of United States Government bonds; payments to correct payroll errors; and payments of costs and related fees for the replacement of employee identification, which is used to allow employees access to sterile or secured areas of airports, in accordance with a fee schedule described in any airline media plan approved by the federal Transportation Security Administration; provided all such deductions are approved by the employer. 
 
	(5)	Contributions authorized by employees for organized and generally recognized charities; provided the deductions for such contributions are approved by the employer. 
 
	(6)	Payments authorized by employees or their collective bargaining agents for the rental of work clothing or uniforms or for the laundering or dry cleaning of work clothing or uniforms; provided the deductions for such payments are approved by the employer. 
 
	(7)	Labor organization dues and initiation fees, and such other labor organization charges permitted by law. 
 
	(8)	Contributions authorized in writing by employees, pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement, to a political committee, continuing political committee, or both, as defined in section 3 of P.L.1973, c.83 (C.19:44A-3), established by the employees' labor union for the purpose of making contributions to aid or promote the nomination, election or defeat of any candidate for a public office of the State or of a county, municipality or school district or the passage or defeat of any public question, subject to the conditions specified in section 2 of P.L.1991, c.190 (C.34:11-4.4a). 
 
	(9)	Contributions authorized in writing by employees to any political committee or continuing political committee, other than a committee provided for in paragraph (8) of this subsection, for the purpose of making contributions to aid or promote the nomination, election or defeat of any candidate for a public office of the State or of a county, municipality or school district or the passage or defeat of any public question, subject to the conditions specified in section 2 of P.L.1991, c.190 (C.34:11-4.4a); in making a payroll deduction pursuant to this paragraph the administrative expenses incurred by the employer shall be borne by such committee, at the option of the employer. 
 
	(10) Payments authorized by employees for employer-sponsored programs for the purchase of insurance or annuities on a group or individual basis, if otherwise permitted by law.
 
	(11) Such other contributions, deductions and payments as the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development may authorize by regulation as proper and in conformity with the intent and purpose of this act, if such deductions are approved by the employer. 
 
	L.1965, c.173, s.4; amended 1977, c.205; 1983, c.445, s.3; 1991, c.190, s.1; 1997, c.35; 2009, c.226.

34:11-4.4a.  Contributions withheld, diverted; conditions  
    2.   In the case of contributions withheld or diverted pursuant to paragraph (8) or (9) of subsection b. of section 4 of P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.4), the contribution shall be withheld or diverted only after compliance with the following conditions:  

   a.   The payroll deduction authorization must be signed by the employee and contain the following explanatory statement:  

   I recognize that my/any contribution through payroll deduction is completely voluntary and in compliance with State law.  It shall be unlawful for any person soliciting an employee for contribution to such a fund to fail to inform such employee of his or her right to refuse to contribute without reprisal.  

   Any questions relative to compliance with election law may be directed to the Election Law Enforcement Commission, 28 West State Street, Trenton, New Jersey 08625, (609) 292-8700.  

   b.   Any political action committee or continuing political committee which elects to solicit employees under the provisions of section 4 of P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.4) shall file with the Election Law Enforcement Commission a statement of registration which identifies the title of the committee and the general category of entity or entities, including, but not limited to, business organizations, labor organizations, professional or trade associations, candidates for or holders of public offices, political parties, ideological groups, or civic associations, the interests of which are shared by the leadership, members or financial supporters of the committee.  

   The statement of registration shall include: (1) the names and mailing addresses of the persons having control over the management of the affairs of the committee; (2) in the case of any person identified under paragraph (1) of this subsection b. who is an individual, the occupation of that individual, and the name and mailing address of the individual's employer, or, in the case of any such entity which is a corporation, partnership, unincorporated association or other organization, the name and mailing address of the organization; and (3) an explanatory statement as to the process utilized for the selection of recipients of funds raised by committee.  

   c.   The political action committee or continuing political committee shall provide space on the payroll deduction authorization document to allow the employee to direct his or her contributions to specific candidates.  

   d.   No employee may elect to contribute more than $5 per week by means of payroll deduction.  No employee may have wages withheld or diverted for more than one political action committee or continuing political committee.  

   e.   No solicitation shall be made for employee contributions on the job or at the workplace.  

   f.   Any political action committee or continuing political committee which elects to solicit employees under the provisions of this act shall annually provide each employee participant with a financial statement indicating disbursement of funds including administrative charges.  

   L.1991,c.190,s.2.  

34:11-4.5.  Death of employee
    a.  In the event of the death of an employee all wages due the deceased employee may, upon proper demand on the employer, be paid, in the absence of actual notice of the pendency of probate proceedings, without requiring letters  testamentary or of administration in the following order of preference to  decedent's:

     (1) surviving spouse,

      (2) children 18 years of age and over in equal shares, or to the guardian of children under 18 years of age,

      (3) father and mother or survivor,

      (4) sisters and brothers,

     or to the person who pays the funeral expenses.

    b.  Payments under subsection a. of this section made after presentation of  proof of relationship shall be a release and discharge of the employer to the  amount of such payment.

     L.1965, c. 173, s. 5.

34:11-4.6  Dissemination of information; records.
 	6.	Every employer shall:

	a.	Notify his employees at the time of hiring, of the rate of pay, and of the regular payday designated by the employer in accordance with section 2 of P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.2).
 
	b.	Notify his employees of any changes in the pay rates or pay days prior to the time of such changes.
 
	c.	Furnish each employee with a statement of deductions made from his wages in accordance with section 4 of P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.4) for each pay period those deductions are made.  Every employer with 10 or more employees, including public employers, shall include in that statement: 
 
	(1)	the employee's gross wages;
 
	(2)	the employee's net wages;
 
	(3)	the employee's rate of pay; and
 
	(4)	if relevant to the wage calculation, the number of hours worked by the employee during the pay period.
 
	An employer may provide the statement required pursuant to this section electronically, unless the employee requests that the statement be provided in a paper format.
 
	As used in this subsection, "public employers" means the State of New Jersey, or the several counties and municipalities thereof, or any other political subdivision of the State, or a school district, or any special district, or any authority, commission, or board, or any branch or agency of the public service.
 
	d.	Keep posted in a place accessible to his employees an abstract of P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.1 et seq.) furnished by the commissioner, and
 
	e.	Make such records as to the persons employed by him, including wage and hour records and preserve such records for such periods of time, as the commissioner shall prescribe by regulation as necessary or appropriate for the enforcement of the provisions of P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.1 et seq.), provided that records of the number of hours worked shall not be required as to any person employed in a bona fide executive, administrative or professional capacity or in the capacity of outside salesman 18 years of age or older where the wages of such person or persons are not determined by the number of hours worked.
 
	L.1965, c.173, s.6; amended 2019, c.399.

34:11-4.7.  Agreements by employer with employee
    It shall be unlawful for any employer to enter into or make any agreement with any employee for the payment of wages of any such employee otherwise than as provided in this act, except to pay wages at shorter intervals than as herein provided, or to pay wages in advance.  Every agreement made in violation  of this section shall be deemed to be null and void, and the penalties in this  act provided may be enforced notwithstanding such agreement;  and each and  every employee with whom any agreement in violation of this section shall be  made by any such employer, or the agent or agents thereof, shall have a right  of civil action against any such employer for the full amount of his wages in  any court of competent jurisdiction in this State.

     L.1965, c. 173, s. 7.

34:11-4.8.  Dispute over amount of wages
    a.  In case of a dispute over the amount of wages, the employer shall pay, without condition and within the time set by this act, all wages, or parts thereof, conceded by him to be due, leaving to the employee all remedies to which he might otherwise be entitled, including those provided under this act, as to any balance claimed.

    b.  The acceptance by an employee of a payment under this section shall not  constitute a release as to the balance of his claim and any release required by  an employer as a condition to payment shall be in violation of this act and  shall be null and void.

     L.1965, c. 173, s. 8.

34:11-4.9  Duties of commissioner.

	9. a. The commissioner shall enforce and administer the provisions of this act and the commissioner or his authorized representatives are empowered to investigate charges of violations of this act.

	b.	The commissioner or his authorized representatives are empowered to enter and inspect such places, question such employees and investigate such facts, conditions or matters as they may deem appropriate to determine whether any person has violated any provision of this act or any rule or regulation issued hereunder or which may aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this act.

	c.	The commissioner or his authorized representatives shall have power to administer oaths and examine witnesses under oath, issue subpoenas, compel the attendance of witnesses, and the production of papers, books, accounts, records, payrolls, documents, and testimony, and to take depositions and affidavits in any proceeding before the commissioner.

	d.	If a person fails to comply with any subpoena lawfully issued, or on the refusal of any witness to testify to any matter regarding which he may be lawfully interrogated, it shall be the duty of the Superior Court, on application by the commissioner, to compel obedience by proceedings for contempt, as in the case of disobedience of the requirements of a subpoena issued from such court or a refusal to testify therein.

	e.	The commissioner is authorized to supervise the payment of amounts due to employees pursuant to Article 1 of chapter 11 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes, and the employer may be required to make these payments to the commissioner to be held in a special account in trust for the employees, and paid on order of the commissioner directly to the employee or employees affected.  The employer shall also pay the commissioner an administrative fee equal to not less than 10% or more than 25% of any payment made to the commissioner pursuant to this section.  The amount of the administrative fee shall be specified in a schedule of fees to be promulgated by rule or regulation of the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).  The fee shall be applied to enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor.

	f.	The commissioner or his designee is authorized to enter into a reciprocal agreement with the labor department or other corresponding agency of any other state or with a person or body authorized to act on behalf of that agency, for the collection of claims and judgments for wages, administrative fees or penalties based on claims arising in each others' states.

	To the extent provided for by the laws of the other state or by any reciprocal agreement entered into with an agency of the other state as provided in this subsection, the commissioner or his designee may: (1) maintain actions in the courts of the other state for the collection of claims and judgments for wages, administrative fees and penalties; and (2) assign the claims and judgments to the agency in the other state for collection.

	Upon the written consent of the agency in the other state, or the person or body authorized to act on behalf of that agency, the commissioner or his designee may maintain actions in the courts of this State upon assigned claims and judgments for wages, administrative fees and penalties arising in the other state in the same manner and to the same extent that such actions by the commissioner or his designees are authorized when arising in this State, but only if the other state extends, by law or agreement, a like comity to cases arising in this State.

	L.1965,c.173,s.9;  amended 1991, c.91, s.353; 1991, c.205, s.2; 2000, c.14.

34:11-4.10  Violations, penalties.
 	10. a. Any employer who knowingly fails to pay the full amount of wages to an employee agreed to or required by, or in the manner required by, the provisions of article 1 of chapter 11 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes and all acts supplementing that article (R.S.34:11-2 et al.), or who knowingly violates any other provision of P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.1 et seq.), or who takes a retaliatory action against an employee by discharging or in any other manner discriminating against the employee because the employee has made a complaint to that employee's employer, to the commissioner, or to that employee's authorized representative, that the employer has not paid the employee the full amount of wages agreed upon or required by, and in the manner required by, the provisions of article 1 of chapter 11 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes and all acts supplementing that article (R.S.34:11-2 et al.), or because the employee has caused to be instituted or is about to cause to be instituted any proceeding under or related to that article or those acts, or because that employee has testified or is about to testify in any proceeding under or relating to that article or those acts, or because the employee has informed any employee of the employer about rights under State laws regarding wages and hours worked, shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense and, upon conviction for a first violation, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not less than 10 nor more than 90 days or by both the fine and imprisonment and, upon conviction for a second or subsequent violation, be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,000 or by imprisonment for not less than 10 nor more than 100 days or by both the fine and imprisonment.  Each week, in any day of which any violation of article 1 of chapter 11 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes and all acts supplementing that article (R.S.34:11-2 et al.) continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.  In the case of a discharge or other discriminatory action against the employee which is in violation of this subsection, the employer shall also be required to offer reinstatement in employment to the discharged employee and to correct the discriminatory action, and also to pay to the employee, in full, all wages lost as a result of that discharge or discriminatory action, plus liquidated damages equal to not more than 200 percent of the wages due, under penalty of contempt proceedings.  Taking an adverse action against an employee within ninety days of the employee filing a complaint with the commissioner or a claim or action being brought by or on behalf of the employee in a court of competent jurisdiction for a violation of article 1 of chapter 11 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes and all acts supplementing that article (R.S.34:11-2 et al.) shall be considered presumptive evidence that the employer's action was knowingly taken in retaliation against the employee.  An employee complaint or other communication need not make explicit reference to any section or provision of any State law regarding wages and hours worked to trigger the protections of this section.

	b.	As an alternative to or in addition to any other sanctions provided by law for violations of P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.1 et seq.), when the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development finds that an employer has violated that act, or taken any retaliatory action against the employee in violation of subsection a. of this section, the commissioner is authorized to assess and collect administrative penalties, up to a maximum of $250 for a first violation and up to a maximum of $500 for each subsequent violation, specified in a schedule of penalties to be promulgated as a rule or regulation by the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.). When determining the amount of the penalty imposed because of a violation, the commissioner shall consider factors which include the history of previous violations by the employer, the seriousness of the violation, the good faith of the employer and the size of the employer's business.  No administrative penalty shall be levied pursuant to this section unless the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development provides the alleged violator with notification of the violation and of the amount of the penalty by certified mail and an opportunity to request a hearing before the commissioner or his designee within 15 days following the receipt of the notice.  If a hearing is requested, the commissioner shall issue a final order upon such hearing and a finding that a violation has occurred.  If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order upon expiration of the 15-day period.  Payment of the penalty is due when a final order is issued or when the notice becomes a final order.  Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding commenced by the commissioner pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).  Any sum collected as a fine or penalty pursuant to this section shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.

	c.	If any employer fails to pay the full amount of wages to an employee agreed to or required by, or in the manner required by, the provisions of article 1 of chapter 11 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes and all acts supplementing that article (R.S.34:11-2 et al.), the employee may recover in a civil action the full amount of any wages due, or any wages lost because of any retaliatory action taken in violation of subsection a. of this section, plus an amount of liquidated damages equal to not more than 200 percent of the wages lost or of the wages due, together with costs and reasonable attorney's fees as are allowed by the court, except that if there is an agreement of the employee to accept payment of the unpaid wages supervised by the commissioner pursuant to section 9 of P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.9) or R.S.34:11-58, the liquidated damages shall be equal to not more than 200 percent of wages that were due prior to the supervised payment.  The payment of liquidated damages shall not be required for a first violation by an employer if the employer shows to the satisfaction of the court that the act or omission constituting the violation was an inadvertent error made in good faith and that the employer had reasonable grounds for believing that the act or omission was not a violation, and the employer acknowledges that the employer violated the law and pays the amount owed within 30 days of notice of the violation.  In a case of retaliation against an employee in violation of the provisions of subsection a. of this section, the employer shall also be required to offer reinstatement in employment to the discharged employee and take other actions as needed to correct the retaliatory action.  For purposes of this subsection, an employer taking an adverse action against an employee within ninety days of the employee filing a complaint with the commissioner, or a claim or action being brought by or on behalf of the employee in a court of competent jurisdiction, for a violation of provisions of article 1 of chapter 11 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes and all acts supplementing that article (R.S.34:11-2 et al.) shall raise a presumption that the employer's action was taken in retaliation against the employee, which presumption may be rebutted only by clear and convincing evidence that the action was taken for other, permissible, reasons.  Any agreement by the employee to work for, or accept, wages paid which are less than the amount agreed to or required by law, or paid in a manner other than that required by article 1 of chapter 11 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes and all acts supplementing that article (R.S.34:11-2 et al.), shall be no defense to the action.  The employee shall be entitled to maintain the action for and on behalf of other similarly situated employees, or designate an agent or representative to maintain the action for and on behalf of all similarly situated employees.  The employee may bring the action for all appropriate relief, including reinstatement, the payment of damages and the recovery of lost wages or unpaid wages pursuant to this section in the Superior Court.  Upon the request of any employee not paid the full wages agreed upon or required by law and in the manner required by the provisions of article 1 of chapter 11 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes and all acts supplementing that article (R.S.34:11-2 et al.), the commissioner may take an assignment of the wage claim in trust for the assigning employee and may bring any legal action necessary to collect the claim, and the employer shall be required to pay to the employee the unpaid wages and liquidated damages equal to not more than 200 percent of the amount of the unpaid wages and pay to the commissioner the costs and reasonable attorney's fees as determined by the court.  The payment of liquidated damages shall not be required for a first violation by an employer if the employer shows to the satisfaction of the court that the act or omission constituting the violation was an inadvertent error made in good faith and that the employer had reasonable grounds for believing that the act or omission was not a violation, and the employer acknowledges that the employer violated the law and pays the amount owed within 30 days of notice of the violation.

	L.1965, c.173, s.10; amended 1991, c.205, s.3; 2019, c.212, s.2.

34:11-4.11.  Rules and regulations
    The commissioner is authorized to propose and issue, from time to time, rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this act.  Such proposed rules and regulations shall be published and made available to the public with notice that the same shall become effective on a specified date, not earlier than 60 days from publication thereof, and that a public hearing on the proposed rule or regulation shall be held at a place, date and time specified, on a date not earlier than 15 days from the date published copies are made available to the public.  At any public hearing held under this section, all interested parties shall have the right to present testimony either orally or in writing, and the commissioner shall consider all testimony offered before promulgating a final rule or regulation.

     L.1965, c. 173, s. 11.

34:11-4.12.  Construction of act
    Nothing in this act shall be deemed to require any employer to amend, change, revise or suspend any pay practice, procedure, policy or system that is  authorized or permitted under any provision of this act.

     L.1965, c. 173, s. 12.

34:11-4.13.  Repeal
    The following sections of the Revised Statutes are repealed:  34:11-4, 34:11-6, 34:11-7, 34:11-23, 34:11-24 and 34:11-27 to 34:11-30, inclusive.

     L.1965, c. 173, s. 13.

34:11-4.14.  Unlawful diverting of wages
	13.  a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase or have assigned to him, other than by order of court, any salary, wages, commissions, pay or other compensation for services, or any part thereof, due or to become due to any employee and any purchase or assignment, whenever executed, shall be void.  It shall also be unlawful for any person to withhold or to pay to any other person on the basis of any assignment or purchase prohibited by this section any salary, wages, commissions, pay or other compensation due to any employee.

	b.	Any person who violates this section, or attempts to do so, shall be liable to the employee for the amount of the salary, wages, commissions, or other compensation for services withheld from the employee.

	c.	Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to make unlawful the withholding or diverting of wages by any employer in accordance with section 4 of P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.4).

	L.1999,c.90, s.13.

34:11-4.15  Disclosure of employee information, certain; change in control, health care entity employer. 
	1. a. Not less than 30 days before a change in control, a former health care entity employer shall: provide the successor health care entity employer, and any collective bargaining representative the employees may have, a list containing the name, address, date of hire, phone number, wage rate, and employment classification of each eligible employee employed at the affected health care entity; inform all eligible employees of their rights provided by this section; and post, in a conspicuous location or locations accessible to all employees, a notice setting forth the rights provided by this section.
 
	b.	No change in control of a health care entity shall be made without a contract or agreement between the former health care entity employer and the successor health care entity employer which provides that:
 
	(1) the successor health care entity employer shall offer employment during a transitional period of not less than four months following the change in control to each eligible employee, with no reduction of wages or paid time off, and no reduction of the total value of benefits, including health care, retirement, and education benefits, provided that:
 
	(a) the offer shall be made in writing and remain open for at least 10 business days from the date of the offer;
 
	(b) during the transition period, the successor health care entity shall offer all available employment positions to eligible employees who had previously held the positions until the available employment positions are filled or until no more eligible employees are available; and
 
	(c) if, at the time of the change in control and throughout the transition period, the total number of employment positions is less than the total number of eligible employees, the choice of employees to be employed shall be based on seniority and experience;
 
	(2) an eligible employee retained pursuant to this section shall not be discharged without cause during the transitional period, except that a successor employer may lay off eligible employees if the employer reduces the total number of employees, including at the time of the change in control, but only if the choice of employees to be retained is based on seniority and experience, and the laid off employees are offered any positions they had previously held that are subsequently restored during the transitional period;
 
	(3) at the end of the transitional period, the successor employer shall perform a written performance evaluation for each retained eligible employee, and offer the employee continued employment if an employee's performance during that period was satisfactory; and
 
	(4) a successor employer shall retain, and provide to the employee or representative of the employee upon request, a written record of each offer of employment and each evaluation made pursuant to this subsection, for not less than three years from the date of the offer or evaluation, with each record including the name, address, date of hire, phone number, wage rate, and employment classification of the employee.
 
	c.	All parties to a contract or agreement covered by this section, and all health care entities subject to a change in control pursuant to a contract or agreement covered by this section, shall comply with all provisions that are required by this section to be included in the contract or agreement pursuant to subsection b. of this section, regardless of whether those provisions are expressly included in the contract or agreement.
 
	d.	Notwithstanding the foregoing, no action taken pursuant to and in compliance with a collective bargaining agreement entered into by an exclusive representative of employees of a health care entity subject to a change in control pursuant to a contract or agreement covered by this section shall be considered a violation of this section.  Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting, delaying, or preventing, including during the transitional period: the recognition of a collective bargaining representative of the employees by a successor health care entity employer; or collective bargaining between the successor health care entity employer and the collective bargaining representative.
 
	e.	An employer who violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to the sanctions, and an employee affected by the violation shall have the remedies, provided by law for violations of P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.1 et seq.).  For the purposes of determining penalties and remedies imposed pursuant to section 10 of P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.10) for violations of this section:
 
	(1) a failure to pay an employee wages, paid time off, or the value of benefits, as required by subsection b. of this section, shall be regarded as a failure to pay the full amount of wages for the purposes of section 10 of P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.10), and the remedies for the failure to pay paid time off or the value of benefits shall be made in the same manner as remedies for unpaid wages;
 
	(2) a discharge of an employee, or failure to offer employment or retain in employment an employee, in violation of subsection b. of this section shall be regarded as retaliation against the employee for the purposes of section 10 of P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.10); and
 
	(3) in a civil action brought before a court by the employee, the court shall have authority to order injunctive or other permanent equitable relief, including, but not limited to, immediate reinstatement of any employee discharged or not retained in violation of this section.
 
	f.	As used in this section:
 
	"Change in control" means: any sale, assignment, transfer, contribution or other disposition of all or substantially all of the assets used in a health care entity's operations; or any sale, assignment, transfer, contribution or other disposition of a controlling interest in the health care entity, including by consolidation, merger, or reorganization, of the health care entity or any person who controls the health care entity; or any event or sequence of events, including a purchase, sale, or termination of a management contract or lease, that causes the identity of the health care entity employer to change, but shall not include a change in control in which both the former health care entity employer and the successor health care employer are government entities.  A change in control shall be defined to occur on the date of execution of the document effectuating the change.
 
	"Eligible employee" means: any person employed at an affected health care entity during the 90-day period immediately preceding a change in control of a health care entity; or any person formerly employed at the health care entity who retains recall rights under an agreement with the former health care entity employer, except that an "eligible employee" shall not include any managerial employee, and shall not include any person who was discharged with cause by the former health care entity or successor health care entity during that 90-day period.
 
	"Former health care entity employer" means any employer of eligible employees who owns, controls, or operates a health care entity where the eligible employees are employed prior to a change in control of the entity.
 
	"Government entity" means the State of New Jersey, any of its political subdivisions, any authority created by the Legislature of the State of New Jersey, and any instrumentality or agency of the State of New Jersey or of any of its political subdivisions.
 
	"Health care entity" means a health care facility licensed pursuant to P.L.1971, c.136 (C.26:2H-1 et seq.), a staffing registry, or a home care services agency as defined in section 1 of P.L.1947, c.262 (C.45:11-23).  If a health care entity is part of a larger facility which includes facilities which are not licensed pursuant to P.L.1971, c.136 (C.26:2H-1 et seq.), the portion of the facility which is not licensed shall not be regarded as a "health care entity" for the purposes of this section.
 
	"Managerial employee" means an employee who is exempt from the overtime requirements of the New Jersey State Wage and Hour Law, P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a et seq.), because the employee is an executive employee.
 
	"Successor health care entity employer" means any employer of eligible employees who owns, controls, or operates a health care entity where the eligible employees are employed after a change in control of the entity.
 
	g.	The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be severable and if any subsection, paragraph, sentence or other portion of this section is for any reason held or declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or preempted by federal law, or the applicability of that portion to any person or facility is held invalid, the remainder of this section shall not thereby be deemed to be unconstitutional, preempted, or invalid.

	L.2022, c.101.

34:11-10.  Commitment for failure to pay judgment
    The court shall cause a defendant who refuses or neglects to pay forthwith the amount of a judgment rendered against him and the costs and charges incident thereto, to be committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding  one hundred days in the case of a first conviction, and in case of a conviction  for a second, subsequent or continuing violation, for a period not exceeding  two hundred days.

34:11-16.  Enforcement of act by department of labor
    The department of labor shall enforce the provisions of this article and for  that purpose the commissioner shall designate such of his employees or assistants as may be necessary.

34:11-17.  Negotiable orders
    It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to pay their employees in  store goods or merchandise, or to issue for the payment of labor any order or  other paper whatsoever, unless the same is negotiable and by its terms redeemable for face value at sight in lawful money of the United States, by the  person giving or issuing the same, but nothing in this section shall prevent  any private individual from giving orders for goods and merchandise on any  store in the profits or business of which he has no interest, directly or  indirectly.

34:11-18.  Forfeiture on issuing orders in payment for labor;  no offset; limitations
    Any employer paying its employees in store goods or merchandise or giving or  issuing or authorizing to be given or issued in payment for labor, any due bills or orders contrary to any law shall forfeit the amount of wages or pay for which such orders were given and the same shall not be offset against any claims for wages but recovery may be had for such wages in full as though no such orders or due bills had been given or paid and no settlement with the employer shall bar an action therefor until after the lapse of one year from such settlement.

34:11-19.  Punishment for issuing orders in payment for labor
    Any person giving or issuing in payment of labor, any due bills or orders contrary to law shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by fine of not more than five hundred dollars.

34:11-21.  Attempting to control employees in purchase of store goods unlawful
    It shall not be lawful for an employer, or his agents, clerks or superintendents, owning or controlling any stores for the sale of general store  goods or merchandise in connection with his manufacturing or other business, to  attempt to control his employees in the purchase of store goods or supplies at  such stores by withholding payment of wages beyond the usual time of payment,  whereby the employee would be compelled to purchase supplies at any such  stores.

34:11-22.  Penalty for attempting to control employees in purchase of store  goods
    Any person offending against the provisions of section 34:11-21 of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction thereof shall be fined  not to exceed one hundred dollars, with costs of suit, for each offense to be  sued by and for the benefit of any citizen of the state.

34:11-24.1.  Medical examinations requested by employers;  imposition of cost on employees prohibited
    No employer or prospective employer shall deduct from the wages of any employee or from the wages to be paid to a prospective employee any sum, or in any manner require payment of any sum from such employee or prospective employee, to defray the cost of any medical examination of such employee or prospective employee when such examination is made at the request or direction of the employer, by a physician designated by said employer, as a condition of entering or continuing employment, and in the event that the employee or prospective employee pays for any such medical examination, the employer or prospective employer shall reimburse the employee or prospective employee for the amount of any such payment.

     L.1952, c. 147, p. 505, s. 1.

34:11-24.2.  Penalty for violation
    Every person who shall violate any of the provisions of this act shall be liable to a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00), to be recovered by and in  the name of the Department of Labor and Industry for the use of the State.

     L.1952, c. 147, p. 506, s. 2.

34:11-24.3.  Effective date
    This act shall take effect July first, one thousand nine hundred and fifty-two.

     L.1952, c. 147, p. 506, s. 3.

34:11-31.  Payment of wages condition precedent to removal of employer's personal property on levy of execution or other process
    No personal property, being in this state and belonging to any person, corporation or manufacturer, shall be liable to be removed by virtue of any execution, attachment or other process, unless the party, by whom or at whose suit such process was issued or sued out, shall first pay or cause to be paid to the operatives, mechanics and other employees of such person, manufacturer or corporation the wages then owing from such person, manufacturer or corporation.  The wages required to be paid as aforesaid shall not exceed two months' wages, and, if the wages due and owing as aforesaid shall exceed two months' wages, the party at whose suit such process is sued out may, upon paying or causing to be paid to such employees two months' wages, proceed to execute his process;  and the sheriff or other officer shall levy and pay to the plaintiff, as well the money so paid for wages as the money to be made by virtue of such process.

34:11-32.  Procedure where personal property is removed under process without payment of wages of debtor's employees
    If an officer shall by virtue of execution, attachment or other process remove any personal property from the possession or premises of any employer against whom the process is directed without first paying to the employees of such employer their wages owing and earned or accrued to the amount specified in section 34:11-31 of this title, such personal property shall not be sold by the officer until ten days after such removal and then not until the plaintiff or party causing the levy shall, before the sale, pay to such employees such wages upon the payment of which the process may be executed and sale made; provided the persons to whom such wages may be owing, shall within ten days after such removal give notice to the officer holding such process of the amount of wages due, and claim the same, which notice may be served by delivery  to the officer or leaving a copy thereof at his usual place of abode.

34:11-33.  Wages for services bestowed on property of manufacturers in hands  of receivers
    Whenever personal property of a manufacturer, distiller, brewer or producer  of manufactured articles shall come into the possession of a receiver, any  employee who has bestowed labor or services upon any of such personal property  for which there is then due and owing to him wages, may apply to the court  appointing such receiver for the payment of such wages. The court may proceed  in a summary manner or otherwise, and shall determine the amount of wages that  are due and unpaid, and direct the receiver forthwith to sell so much of such  personal property as may be necessary to pay such wages to such employees in  preference to any other creditors and without delay.

     Amended by L.1953, c. 33, p. 589, s. 37.

34:11-33.1.  Income or wage tax advantages for New Jersey residents with income from other jurisdictions;  legislative findings
    It is hereby found that residents of this State with income taxable in the State of New York heretofore have been allowed only limited itemized deductions, as compared with residents of the State of New York, in the computation of income taxable by the State of New York;  that by chapter 68 of the laws of New York of 1961, approved March 1, 1961, the State of New York altered this discriminatory feature of its laws by authorizing residents of the  State of New Jersey to claim all or part of all types of itemized deductions  available to residents of the State of New York;  but that said chapter 68  provided that residents of the State of New Jersey may claim such additional  itemized deductions only if the State of New Jersey shall have authorized  certain withholding of taxes by employers in New Jersey who employ residents of  New York and shall have entered into an agreement with the State of New York to  provide to it certain information concerning its residents who are employed in  the State of New Jersey, to aid in the collection of the income tax from such  residents.  It being the desire of the Legislature to authorize the steps  necessary to secure for its residents the benefits of said chapter 68, and such  other tax benefits as may be or become available by virtue of other laws of the  State of New York or other jurisdictions, this act is enacted to authorize  compliance with the conditions so prescribed by the State of New York and with  other similar conditions prescribed by such other laws.

     L.1961, c. 10, p. 29, s. 1.

34:11-33.2.  Definitions
    In this act, unless the context otherwise indicates,

    (a)  "Tax advantage"  refers to income or wage taxes, and means (1) a less inclusive definition of taxable income or wages, (2) a lower rate of tax, (3) a  greater number of or amount of available exemptions, or (4) a greater number or  amount of available deductions, or any of the foregoing, and

    (b)  "Foreign taxing jurisdiction"  or  "jurisdiction"  means a sister State  or any municipality or other subdivision of a sister State which imposes a tax  on the income or wages of residents of this State from sources within such  jurisdiction.

     L.1961, c. 10, p. 30, s. 2.

34:11-33.3.  Authority to enter into agreement with other jurisdiction; declaration of determination
    If the State Treasurer shall determine, as evidenced by a declaration filed  in the office of the Secretary of State, that (a) the laws of a foreign taxing  jurisdiction offer a tax advantage to residents of this State contingent in  whole or in part upon the existence of an agreement between that jurisdiction  and this State under which this State will furnish to that jurisdiction, or  agency thereof, information in regard to names and addresses, in that  jurisdiction, of such categories of residents of that jurisdiction employed in  this State as shall be specified by that jurisdiction, or agency thereof, and  that (b) compliance with the prerequisites to securing such tax advantage is  within the authority of this State under this act and will not, in the judgment  of the State Treasurer, be unduly burdensome in comparison to the advantage to  be derived;  then, upon the filing of such declaration of determination, the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, on behalf of this State, shall enter into such agreement with that jurisdiction.

     L.1961, c. 10, p. 30, s. 3.

34:11-33.4.  Furnishing of required information to other jurisdiction; powers and duties of division of taxation
    If an agreement with a foreign taxing jurisdiction is in force pursuant to section 3 hereof, the Division of Taxation shall ascertain, from any source available to it, such information as may be required to be furnished to such jurisdiction under or by virtue of the terms of the agreement, and shall furnish that information to such jurisdiction in compliance with said agreement.  The division is authorized, to the extent necessary to comply with the terms of said agreement, to adopt and enforce rules and regulations requiring employers within this State to furnish the division with information in regard to names and addresses, in such jurisdiction, of persons employed by them who reside in such jurisdiction.  The division, by such rules and regulations, may provide that any employer who fails to furnish the required information within the time prescribed by the division, shall, unless the employer shall establish to the satisfaction of the division that such failure was in good faith and was not willful, be liable to a penalty, with respect to each such name and address not reported, of $1.00 for each calendar month or fraction thereof that the information was withheld;  provided, nevertheless, that the amount of such penalties which may be assessed against a single employer shall not exceed $1,000.00 for any calendar year.  Such penalty shall be recoverable under the provisions of the Penalty Enforcement Law.

     L.1961, c. 10, p. 31, s. 4.

34:11-33.5.  Reimbursement for expenses incurred or paid by New Jersey; termination of agreement
    An agreement under section 3, hereof, may provide for payment or reimbursement by the foreign taxing jurisdiction, if authorized by the laws of such jurisdiction, of expenses incurred or paid by the State of New Jersey in the performance of such agreement.  Such agreement may also provide for its termination by the State Treasurer of this State.

     L.1961, c. 10, p. 31, s. 5.

34:11-33.6.  Withholding of tax from salary or wages of employees subject to  tax of other jurisdiction
    Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation employing 1 or more persons in this State who are residents of a foreign taxing jurisdiction which is a party to an agreement in force under section 3, hereof, may, for each pay period, deduct and withhold an amount, computed as hereinafter provided, from the salary or wages of an employee who resides in such jurisdiction and whose salary or wages are subject to the income or wage tax of  such jurisdiction, for the purpose of crediting such amount on account of such  income or wage tax due or to become due from such employee to such jurisdiction.  Such amount shall be computed in such a manner as to result, so far as practicable, in withholding from the employee's salary or wages during each calendar year an amount substantially equivalent to the tax reasonably estimated to be or become due from such employee to such jurisdiction as taxes upon his wages or the income of his wages from such employer during such calendar year.  Amounts so deducted and withheld shall be held as a trust fund for payment to such jurisdiction.  The method of determining the amount to be deducted and withheld, and the time and manner of payment over to such jurisdiction, may be further prescribed by rules and regulations of the Division of Taxation. For each pay period during which any deduction or withholding is so made, the employer shall furnish to such jurisdiction a statement of the name, place of residence, amount of salary or wages earned by,  and amount of salary or wages so deducted or withheld from, such employee.

     L.1961, c. 10, p. 31, s. 6.

34:11-56a.  Minimum wage level;  establishment
    It is declared to be the public policy of this State to establish a minimum  wage level for workers in order to safeguard their health, efficiency, and  general well-being and to protect them as well as their employers from the  effects of serious and unfair competition resulting from wage levels  detrimental to their health, efficiency and well-being.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 1, eff. June 17, 1966.

34:11-56a1  Definitions relative to minimum wages.
	2.	As used in this act:

	(a)	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	(b)	"Director" means the director in charge of the bureau referred to in section 3 of this act.
 
	(c)	"Wage board" means a board created as provided in section 10 of this act.
 
	(d)	"Wages" means any moneys due an employee from an employer for services rendered or made available by the employee to the employer as a result of their employment relationship including commissions, bonus and piecework compensation and including the fair value of any food or lodgings supplied by an employer to an employee, and, until December 31, 2018, "wages" includes any gratuities received by an employee for services rendered for an employer or a customer of an employer.  The commissioner may, by regulation, establish the average value of gratuities received by an employee in any occupation and the fair value of food and lodging provided to employees in any occupation, which average values shall be acceptable for the purposes of determining compliance with this act in the absence of evidence of the actual value of such items.
 
	(e)	"Regular hourly wage" means the amount that an employee is regularly paid for each hour of work as determined by dividing the total hours of work during the week into the employee's total earnings for the week, exclusive of overtime premium pay.
 
	(f)	"Employ" includes to suffer or to permit to work.
 
	(g)	"Employer" includes any individual, partnership, association, corporation, and the State and any county, municipality, or school district in the State, or any agency, authority, department, bureau, or instrumentality thereof, or any person or group of persons acting directly or indirectly in the interest of an employer in relation to an employee.
 
	(h)	"Employee" includes any individual employed by an employer.
 
	(i)	"Occupation" means any occupation, service, trade, business, industry or branch or group of industries or employment or class of employment in which employees are gainfully employed.
 
	(j)	"Minimum fair wage order" means a wage order promulgated pursuant to this act.
 
	(k)	"Fair wage" means a wage fairly and reasonably commensurate with the value of the service or class of service rendered and sufficient to meet the minimum cost of living necessary for health.
 
	(l)	"Oppressive and unreasonable wage" means a wage which is both less than the fair and reasonable value of the service rendered and less than sufficient to meet the minimum cost of living necessary for health.
 
	(m)	"Limousine" means a motor vehicle used in the business of carrying passengers for hire to provide prearranged passenger transportation at a premium fare on a dedicated, nonscheduled, charter basis that is not conducted on a regular route and with a seating capacity in no event of more than 14 passengers, not including the driver, provided, that such a motor vehicle shall not have a seating capacity in excess of four passengers, not including the driver, beyond the maximum passenger seating capacity of the vehicle, not including the driver, at the time of manufacture. "Limousine" shall not include taxicabs, hotel or airport shuttles and buses, buses employed solely in transporting school children or teachers to and from school, vehicles owned and operated directly or indirectly by businesses engaged in the practice of mortuary science when those vehicles are used exclusively for providing transportation related to the provision of funeral services or vehicles owned and operated without charge or remuneration by a business entity for its own purposes.
 
	(n)	"Seasonal employment" means employment during a year by an employer that is a seasonal employer, or employment by a non-profit or government entity of an individual who is not employed by that employer outside of the period of that year commencing on May 1 and ending September 30, or employment by a governmental entity in a recreational program or service during the period commencing on May 1 and ending September 30, except that "seasonal employment" does not include employment of employees engaged to labor on a farm on either a piece-rate or regular hourly rate basis.
 
	(o)	"Seasonal employer" means an employer who exclusively provides its services in a continuous period of not more than ten weeks during the months of June, July, August, and September, or an employer for which, during the immediately previous calendar year, not less than two thirds of the employer's gross receipts were received in a continuous period of not more than sixteen weeks or for which not less than 75 percent of the wages paid by the employer during the immediately preceding year were paid for work performed during a single calendar quarter.
 
	(p)	"Small employer" means any employer who employed less than six employees for every working day during each of a majority of the calendar workweeks in the current calendar year and less than six employees for every working day during not less than 48 calendar workweeks in the preceding calendar year, except that, if the employer was newly established during the preceding calendar year, the employer shall be regarded as a "small employer" if the employer employed less than six employees for every working day during all of the weeks of that year, and during a majority of the calendar workweeks in the current calendar year, and, if the employer is newly established during the current calendar year, the employer shall be regarded as a "small employer" if the employer employed less than six employees for every working day during a majority of the calendar workweeks in the current calendar year.
 
	(q)	"Long-term care facility direct care staff member" means any health care professional licensed or certified pursuant to Title 26 or Title 45 of the Revised Statutes who is employed by a long-term care facility and who provides personal care, assistance, or treatment services directly to residents of the facility in the course of the professional's regular duties.
 
	L.1966, c.113, s.2; amended 1995, c.387, s.1; 1999, c.356, s.2; 2001, c.416, s.2; 2019, c.32, s.1; 2020, c.89, s.1.

34:11-56a2.  Bureau for administration of act;  director and assistants
    The commissioner shall maintain a bureau in the department to which the administration of this act, and of any minimum wage orders or regulations promulgated hereunder, shall be assigned, said bureau to consist of a director in charge and such assistants and employees as the commissioner may deem desirable.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 3.

34:11-56a3.  Employment at unreasonable wage declared contrary to public policy;  contract or agreement void
    The employment of an employee in any occupation in this State at an oppressive and unreasonable wage is hereby declared to be contrary to public policy and any contract, agreement or understanding for or in relation to such employment shall be void.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 4.

34:11-56a4  Minimum wage rate; exceptions.
	5. a. Except as provided in subsections c., d., e. g., and i. of this section, each employer shall pay to each of his employees wages at a rate of not less than $8.85 per hour as of January 1, 2019 and, on January 1 of 2020 and January 1 of each subsequent year, the minimum wage shall be increased by any increase in the consumer price index for all urban wage earners and clerical workers (CPI-W) as calculated by the federal government for the 12 months prior to the September 30 preceding that January 1, except that any of the following rates shall apply if it exceeds the rate determined in accordance with the applicable increase in the CPI-W for the indicated year: on July 1, 2019, the minimum wage shall be $10.00 per hour; on January 1, 2020, the minimum wage shall be $11.00 per hour; and on January 1 of each year from 2021 to 2024, inclusive, the minimum wage shall be increased from the rate of the preceding year by $1.00 per hour.  If the federal minimum hourly wage rate set by section 6 of the federal "Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938" (29 U.S.C. s.206), or a successor federal law, is raised to a level higher than the State minimum wage rate set by this subsection, then the State minimum wage rate shall be increased to the level of the federal minimum wage rate and subsequent increases based on increases in the CPI-W pursuant to this section shall be applied to the higher minimum wage rate.  If an applicable wage order has been issued by the commissioner under section 17 (C.34:11-56a16) of this act, the employer shall also pay not less than the wages prescribed in said order.  The wage rates fixed in this section shall not be applicable to persons under the age of 18 not possessing a special vocational school graduate permit issued pursuant to section 15 of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.15), or to persons employed as salesmen of motor vehicles, or to persons employed as outside salesmen as such terms shall be defined and delimited in regulations adopted by the commissioner, or to persons employed in a volunteer capacity and receiving only incidental benefits at a county or other agricultural fair by a nonprofit or religious corporation or a nonprofit or religious association which conducts or participates in that fair.
 
	b. (1) An employer shall also pay each employee not less than 1 1/2 times such employee's regular hourly rate for each hour of working time in excess of 40 hours in any week, except that this overtime rate shall not apply: to any individual employed in a bona fide executive, administrative, or professional capacity; or to employees engaged to labor on a farm or employed in a hotel; or to an employee of a common carrier of passengers by motor bus; or to a limousine driver who is an employee of an employer engaged in the business of operating limousines; or to employees engaged in labor relative to the raising or care of livestock.
 
	(2)	Employees engaged on a piece-rate or regular hourly rate basis to labor on a farm shall be paid for each day worked not less than the applicable minimum hourly wage rate multiplied by the total number of hours worked.
 
	(3)	Full-time students may be employed by the college or university at which they are enrolled at not less than 85% of the effective applicable minimum wage rate.
 
	c.	Employees of a small employer, and employees who are engaged in seasonal employment, except for employees who customarily and regularly receive gratuities or tips who shall be subject to the provisions of subsections a. and d. of this section, shall be paid $8.85 per hour as of January 1, 2019 and, on January 1 of 2020 and January 1 of each subsequent year, that minimum wage rate shall be increased by any increase in the consumer price index for all urban wage earners and clerical workers (CPI-W) as calculated by the federal government for the 12 months prior to the September 30 preceding that January 1, except that any of the following rates shall apply if it exceeds the rate determined in accordance with the applicable increase in the CPI-W for the indicated year: on January 1, 2020, the minimum wage shall be $10.30 per hour; and on January 1 of each year from 2021 to 2025, inclusive, the minimum wage shall be increased from the rate of the preceding year by eighty cents per hour, and, in 2026, the minimum wage shall be increased from the rate of the preceding year by seventy cents per hour, and, in each year from 2027 to 2028 inclusive, the minimum wage for employees subject to this subsection c. shall be increased by the same amount as the increase for employees subject to subsection a. of this section based on CPI-W increases, plus one half of the difference between $15.00 per hour and the minimum wage in effect in 2026 for employees pursuant to subsection a. of this section, so that, by 2028, the minimum wage for employees subject to this subsection shall be the same as the minimum wage in effect for employees subject to subsection a. of this section.  If the federal minimum hourly wage rate set by section 6 of the federal "Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938" (29 U.S.C. s.206), or a successor federal law, is raised to a level higher than the State minimum wage rate set by this subsection, then the State minimum wage rate shall be increased to the level of the federal minimum wage rate and subsequent increases based on increases in the CPI-W pursuant to this subsection shall be applied to the higher minimum wage rate.
 
	d.	Employees engaged on a piece-rate or regular hourly rate basis to labor on a farm shall be paid $8.85 per hour as of January 1, 2019 and, on January 1 of 2020 and January 1 of each subsequent year, that minimum wage rate shall be increased by any increase in the consumer price index for all urban wage earners and clerical workers (CPI-W) as calculated by the federal government for the 12 months prior to the September 30 preceding that January 1, except that any of the following rates shall apply if it exceeds the rate determined in accordance with the applicable increase in the CPI-W for the indicated year:
 
	(1)	on January 1, 2020, the minimum wage shall be $10.30 per hour; on January 1, 2022, the minimum wage shall be $10.90 per hour; and on January 1 of each year from 2023 to 2024, inclusive, the minimum wage shall be increased from the rate of the preceding year by eighty cents per hour; and
 
	(2)	subject to the provisions of paragraph (3) of this subsection d., minimum wage rates shall be increased as follows: on January 1 of 2025, the minimum wage shall be increased to $13.40, and on January 1 of each year from 2026 to 2027, inclusive, the minimum wage shall be increased from the rate of the preceding year by eighty cents per hour, and, in each year from 2028 to 2030 inclusive, the minimum wage for employees subject to this subsection d. shall be increased during that year by the same amount as the increase in that year for employees subject to subsection a. of this section based on CPI-W increases, plus one third of the difference between $15.00 per hour and the minimum wage in effect in 2027 for employees pursuant to subsection a. of this section, so that, by 2030, the minimum wage for employees subject to this subsection shall be the same as the minimum wage in effect for employees subject to subsection a. of this section.
 
	(3)	Not later than March 31, 2024, the commissioner and the Secretary of Agriculture shall review the report issued by the commissioner pursuant to subsection b. of section 4 of P.L.2019, c.32 (C.34:11-56a4.10) and shall consider any information provided by the secretary regarding the impact on farm employers and the viability of the State's agricultural industry of the increases of the minimum wage made pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection, and the potential impact of the increases which would be set by paragraph (2) of this subsection, including comparisons with the wage rates in the agricultural industries in other states, and shall recommend: approval of the increases set forth in paragraph (2) of this subsection; disapproval of the increases set forth in paragraph (2) of this subsection; or an alternative manner of changing the minimum wage after 2024 for employees engaged on a piece-rate or regular hourly rate basis to labor on a farm. In contemplation of the possibility that the commissioner and the secretary are unable to agree on the recommendation required by this paragraph, by December 31, 2021, the Governor shall appoint a public member subject to advice and consent by the Senate, who will serve as a tie-breaking member if needed.  The increases set forth in paragraph (2) of this subsection shall take effect unless there is a recommendation pursuant to this paragraph to disapprove the increases or for an alternative manner of changing the minimum wage after 2024 for employees engaged on a piece-rate or regular hourly rate basis to labor on a farm and the Legislature, not later than June 30, 2024, enacts a concurrent resolution approving the implementation of that recommendation.  Beginning in 2024, the commissioner, secretary, and public member shall meet biennially to make either a one or two year recommendation to the Legislature for implementation by way of concurrent resolution.
 
	(4)	If the federal minimum hourly wage rate set by section 6 of the federal "Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938" (29 U.S.C. s.206), or a successor federal law, is raised to a level higher than the State minimum wage rate set by this subsection, then the State minimum wage rate shall be increased to the level of the federal minimum wage rate and subsequent increases based on increases in the CPI-W pursuant to this subsection shall be applied to the higher minimum wage rate.
 
	e.	With respect to an employee who customarily and regularly receives gratuities or tips, every employer is entitled to a credit for the gratuities or tips received by the employee against the hourly wage rate that would otherwise be paid to the employee pursuant to subsection a. of this section of the following amounts: after December 31, 2018 and before July 1, 2019, $6.72 per hour; after June 30, 2019 and before January 1, 2020, $7.37 per hour; during calendar years 2020, 2021 and 2022, $7.87 per hour; during calendar year 2023, $8.87 per hour; and during calendar year 2024 and subsequent calendar years, $9.87 per hour.
 
	f.	Notwithstanding the provisions of this section to the contrary, every trucking industry employer shall pay to all drivers, helpers, loaders and mechanics for whom the Secretary of Transportation may prescribe maximum hours of work for the safe operation of vehicles, pursuant to section 31502(b) of the federal Motor Carrier Act, 49 U.S.C.s.31502(b), an overtime rate not less than 1 1/2 times the minimum wage required pursuant to this section and N.J.A.C. 12:56-3.1.  Employees engaged in the trucking industry shall be paid no less than the minimum wage rate as provided in this section and N.J.A.C. 12:56-3.1.  As used in this section, "trucking industry employer" means any business or establishment primarily operating for the purpose of conveying property from one place to another by road or highway, including the storage and warehousing of goods and property. Such an employer shall also be subject to the jurisdiction of the Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the federal Motor Carrier Act, 49 U.S.C.s.31501 et seq., whose employees are exempt under section 213(b)(1) of the federal "Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938," 29 U.S.C. s.213(b)(1), which provides an exemption to employees regulated by section 207 of the federal "Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938," 29 U.S.C. s.207, and the Interstate Commerce Act, 49 U.S.C. s.501 et al.
 
	g.	Commencing on January 1, 2020, a training wage of not less than 90 percent of the minimum wage rate otherwise set pursuant to subsection a. of this section may be paid to an employee who is enrolled in an established employer on-the-job or other training program which meets standards set by regulations adopted by the commissioner.  The period during which an employer may pay the training wage to the employee shall be the first 120 hours of work after hiring the employee in employment in an occupation in which the employee has no previous similar or related experience.  An employer shall not utilize any employee paid the training wage in a manner which causes, induces, encourages or assists any displacement or partial displacement of any currently employed worker, including any previous recipient of the training wage, by reducing hours of a currently employed worker, replacing a current or laid off employee with a trainee, or by relocating operations resulting in a loss of employment at a previous workplace, or in a manner which replaces, supplants, competes with or duplicates any approved apprenticeship program.  An employer who pays an employee a training wage shall make a good faith effort to continue to employ the employee after the period of the training wage expires and shall not hire the employee at the training wage unless there is a reasonable expectation that there will be regular employment, paying at or above the effective minimum wage, for the trainee upon the successful completion of the period of the training wage.  If the commissioner determines that an employer has made repeated, knowing violations of the provisions of this subsection regarding the payment of a training wage, the commissioner shall suspend the employer's right to pay a training wage for a period set pursuant to regulations adopted by the commissioner, but not less than three years.
 
	h.	The provisions of this section shall not be construed as prohibiting any political subdivision of the State from adopting an ordinance, resolution, regulation or rule, or entering into any agreement, establishing any standard for vendors, contractors and subcontractors of the subdivision regarding wage rates or overtime compensation which is higher than the standards provided for in this section, and no provision of any other State or federal law establishing a minimum standard regarding wages or other terms and conditions of employment shall be construed as preventing a political subdivision of the State from adopting an ordinance, resolution, regulation or rule, or entering into any agreement, establishing a standard for vendors, contractors and subcontractors of the subdivision which is higher than the State or federal law or which otherwise provides greater protections or rights to employees of the vendors, contractors and subcontractors of the subdivision, unless the State or federal law expressly prohibits the subdivision from adopting the ordinance, resolution, regulation or rule, or entering into the agreement.
 
	i.	Effective on the first day of the second month next following the effective date of P.L.2020, c.89 (C.30:4D-7cc et al.), the minimum wage for long-term care facility direct care staff members shall be in an amount that is $3 higher than the prevailing minimum wage established pursuant to subsection a. of this section.
 
	L.1966, c.113, s.5; amended 1968, c.19; 1970, c.115, s.3; 1971, c.195; 1972, c.84, s.1; 1974, c.62, s.1; 1974, c.63, s.1; 1976, c.88, s.1; 1979, c.32, s.1; 1980, c.182, s.1; 1985, c.132; 1990, c.18; 1995, c.387, s.2; 1999, c.6; 1999, c.370; 2005, c.70, s.1; 2019, c.32, s.2; 2020, c.89, s.2; 2023, c.262, s.8.

34:11-56a4.1.  Summer camps, conferences and retreats;  exception
    The provisions of the act to which this act is a supplement in respect to minimum wages and compensation for overtime work shall not be applicable during  the months of June, July, August or September of the year to summer camps,  conferences and retreats operated by any nonprofit or religious corporation or  association.

     L.1967, c. 89, s. 1, eff. June 2, 1967.  Amended by L.1968, c. 58, s. 1, eff.  June 11, 1968.

34:11-56a4.2.  Application of act to wages under wage orders
    The provisions of this act shall be applicable to wages covered by wage orders issued pursuant to section 17 of P.L.1966, c. 113 (C. 34:11-56a16).

     L.1972, c. 84, s. 2.

34:11-56a4.3.  Date of application of act
    The provisions of this act shall be applicable to wages covered by wage orders issued pursuant to section 17 of P.L.1966, c. 113 (C. 34:11-56a16).

     L.1974, c. 62, s. 2;  L.1974, c. 63, s. 2.

34:11-56a4.4.  Date of application of L.1976, c. 88
    The provisions of this act shall be applicable to wages covered by wage orders issued pursuant to section 17 of P.L.1966, c. 113 (C. 34:11-56a16).

     L.1976, c. 88, s. 2.

34:11-56a4.5.  Application of L.1979, c. 32
    The provisions of this act shall be applicable to wages covered by wage orders issued pursuant to section 17 of P.L.1966, c. 113 (C. 34:11-56a16).

     L.1979, c. 32, s. 2, eff. March 1, 1979.

34:11-56a4.6.  Application of L.1980, c. 182
    The provisions of this act shall be applicable to wages covered by wage orders issued pursuant to section 17 of P.L.1966, c. 113 (C. 34:11-56a16).

     L.1980, c. 182, s. 2, eff. Jan. 1, 1981.

34:11-56a4.7  "New Jersey Minimum Wage Advisory Commission."
	2.  a.  There is created a commission to be known as the "New Jersey Minimum Wage Advisory Commission," which shall be a permanent, independent body in but not of the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.  The commission shall consist of five members as follows: the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, ex officio, who shall serve as chair of the commission, and four members appointed by the Governor as follows: two persons who shall be nominated by organizations who represent the interests of the business community in this State and two persons who shall be nominated by the New Jersey State AFL-CIO.

	b.	Members shall be appointed not later than December 31, 2005.  Members shall be appointed for four-year terms and may be re-appointed for any number of terms.  Any member of the commission may be removed from office by the Governor, for cause, upon notice and opportunity to be heard. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the balance of the unexpired term.  A member shall continue to serve upon the expiration of his term until a successor is appointed and qualified, unless the member is removed by the Governor.

	c.	Action may be taken by the commission by an affirmative vote of a majority of its members and a majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business, for the performance of any duty, or for the exercise of any power of the commission.

	d.	Members of the commission shall serve without  compensation, but may be reimbursed for the actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as members of the commission within the limits of funds appropriated or otherwise made available for that purpose.

	L.2005,c.70,s.2.

34:11-56a4.8  Annual evaluation of adequacy of minimum wage.
	3.  a.  The commission shall annually evaluate the adequacy of the minimum wage relative to the following factors:

	(1)	The overall cost of living in the State;

	(2)	Changes in the components of the cost of living which have the greatest impact on low-income families, including increases in the cost of housing, food, transportation, health care and child care;

	(3)	The cost of living in the State compared to that of other states;

	(4)	Changes in the purchasing power of the minimum wage; and

	(5)	Changes in the value of the minimum wage relative to the federal poverty guidelines, the federal lower living standard income level guidelines and the self-sufficiency standards established as goals for State and federal employment and training services pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-3) and section 1 of P.L.1992, c.48 (C.34:15B-35).

	b.	In furtherance of its evaluation, the commission may hold public meetings or hearings within the State on any matter or matters related to the provisions of this act, and call to its assistance and avail itself of the services of the John J. Heldrich Center for Workforce Development and the employees of any other State department, board, commission or agency which the commission determines possesses relevant data, analytical and  professional expertise or other resources which may assist the commission in discharging its duties under this act.  Each department, board, commission or agency of this State is hereby directed, to the extent not inconsistent with law, to cooperate fully with the commission and to furnish such information and assistance as is necessary to accomplish the purposes of this act.  

	c.	The commission shall submit a written report of its findings regarding the adequacy of the minimum wage and its recommendations as to whether, or how much, to increase the minimum wage to the Governor and to the Legislature, who shall immediately review the commission report upon its receipt.  Each House of the Legislature shall consider the commission report within 120 days of the receipt of the report.  The first report shall be submitted to the Legislature no sooner than October 1, 2007 and no later than December 31, 2007, and subsequent reports shall be submitted in one year intervals thereafter.

	L.2005,c.70,s.3.

34:11-56a4.9.  "Task Force on Wages and State Benefits"
 	3. a. There is established, in but not of the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the "Task Force on Wages and State Benefits."  The task force shall consist of 11 members, including the Commissioners of Health, Human Services, Education, Community Affairs, and Labor and Workforce Development, and the State Treasurer, or their designees, all who shall serve ex officio, and five public members appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate as follows: one person nominated by an organization which represents the interests of the business community in this State, one person nominated by the New Jersey State AFL-CIO, two persons nominated by organizations representing the interests of low-income individuals, and one person representing the interests of other disadvantaged individuals who rely on services and benefits provided or administered by the State or its instrumentalities.  Public members shall be appointed for four-year terms and may be re-appointed for any number of terms.  Any public member of the task force may be removed from office by the Governor, for cause, upon notice and opportunity to be heard. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the balance of the unexpired term.  A member shall continue to serve upon the expiration of the member's term until a successor is appointed and qualified, unless the member is removed by the Governor.
 
	b.	Action may be taken by the task force by an affirmative vote of a majority of its members and a majority of the task force shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business, for the performance of any duty, or for the exercise of any power of the task force.  Members of the task force shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for the actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as members of the task force within the limits of funds appropriated or otherwise made available for that purpose.
 
	c.	The purpose of the task force is to evaluate how changes in required minimum wage levels pursuant to P.L.2019, c.32 (C.34:11-56a4.9 et al.) may affect the eligibility of low-income individuals, and other disadvantaged individuals, for a variety of services and benefits provided or administered by the State or its instrumentalities, including, but not limited to, health, human services, childcare, education, housing and tax benefits, and how the combination of changes in minimum wage and eligibility standards may impact the living standards of the individuals and their families.  The task force shall produce annual reports of its findings, which shall include any recommendations the task force deems appropriate for adjustments in eligibility standards for the benefits, changes in benefit subsidy rates, and other relevant reforms, to ensure that the combination of minimum wage increases and State services and benefits are coordinated effectively so as to further advance the overall goal of raising the living standards of working families.
 
	d.	In furtherance of its evaluation, the task force may hold public meetings or hearings within the State and call to its assistance and avail itself of the services of the employees of any other State department, board, or agency which the task force determines possesses relevant data, analytical and professional expertise or other resources which may assist the task force in discharging its duties under this section.  Each department, board, or agency of this State is hereby directed, to the extent not inconsistent with law, to cooperate fully with the task force and to furnish such information and assistance as is necessary to accomplish the purposes of this section.
 
	e.	The task force shall issue its first annual report to the Governor and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), to the Legislature not later than September 30, 2019, and make the report available to the public by means including the posting of the report on the web sites of all of the State departments represented on the task force.  Each subsequent annual report shall be issued and made available to the public not later than September 30 of the respective year and shall include a review of any administrative and legislative actions taken in response to recommendations of previous reports of the task force, together with an evaluation of the effectiveness of the actions in facilitating the overall goal of raising the living standards of working families, and any further recommendation deemed appropriate by the task force.

	L.2019, c.32, s.3. 

34:11-56a4.10.  Impact reports in 2019-2023 calendar years
	4. a. The commissioner shall, not later than September 30, 2024, issue and post on the Department of Labor and Workforce Development website a report which evaluates the impacts on employers and employees of the credits provided in calendar years 2019 through 2023 to employers for gratuities and tips pursuant to subsection e. of section 5 of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a4).  The report shall evaluate the adequacy of the minimum wage of employees who customarily and regularly receive gratuities or tips after adjustment for the credits provided to employers pursuant to subsection 5 of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a4).
 
	b.	The commissioner, in consultation with the State Treasurer, shall, not later than September 30, 2024, issue and post on the Department of Labor and Workforce Development website a report which evaluates the impacts on employers and employees of the tax credits provided in calendar years 2019 through 2023 to employers of employees with impairments pursuant to sections 5 through 9 of P.L.2019, c.32 (C.34:11-56a39 to 34:11-56a41, 54:10A-5.42, and 54A:4-18). The report will include recommendations regarding the continuation of the tax credits.
 
	L.2019, c.32, s.4. 

34:11-56a5.  Administrative regulations;  publication;  duration
    For any occupation for which no wage order issued pursuant to section 17 of  this act is in effect, the commissioner shall, within 6 months after the rate  provided in section 5 is in effect, make such administrative regulations as he  shall deem appropriate to carry out the purposes of this act or necessary to  prevent the circumvention or evasion thereof, and to safeguard the minimum wage  rates hereby established.  Such regulations may include regulations defining  and governing outside salesmen;  learners and apprentices, their number,  proportion and length of service;  part-time pay; bonuses, overtime pay;   special pay for special or extra work;  or permitted charges to employees or  allowances for board, lodging, apparel or other facilities or services  customarily furnished by employers to employees;  or allowances for such other  special conditions or circumstances.

    The commissioner shall publish such regulations as he proposes to issue and  such regulations may be issued pursuant to this section only after a public  hearing, subsequent to publication of notice of the hearing, at which any  person may be heard.

    Such administrative regulations shall remain in effect only until such time  as a wage order governing the occupation or occupations concerned, and to the  extent inconsistent therewith, has been promulgated and becomes effective as  provided in this act.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 6.

34:11-56a6.  Authority of commissioner and director
    The commissioner, the director and their authorized representatives shall have the authority to:

    (a) investigate and ascertain the wages of persons employed in any occupation in the State;

    (b) enter and inspect the place of business or employment of any employer or  employees in any occupation in the State, for the purpose of examining and inspecting any or all books, registers, payrolls and other records of any such employer that in any way relate to or have a bearing upon the question of wages, hours, and other conditions of employment of any such employees;  copy any or all of such books, registers, payrolls, and other records as he or his authorized representative may deem necessary or appropriate;  and question such  employees for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of this act  and the orders and regulations issued hereunder have been and are being complied with;  and

    (c) require from such employer full and correct statements in writing, including sworn statements, with respect to wages, hours, names, addresses and such other information pertaining to his employees and their employment as the commissioner, the director or their authorized representatives may deem necessary or appropriate.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 7.

34:11-56a7.  Investigation of occupation
    The commissioner shall have the power, on his own motion, and it shall be his duty upon the petition of 50 or more residents of the State, to cause the director to investigate any occupation to ascertain whether a substantial number of employees are receiving less than a fair wage.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 8.

34:11-56a8.  Appointment of wage board;  report upon establishment of minimum fair wage rates
    If the commissioner is of the opinion that a substantial number of employees  in any occupation or occupations are receiving less than a fair wage, he shall  appoint a wage board as provided in section 10 of this act to report upon the  establishment of minimum fair wage rates for employees in such occupation or  occupations.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 9.

34:11-56a9.  Wage board;  membership;  quorum;  rules and regulations; compensation
    A wage board shall be composed of not more than 3 representatives of the employers in any occupation, an equal number of representatives of the employees in such occupations and not more than 3 disinterested persons representing the public, one of whom shall be designated by the commissioner as  chairman.  The commissioner after conferring with the director shall appoint  the members of the wage board, the representatives of the employers and  employees to be selected so far as practicable from nominations submitted by  the employers and employees.  Two-thirds of the members shall constitute a quorum and the recommendations or report of the wage board shall require a vote  of not less than a majority of all its members.  The commissioner after conferring with the director shall make and establish from time to time rules and regulations governing the selection of a wage board and its mode of procedure not inconsistent with this act.  The members of a wage board shall serve without pay but may be reimbursed for all necessary expenses.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 10.

34:11-56a10.  Powers of wage board
    A wage board shall have power to administer oaths and to require by subpoena  the attendance and testimony of witnesses, the production of all books,  records, and other evidence relative to matters under investigation. Such  subpoena shall be signed and issued by the chairman of the wage board and shall  be served and have the same effect as if issued out of the Superior Court.  A  wage board shall have power to cause depositions of witnesses residing within  or without the State to be taken in the manner prescribed for like dispositions  in civil actions in the Superior Court.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 11.

34:11-56a11.  Presentation of evidence and information to wage board; witnesses
    The commissioner or the director shall present to a wage board promptly upon  its organization all the evidence and information in the possession of the  commissioner or director relating to the wages of employees in the occupations  for which the wage board was appointed and all other information which the  commissioner or the director deems relevant to the establishment of a minimum  fair wage, and shall cause to be brought before the committee any witnesses  whom the commissioner or the director deems material.  A wage board may summon  other witnesses or call upon the commissioner or the director to furnish  additional information to aid it in its deliberations.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 12.

34:11-56a12.  Rules of evidence and procedure
    The commissioner and the wage board in establishing a minimum fair wage, shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence or procedure, but may consider all relevant circumstances affecting the value of the service or class  of service rendered;  may consider the wages paid in the State for work of like  or comparable character by employers who voluntarily maintain minimum fair wage  standards;  and may be guided by like considerations as would guide a court in  a suit for the reasonable value of services rendered at the request of the  employer without agreement as to amount of wages to be paid.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 13.

34:11-56a13.  Recommendations of wage board
    The report of the wage board shall recommend minimum fair wage rates, on an  hourly, daily or weekly basis for the employees in the occupation or occupations for which the wage board was appointed.  The wage board may recommend establishment or modification of the number of hours per week after which the overtime rate established in section 5 shall apply and may recommend the establishment or modification of said overtime rate.  The board may also recommend permitted charges to the employees or allowances for board, lodging, apparel, or other facilities or services customarily furnished by the employer to the employee;  or allowances for such other special conditions or circumstances excluding gratuities which may be usual in a particular employer-employee relationship.  A wage board may differentiate and classify employments in any occupation according to the nature of the service rendered and recommend appropriate minimum fair wage rates for different employments. It may recommend minimum fair wage rates varying with localities if in the judgment of the wage board conditions make such local differentiation proper.

    A wage board may recommend a suitable scale of rates for learners and apprentices or students in any occupation which may be less than the regular minimum fair wage rates recommended for experienced employees.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 14.

34:11-56a14.  Submission of report of wage board
    Within 60 days of its organization a wage board shall submit to the commissioner a report including its recommendations as to minimum fair wage standards for the employees in the occupation or occupations the wage standards  of which the wage board was appointed to investigate.  If its report is not  submitted within such time the commissioner may constitute a new wage board.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 15.

34:11-56a15.  Acceptance or rejection of report by commissioner
    On submission of the report of a wage board the commissioner shall within 10  days confer with the director and accept or reject the report.

    If he rejects the report, he shall resubmit the matter to the same wage board or to a new wage board with a statement of his reasons for the rejection.

    If he accepts the report, it shall be published within 30 days together with  such proposed administrative regulations as the commissioner after conferring  with the director may deem appropriate to supplement the report of the wage  board and to safeguard the minimum fair wage standards to be established.

    At the same time notice shall be given of a public hearing before the commissioner or the director, not sooner than 15 nor more than 30 days after such publication, at which all persons favoring or opposing the recommendations  contained in the report or the proposed regulations may be heard.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 16.

34:11-56a16.  Approval or disapproval of report following public hearing; effective date of wage order
    Within 10 days after the hearing the commissioner shall confer with the director and approve or disapprove the report of the wage board.  If the report  is disapproved the commissioner may resubmit the matter to the same wage board  or to a new wage board.  If the report is approved, the commissioner shall make  a wage order which shall define minimum fair wage rates in the occupation or  occupations as recommended in the report of the wage board and which shall  include such proposed administrative regulations as the commissioner may deem  appropriate to supplement the report of the wage board and to safeguard the  minimum fair wage standards established. Such administrative regulations may  include among other things, regulations defining and governing learners and  apprentices, their rates, number, proportion or length of service;  piece rates  or their relations to time rates;  overtime or part-time rates, bonuses or  special pay for special or extra work;  deductions for board, lodging, apparel  or other items or services supplied by the employer;  and other special  conditions or circumstances excluding gratuities;  and in view of the  diversities and complexities of different occupations and the dangers of  evasion and nullification, the commissioner may provide in such regulations  without departing from the basic minimum rates recommended by the wage board  such modifications or reductions of or addition to such rates in or for such special cases or classes of cases as those herein enumerated as the commissioner may find appropriate to safeguard the basic minimum rates established.  Said wage order shall take effect upon expiration of 180 days from the date of the issuance of the order.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 17.

34:11-56a17.  Special certificates or licenses for employment at wages less  than minimum
    (a) The commissioner, to the extent necessary in order to prevent curtailment of opportunities for employment, shall by regulation provide for the employment of learners, apprentices and students, under special certificates issued pursuant to regulations of the commissioner, at such wages lower than the minimum wage applicable under the provisions of this act and subject to such limitations as to time, number, proportion and length of service as the commissioner shall prescribe.

    (b) For any occupation for which minimum fair wage order rates or minimum wage rates are established by or pursuant to this act the commissioner or the director may cause to be issued to an employee, including a learner, apprentice  or student, whose earning capacity is impaired by age or physical or mental  deficiency or injury, a special license authorizing employment at such wages  less than such minimum wage rates and for such period of time as shall be fixed  by the commissioner or the director and stated in the license.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 18.  Amended by L.1980, c. 90, s. 9.

34:11-56a18.  Modification of wage order
    At any time after a minimum fair wage order has been in effect for 1 year or  more, the commissioner may, on his own motion, after conferring with the director, and shall, on petition of 50 or more residents of the State, reconsider the minimum fair wage rates set therein and reconvene the same wage board or appoint a new board to recommend whether or not the rate, or rates, contained in such order, shall be modified.  The report of such wage board shall be dealt with in the manner prescribed in sections 15, 16 and 17 of this act.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 19.

34:11-56a19.  Additions or modifications to administrative regulations; hearing;  notice
    The commissioner may, from time to time after conference with the director and without reference to a wage board, propose such modifications of or additions to any administrative regulations issued pursuant to sections 6 and 17 of this act as he may deem appropriate to effectuate the purposes of this article;  provided, such proposed modifications or additions could legally have  been included in the original regulation. Notice shall be given of a public  hearing to be held by the commissioner or director not less than 15 days after  such notice, at which all persons in favor of or opposed to the proposed  modifications or additions may be heard.  After the hearing the commissioner  may make an order putting into effect the proposed modifications of or  additions to the administrative regulations as he deems appropriate.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 20.

34:11-56a20. Records of wages and hours  
    21.  Every employer of employees subject to this act shall keep a true and accurate record of the hours worked by each and the wages paid by him to each and shall furnish to the commissioner or the director or their authorized representative upon demand a sworn statement of the same.  Such records shall be open to inspection by the commissioner or the director or their authorized representative at any reasonable time.  No employer shall be found guilty of violating this provision for failure to keep a true and accurate record of the hours worked by outside salesmen, buyers of poultry, eggs, cream, milk or other perishable commodities in their natural or raw state, homeworkers legally employed in accordance with the laws of this State or any person employed in a bona fide executive, administrative or professional capacity, except that no exemption from record keeping pursuant to this section in regard to any person employed in a bona fide executive, administrative or professional capacity shall be construed to permit an employer to pay wages at a rate which violates the provisions of section 5 of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a4).  

   L.1966,c.113,s.21; amended 1993,c.91,s.1.  

34:11-56a21.  Summary of act, orders, and regulations;  posting
    Every employer subject to any provision of this act or of any regulations or  orders issued under this act shall keep a summary of this act, approved by the  commissioner, and copies of any applicable wage orders and regulations issued  under this act, or a summary of such wage orders and regulations, posted in a  conspicuous and accessible place in or about the premises wherein any person  subject thereto is employed.  Employers shall be furnished copies of such  summaries, orders, and regulations by the State on request without charge.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 22.

34:11-56a22. Violations; penalties  
     23.  Any employer who willfully hinders or delays the commissioner, the director or their authorized representatives in the performance of his duties in the enforcement of this act, or fails to make, keep, and preserve any records as required under the provisions of this act, or falsifies any such record, or refuses to make any such record accessible to the commissioner, the director or their authorized representatives upon demand, or refuses to furnish a sworn statement of such record or any other information required for the proper enforcement of this act to the commissioner, the director or their authorized representatives upon demand, or pays or agrees to pay wages at a rate less than the rate applicable under this act or any wage order issued pursuant thereto, or otherwise violates any provision of this act or of any regulation or order issued under this act shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense and shall, upon conviction for a first violation, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not less than 10 nor more than 90 days or by both the fine and imprisonment and, upon conviction for a second or subsequent violation, be punished by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not less than 10 nor more than 100 days or by both the fine and imprisonment. Each week, in any day of which an employee is paid less than the rate applicable to him under this act or under a minimum fair wage order, and each employee so paid, shall constitute a separate offense.  

    As an alternative to or in addition to any other sanctions provided by law for violations of the "New Jersey State Wage and Hour Law," P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a et seq.), when the Commissioner of Labor finds that an individual has violated that act, the commissioner is authorized to assess and collect administrative penalties, up to a maximum of $250 for a first violation and up to a maximum of $500 for each subsequent violation, specified in a schedule of penalties to be promulgated as a rule or regulation by the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.). When determining the amount of the penalty imposed because of a violation, the commissioner shall consider factors which include the history of previous violations by the employer, the seriousness of the violation, the good faith of the employer and the size of the employer's business.  No administrative penalty shall be levied pursuant to this section unless the Commissioner of Labor provides the alleged violator with notification of the violation and of the amount of the penalty by certified mail and an opportunity to request a hearing before the commissioner or his designee within 15 days following the receipt of the notice.  If a hearing is requested, the commissioner shall issue a final order upon such hearing and a finding that a violation has occurred.  If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order upon expiration of the 15-day period.  Payment of the penalty is due when a final order is issued or when the notice becomes a final order.  Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding commenced by the commissioner pursuant to "the penalty enforcement law" (N.J.S.2A:58-1 et seq.).  Any sum collected as a fine or penalty pursuant to this section shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor.  

    L.1966,c.113,s.23; amended 1991,c.205,s.5.  

34:11-56a23. Payment of amounts due employees  
     24.  As an alternative to any other sanctions or in addition thereto, herein or otherwise provided by law for violation of this act or of any rule or regulation duly issued hereunder, the Commissioner of Labor is authorized to supervise the payment of amounts due to employees under this act, and the employer may be required to make these payments to the commissioner to be held in a special account in trust for the employee, and paid on order of the commissioner directly to the employee or employees affected.  The employer shall also pay the commissioner an administrative fee equal to not less than 10% or more than 25% of any payment made to the commissioner pursuant to this section.  The amount of the administrative fee shall be specified in a schedule of fees to be promulgated by rule or regulation of the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.). The fee shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor.  

    L.1966,c.113,s.24; amended 1991,c.205,s.21.  

34:11-56a24  Penalties for violations.
	25. a. Any employer who takes a retaliatory action against any employee by discharging or in any other manner discriminating against the employee because the employee has made any complaint to his employer, to the commissioner, the director or to their authorized representatives, or to a representative of the employee, that he has not been paid wages in accordance with the provisions of this act, or because such employee has caused to be instituted or is about to cause to be instituted any proceeding under or related to this act, or because such employee has testified or is about to testify in any such proceeding, or because such employee has served or is about to serve on a wage board, or because the employee has informed any employee of the employer about rights under State laws regarding wages and hours of work, shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense and shall, upon conviction for a first violation, be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not less than 10 nor more than 90 days or by both the fine and imprisonment and, upon conviction for a second or subsequent violation, be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,000 or by imprisonment for not less than 10 nor more than 100 days or by both the fine and imprisonment.  The employer shall also be required, as a condition of such judgment of conviction, to offer reinstatement in employment to the discharged employee and to correct any such discriminatory action, and also to pay to any such employee in full, all wages lost as a result of such discharge or discriminatory action and an additional amount of liquidated damages equal to not more than 200 percent of the wages lost, under penalty of contempt proceedings for failure to comply with such requirement.  Taking an adverse action against an employee within ninety days of the employee filing a complaint with the commissioner, or a claim or action being brought by or on behalf of the employee in a court of competent jurisdiction, for a violation of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a et seq.) shall be considered presumptive evidence that the employer's action was knowingly taken in retaliation against the employee.  An employee complaint or other communication need not make explicit reference to any section or provision of State law regarding wages or hours worked to trigger the protections of this section.

	b.	As an alternative to or in addition to any other sanctions provided by law for violations of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a et seq.), when the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development finds that an employer has violated that act, or taken any retaliatory action against the employee in violation of subsection a. of this section, the commissioner is authorized to assess and collect administrative penalties, up to a maximum of $250 for a first violation and up to a maximum of $500 for each subsequent violation, specified in a schedule of penalties to be promulgated as a rule or regulation by the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.). When determining the amount of the penalty imposed because of a violation, the commissioner shall consider factors which include the history of previous violations by the employer, the seriousness of the violation, the good faith of the employer and the size of the employer's business.  No administrative penalty shall be levied pursuant to this section unless the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development provides the alleged violator with notification of the violation and of the amount of the penalty by certified mail and an opportunity to request a hearing before the commissioner or his designee within 15 days following the receipt of the notice.  If a hearing is requested, the commissioner shall issue a final order upon such hearing and a finding that a violation has occurred.  If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order upon expiration of the 15-day period.  Payment of the penalty is due when a final order is issued or when the notice becomes a final order.  Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding commenced by the commissioner pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).  Any sum collected as a fine or penalty pursuant to this section shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.

	L.1966, c.113, s.25; amended 1991, c.205, s.22; 2019, c.212, s.3.

34:11-56a25  Civil action by employee to recover wages, additional amount.
 	26.	If any employee is paid by an employer less than the minimum fair wage to which the employee is entitled under the provisions of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a et seq.) or by virtue of a minimum fair wage order, or suffers a loss of wages or other damages because of a retaliatory action by the employer in violation of the provisions of section 24 of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a24), the employee may recover in a civil action the full amount of that minimum wage less any amount actually paid to him or her by the employer, or any wages lost due to the retaliatory action, and an additional amount equal to not more than 200 percent of the amount of the unpaid minimum wages or wages lost due to retaliatory action as liquidated damages, plus costs and reasonable attorney's fees as determined by the court, except that if there is an agreement of the employee to accept payment of the unpaid wages or compensation supervised by the commissioner pursuant to section 24 of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a23) or R.S.34:11-58, the liquidated damages shall be equal to not more than 200 percent of wages that were due prior to the supervised payment.  The payment of liquidated damages shall not be required for a first violation by an employer if the employer shows to the satisfaction of the court that the act or omission constituting the violation was an inadvertent error made in good faith and that the employer had reasonable grounds for believing that the act or omission was not a violation, and the employer acknowledges that the employer violated the law and pays the amount owed within 30 days of notice of the violation.  In a case of retaliation against an employee in violation of the provisions of section 24 of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a24), the employer shall also be required to offer reinstatement in employment to the discharged employee, and take other actions as needed to correct the retaliatory action.  For purposes of this section, an employer taking an adverse action against an employee within 90 days of the employee filing a complaint with the commissioner or a claim or action being brought by or on behalf of the employee in a court of competent jurisdiction for a violation of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a et seq.) shall raise a presumption that the employer's action was taken in retaliation against the employee, which presumption may be rebutted only by clear and convincing evidence that the action was taken for other, permissible, reasons.  Any agreement between the employee and the employer to work for less than the minimum fair wage shall be no defense to the action.  An employee shall be entitled to maintain the action for and on behalf of himself or other employees similarly situated, and the employee and employees may designate an agent or representative to maintain the action for and on behalf of all employees similarly situated.  The employee may bring the action to recover unpaid minimum wages, or wages lost due to retaliatory action, or other appropriate relief, including reinstatement and payment of damages pursuant to this section, in the Superior Court.

	At the request of any employee paid less than the minimum wage to which the 
employee was entitled under the provisions of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a et seq.) or under an order, the commissioner may take an assignment of the wage claim in trust for the assigning employee and may bring any legal action necessary to collect the claim, and the employer shall be required to pay to the employee the unpaid wages and liquidated damages equal to not more then 200 percent the amount of the unpaid wages and pay to the commissioner the costs and reasonable attorney's fees as determined by the court.  The payment of liquidated damages shall not be required for a first violation by an employer if the employer shows to the satisfaction of the court that the act or omission constituting the violation was an inadvertent error made in good faith and that the employer had reasonable grounds for believing that the act or omission was not a violation, and the employer acknowledges that the employer violated the law and pays the amount owed within 30 days of notice of the violation.

	L.1966, c.113, s.26; amended 2019, c.212, s.4.

34:11-56a25.1  Limitations; commencement of action.
	1.	No claim for unpaid minimum wages, unpaid overtime compensation, unlawful discharge or other discriminatory acts taken in retaliation against the employee, or other damages under this act shall be valid with respect to any such claim which has arisen more than six years prior to the commencement of an action for the recovery thereof.  In determining when an action is commenced, the action shall be considered to be commenced on the date when a complaint is filed with the Commissioner of the Department of Labor and Workforce Development or the Director of Wage and Hour Compliance, and notice of such complaint is served upon the employer; or, where an audit by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development discloses a probable cause of action for unpaid minimum wages, unpaid overtime compensation, or other damages, and notice of such probable cause of action is served upon the employer by the Director of Wage and Hour Compliance; or where a cause of action is commenced in a court of appropriate jurisdiction.

	L.1967, c.216, s.1; amended 2019, c.212, s.5.

34:11-56a25.2.  Defense to action
    In any action or proceeding commenced prior to or on or after the date of the enactment of this act based on any act or omission prior to or on or after the date of the enactment of this act, no employer shall be subject to any liability or punishment for or on account of the failure of the employer to pay  minimum wages or overtime compensation under this act, if he pleads and proves  that the act or omission complained of was in good faith in conformity with and  in reliance on any written administrative regulation, order, ruling, approval  or interpretation by the Commissioner of the Department of Labor and Industry  or the Director of the Wage and Hour Bureau, or any administrative practice or  enforcement policy of such department or bureau with respect to the class of  employers to which he belonged.  Such a defense, if established, shall be a  complete bar to the action or proceeding, notwithstanding, that after such act  or omission, such administrative regulation, order, ruling, approval,  interpretation, practice, or enforcement policy is modified or rescinded or is  determined by judicial authority to be invalid or of no legal effect.

     L.1967, c. 216, s. 2, eff. Oct. 5, 1967.

34:11-56a26.  Protection of right to collective bargaining
    Nothing in this act shall be deemed to interfere with, impede, or in any way  diminish the right of employees to bargain collectively through representatives  of their own choosing in order to establish wages in excess of the applicable  minima under this act.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 27.

34:11-56a27.  Partial invalidity
    If any provision of this act, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of the act and the application thereof, to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 28.

34:11-56a28.  Supplementation of provisions of Minimum Wage Standards Act
    This act shall supplement the provisions of article 2 of chapter 11 of Title  34 of the Revised Statutes.  Nothing herein shall be deemed to supersede any of  the provisions of said article 2 of chapter 11, of Title 34, except insofar as  the wages entitled to be received by any employee under the provisions of this  act and the regulations and wage orders issued thereunder exceed the wages such  employee is entitled to receive under the provisions of said article 2, of  chapter 11, of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes and the regulations and wage  orders issued pursuant thereto.

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 29.

34:11-56a29.  Short title
    This act shall be known as the  "New Jersey State Wage and Hour Law."

     L.1966, c. 113, s. 30.

34:11-56a30.  Application of act to minors
    Except with respect to the minimum wage rates established by P.L.1966, c. 113, s. 5, the provisions of the  "New Jersey State Wage and Hour Law," P.L.1966, c. 113 (C. 34:11-56a1 et seq.) are applicable to the employment of minors.  Wage orders pertaining to minors including those promulgated under R.S. 34:11-34 through R.S. 34:11-56, on the effective date of this act shall remain in force until superseded by wage orders or regulations issued pursuant to P.L.1966, c. 113.

     L.1980, c. 90, s. 8.

34:11-56a31  Establishment of maximum work week for certain health care facility employees.

	1.	It is declared to be the public policy of this State to establish a maximum work week for certain hourly wage health care facility employees, beyond which the employees cannot be required to perform overtime work, in order to safeguard their health, efficiency, and general well-being as well as the health and general well-being of the persons to whom these employees provide services.

	L.2001,c.300,s.1.

34:11-56a32  Definitions relative to work hours for certain health care facility employees.

	2.	As used in this act:

	"Employee" means an individual employed by a health care facility who is involved in direct patient care activities or clinical services and who receives an hourly wage, but shall not include a physician.

	"Employer" means an individual, partnership, association, corporation or person or group of persons acting directly or indirectly in the interest of a health care facility.

	"Health care facility" means a health care facility licensed by the Department of Health and Senior Services pursuant to P.L.1971, c.136 (C.26:2H-1 et seq.), a State or county psychiatric hospital, a State developmental center, or a health care service firm registered by the Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Law and Public Safety pursuant to P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-1 et seq.).

	"On-call time" means time spent by an employee who is not currently working on the premises of the place of employment, but who is compensated for availability, or as a condition of employment has agreed to be available, to return to the premises of the place of employment on short notice if the need arises.

	"Reasonable efforts" means that the employer shall: a. seek persons who volunteer to work extra time from all available qualified staff who are working at the time of the unforeseeable emergent circumstance; b. contact all qualified employees who have made themselves available to work extra time; c. seek the use of per diem staff; and d. seek personnel from a contracted temporary agency when such staff is permitted by law or regulation.

	"Unforeseeable emergent circumstance" means  an unpredictable or unavoidable occurrence at unscheduled intervals relating to health care delivery that requires immediate action.

	L.2001,c.300,s.2.

34:11-56a33  Excessive work shift contrary to public policy.

	3.	The requirement that an employee of a health care facility accept work in excess of an agreed to, predetermined and regularly scheduled daily work shift, not to exceed 40 hours per week, except in the case of an unforeseeable emergent circumstance when the overtime is required only as a last resort and is not used to fill vacancies resulting from chronic short staffing and the employer has exhausted reasonable efforts to obtain staffing, is declared to be contrary to public policy and any such requirement contained in any contract, agreement or understanding executed or renewed after the effective date of this act shall be void.

	L.2001,c.300,s.3.

34:11-56a34  Health care facility employee work shift determined; exceptions voluntary.

	4. a. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no health care facility shall require an employee to accept work in excess of an agreed to, predetermined and regularly scheduled daily work shift, not to exceed 40 hours per week.

	b.	The acceptance by any employee of such work in excess of an agreed to, predetermined and regularly scheduled daily work shift, not to exceed 40 hours per week, shall be strictly voluntary and the refusal of any employee to accept such overtime work shall not be grounds for discrimination, dismissal, discharge or any other penalty or employment decision adverse to the employee.

	c.	The provisions of this section shall not apply in the case of an unforeseeable emergent circumstance when: (1) the overtime is required only as a last resort and is not used to fill vacancies resulting from chronic short staffing, and (2) the employer has exhausted reasonable efforts to obtain staffing. In the event of such an unforeseeable emergent circumstance, the employer shall provide the employee with necessary time, up to a maximum of one hour, to arrange for the care of the employee's minor children or elderly or disabled family members.

	The requirement that the employer shall exhaust reasonable efforts to obtain staffing shall not apply in the event of any declared national, State or municipal emergency or a disaster or other catastrophic event which substantially affects or increases the need for health care services.

	d.	In the event that an employer requires an employee to work overtime pursuant to subsection c. of this section, the employer shall document in writing the reasonable efforts it has exhausted.  The documentation shall be made available for review by the Department of Health and Senior Services and the Department of Labor.

	L.2001,c.300,s.4.

34:11-56a35  Violations, sanctions.

	5.	An employer who violates the provisions of this act shall be subject to the sanctions provided by law for violations of the "New Jersey State Wage and Hour Law," P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a et seq.).

	L.2001,c.300,s.5.

34:11-56a36  Construction, applicability of act.

	6. a. The provisions of this act shall not be construed to impair or negate any employer-employee collective bargaining agreement or any other employer-employee contract in effect on the effective date of this act.

	b.	The provisions of this act shall not apply to employees of assisted living facilities licensed by the Department of Health and Senior Services who are provided with room and board as a benefit of their employment and reside in the facility on a full-time basis.

	c.	The provisions of this act shall not apply to on-call time, but nothing in this act shall be construed to permit an employer to use on-call time as a substitute for mandatory overtime.

	L.2001,c.300,s.6.

34:11-56a37  Collection of data relative to mandatory overtime prohibition, report.

	7.	The Departments of Health and Senior Services, Human Services, and Law and Public Safety shall each collect data from all health care facilities which the respective department licenses, operates or regulates, as to the potential impact of the mandatory overtime prohibition on employee availability and other considerations, and shall jointly report their findings to the Senate and General Assembly Health Committees within 18 months of the date of enactment of this act.

	L.2001,c.300,s.7.

34:11-56a38  Rules, regulations.

	8.	The Commissioner of Health and Senior Services, in consultation with the Attorney General and the Commissioners of Human Services and Labor, shall adopt rules and regulations, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), within six months of the date of enactment of this act, to carry out the purposes of this act.

	L.2001,c.300,s.8.

34:11-56a39.  Definitions relative to C.34:11-56a39 et al. 
	5.	As used in sections 5 through 9 of P.L.2019, c.32 (C.34:11-56a39 to 34:11-56a41, 54:10A-5.42, and 54A:4-18):
 
	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	"Employee with an impairment" means an employee earning at least the minimum wage on the effective date of P.L.2019, c.32 (C.34:11-56a4.9 et al.) whose work capacity is significantly impaired by age or physical or mental deficiency or injury and who, based on a determination by the State, is found eligible for personal assistance services or prescribed drugs because without such services or drugs the individual would be unable to perform the essential functions of the employment position that the individual holds.
 
	"Employer" means any nongovernmental business entity including, but not limited to, a nonprofit organization, a corporation, S corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited partnership, and sole proprietorship, and shall include all entities related by common ownership or control.
 
	"Tax year" means the calendar year or fiscal year in which a taxpayer's gross income tax or corporation business tax liability is due and payable.
 
	L.2019, c.32, s.5. 

34:11-56a40.  Tax credit program to employers of employees with impairments
	6. a. There is established in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development a program, administered by the commissioner, to provide tax credits to employers of employees with impairments. The purpose of the program is to provide tax credits to employers of employees with impairments to help to offset the cost to the employer of any wage increases for those employees caused by the enactment of P.L.2019, c.32 (C.34:11-56a4.9 et al.), including the cost to the employer of corresponding increases in payroll taxes that the employer paid on those workers' wages. 
 
	b.	Prior to January 1, 2025, an employer subject to the provisions of subsections a. and e. of section 5 of P.L 1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a4) may apply to the commissioner for an award of tax credits under this section. A tax credit allowed pursuant to this section shall be in the amount provided in subsections d. and e. of this section against the corporation business tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5) or the gross income tax imposed pursuant to the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq., whichever of the two taxes is applicable to the employer.
 
	c.	Prior to January 1, 2028, an employer subject to the provisions of subsections c. and d. of section 5 of P.L 1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a4) may apply to the commissioner for an award of tax credits under this section. A tax credit allowed pursuant to this section shall be in the amount provided in subsections d. and e. of this section against the corporation business tax imposed pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5) or the gross income tax imposed pursuant to the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq., whichever of the two taxes is applicable to the employer.
 
	d. (1) The final amount of the tax credit provided to an employer for employees with impairments employed by the employer during a tax year shall be a preliminary amount of the tax credit, which is the amount by which the wages and payroll taxes which the employer is required to pay each employee with an impairment the employer employs pursuant to P.L.2019, c.32 (C.34:11-56a4.9 et al.) during the tax year exceeds the amount that the employer actually paid for the employee with an impairment in wages and payroll taxes in the last preceding calendar year (as adjusted pursuant to subparagraph (c) of this paragraph), provided that:
 
	(a)	if the number of hours worked during the tax year by an employee with an impairment employed by the employer is equal to the number of hours the employee with an impairment worked for the employer during the last preceding calendar year, then the preliminary amount of the tax credit for each of the hours worked shall be in the amount that remains after the amount actually paid for the employee with an impairment in wages and payroll taxes during the last preceding calendar year (as adjusted pursuant to subparagraph (c) of this paragraph) is subtracted from the amount which is required to be paid for the employee with an impairment in payroll taxes and in wages pursuant to the minimum wage rate which applies to the tax year pursuant to P.L.2019, c.32 (C.34:11-56a4.9 et al.);
 
	(b)	if the number of hours worked during the tax year by an employee with an impairment employed by the employer is greater than the number of hours worked by the employee with an impairment employed by the employer during the last preceding calendar year, then the preliminary amount of the tax credit shall be calculated in two parts and the sum of the two parts shall be the preliminary amount of the tax credit. In the first part of the calculation, regarding the hours worked during the tax year which are equal to the number of hours worked during the last preceding calendar year, the preliminary amount of the tax credit shall be calculated in the same manner as the credit is calculated in subparagraph (a) of this paragraph. In the second part of the calculation, regarding the hours worked during the tax year which are in addition to the number of hours worked during the last preceding calendar year, the preliminary amount of the tax credit for each additional hour shall be calculated in the same manner as the credit is calculated in subparagraph (a) of this paragraph, except that it shall be presumed that the additional number of hours worked by the employee with an impairment would have been paid at the minimum wage rate in effect during the last preceding calendar year (as adjusted pursuant to subparagraph (c) of this paragraph), and the preliminary amount of the tax credit for each of those hours of work shall be calculated by subtracting that presumed rate from the actual minimum wage rate for the tax year; and
 
	(c) In making any of the calculations in this paragraph, the actual rate of pay paid to an employee with an impairment in the preceding calendar year shall be increased by whichever is the larger of:
 
	(i)	the increase in the State minimum wage that would have occurred, for the applicable tax year, if P.L.2019, c.32 (C.34:11-56a4.9 et al.) had not been enacted; or
 
	(ii) any increase in the federal minimum hourly wage rate set for the applicable tax year pursuant to section 6(a)(1) of the federal "Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938" (29 U.S.C. s.206(a)(1)).
 
	(2)	If the number of hours worked during the tax year by an employee with an impairment employed by the employer is less than the number of hours worked during the last preceding calendar year, then the employer shall not be eligible for a tax credit under this section for that tax year for that employee with an impairment.
 
	e.	An employer may qualify for a tax credit pursuant to sections 5 through 9 of P.L.2019, c.32 (C.34:11-56a39 to 34:11-56a41, 54:10A-5.42, and 54A:4-18) in a taxable year or privilege period beginning on or after January 1, 2019. An employer who qualifies for a tax credit pursuant to this section with respect to hours worked during a tax year may use the tax credit when determining the employer's estimated tax for the purpose of making installment payments of the tax during that tax year. The commissioner shall, upon request, provide assistance to the employer in estimating the likely amount of the tax credit to assist the employer in determining the amount of the tax credit and the installment payments of the tax during a tax year. For tax years 2019 and 2020, the Director of the Division of Taxation may waive in part, or entirely, penalties for underpayment of taxes in connection with installment payments to the extent that the director finds that the underpayment occurred because of a good faith error of the employer in calculating the amount of the credit. Any misclassification of an employee by an employer who knowingly, in applying for the tax credit, falsely represents an employee as an employee with an impairment shall be regarded as a violation of the applicable State tax law and shall be subject to three times the amount of penalties otherwise provided in that law for violations of the law and, for that violation, the penalty shall not be waived, including during tax years 2019 and 2020.
 
	f.	An employer shall not be eligible for a tax credit pursuant to sections 5 through 9 of P.L.2019, c.32 (C.34:11-56a39 to 34:11-56a41, 54:10A-5.42, and 54A:4-18) if the commissioner determines that the employer reduced the wages that the employer paid to any employee with an impairment employed by the employer to be eligible for a tax credit under sections 5 through 9 of P.L.2019, c.32 (C.34:11-56a39 to 34:11-56a41, 54:10A-5.42, and 54A:4-18) in a future year.
 
	g.	The combined value of all tax credits approved annually by the commissioner pursuant to this section shall not exceed $10,000,000 in a calendar year.  The commissioner shall annually review and report to the Legislature in accordance with section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1) on the sufficiency of the tax credit cap authorized pursuant to this subsection and have any recommendations with respect thereto to the Legislature.
 
	L.2019, c.32, s.6. 

34:11-56a41.  Regulations
 	7. a. Notwithstanding any provision of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) to the contrary, the commissioner, in consultation with the State Treasurer, may adopt, upon filing with the Office of Administrative Law, such regulations that the commissioner deems necessary to implement the provisions of sections 5 through 9 of P.L.2019, c.32 (C.34:11-56a39 to 34:11-56a41, 54:10A-5.42, and 54A:4-18), which regulations shall be effective for a period not to exceed 180 days from the date of the filing. The commissioner shall thereafter amend, adopt, or readopt the regulations in accordance with the requirements of P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.). The regulations adopted by the commissioner shall include the following:
 
	(1) standards and procedures for determining which employees are employees with impairments for the purpose of determining the eligibility of employers for tax credits;
 
	(2) any additions to, or modifications of, wage record-keeping requirements needed to calculate the amounts of tax credits under sections 5 through 9 of P.L.2019, c.32 (C.34:11-56a39 to 34:11-56a41, 54:10A-5.42, and 54A:4-18); 
 
	(3) continuing to provide the calculation, for each year, of what the minimum wage would have been under section 5 of P.L.1966 (C.34:11-56a4) and paragraph 23 of Article I of the New Jersey Constitution if P.L.2019, c.32 (C.34:11-56a4.9 et al.) had not been enacted ; and
 
	(4) a method for employers to submit certificates of credit to the Division of Taxation pursuant to sections 8 and 9 of P.L.2019, c.32 (C.54:10A-5.42 and C.54A:4-18).
 
	b.	Beginning the year next following the year in which P.L.2019, c.32 (C.34:11-56a4.9 et al.) takes effect and every two years thereafter, the commissioner shall prepare a report concerning the award of tax credits under sections 5 through 9 of P.L.2019, c.32 (C.34:11-56a39 to 34:11-56a41, 54:10A-5.42, and 54A:4-18), and submit the report to the Governor, and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), to the Legislature. Each biennial report required under this subsection shall include the names and locations of, and the amount of tax credits allowed to, each employer allowed a tax credit under sections 5 through 9 of P.L.2019, c.32 (C.34:11-56a39 to 34:11-56a41, 54:10A-5.42, and 54A:4-18).
 
	L.2019, c.32, s.7. 

34:11-56a42  Findings, declarations.
	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that:
 
	a.	On March 29, 2023, the Major League Baseball Players Association, the recognized labor union for Major League Baseball players, entered into a first-ever nationwide collective bargaining agreement with Minor League Baseball on behalf of minor league players.
 
	b.	This agreement provides significant compensation and benefits to minor league players, including annual salaries, health care, housing, retirement benefits, meals, and tuition assistance.
 
	c.	The unique nature of minor league athletic work, including irregular hours and non-traditional training schedules, makes the application of State wage and hour laws incompatible with the collectively bargained agreement.
 
	d.	It is in the interest of the State to respect the terms of a union-negotiated agreement and ensure continued operations of minor league teams that provide community and economic benefits to New Jersey.
 
L.2025, c.141, s.1.

34:11-56a43  Minor League Baseball players exempt from certain State wage laws, circumstances.
	2. a. The provisions of the "New Jersey State Wage and Hour Law," P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a et seq.) and the recordkeeping requirements of the State wage payment law, P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.1 et seq.) shall not apply to a minor league baseball player who is subject to a collective bargaining agreement entered into between Minor League Baseball and the Major League Baseball Players Association that is in effect and that expressly provides for wages and conditions of the minor league baseball player.
 
	b.	The exclusion in subsection a. of this section shall apply only during a period in which an affected minor league baseball player is compensated pursuant to the terms of a collective bargaining agreement that meets the requirements of this section and shall not extend beyond the term of that agreement, except that a collective bargaining agreement may be renewed, renegotiated, or extended.
 
	c.	Minor League Baseball and the Major League Baseball Players Association shall notify the Department of Labor and Workforce Development of any termination or replacement of a collective bargaining agreement subject to the provisions of this act within one week of any termination or replacement.
 
L.2025, c.141, s.2.

34:11-56.1.  Definitions.
	1.	As used in this act:
 
	a.	"Employee" includes any person, either male or female, employed by an employer, but shall not include persons performing volunteer service for nonprofit organizations or corporations nor persons employed on a farm or in a hotel.
 
	b.	"Employer" includes any person acting directly or indirectly in the interest, or as agent, of an employer in relation to an employee and further includes one or more individuals, partnerships, corporations, associations, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, or receivers, such term shall not include nonprofit hospital associations or corporations.
 
	c.	"Employ" includes to suffer or permit to work.
 
	d.	"Occupation" includes any industry, trade, business or branch thereof, or any employment or class of employment.
 
	e.	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development of the State of New Jersey.

     L.1952, c. 9, p. 45, s. 1; amended 2023, c.262, s.9.

34:11-56.2.  Discrimination in pay based on sex prohibited
    No employer shall discriminate in any way in the rate or method of payment of wages to any employee because of his or her sex.  A differential in pay between employees based on a reasonable factor or factors other than sex shall not constitute discrimination within the meaning of this section.

     L.1952, c. 9, p. 46, s. 2.

34:11-56.3.  Enforcement of act
    The Commissioner of Labor and Industry shall have the power and it shall be  his duty to carry out and enforce the provisions of this act.

     L.1952, c. 9, p. 46, s. 3.

34:11-56.4.  Inspection of records;  obtaining of information
    The commissioner, or his authorized representative, shall have the power to  enter the place of employment of any employer to inspect and copy payrolls and  other employment records, to compare character of work and skills on which  persons employed by the employer are engaged, to question such persons under  subpoena, if necessary, and to obtain such other information as is reasonably  necessary to the administration and enforcement of this act.

     L.1952, c. 9, p. 46, s. 4.

34:11-56.5.  Regulations, power to make
    The commissioner shall have the power to issue such regulations, not inconsistent with the purpose and provisions of this act, as he deems necessary  or appropriate for the efficient administration thereof.

     L.1952, c. 9, p. 46, s. 5.

34:11-56.6.  Violations of act
    Any employer who willfully violates any provision of this act, or who discharges or in any other manner discriminates against any employee because such employee has made any complaint to his or her employer, the commissioner, or any other person, or instituted, or caused to be instituted any proceeding under or related to this act, or has testified or is about to testify in any such proceedings, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), or by imprisonment for not less than ten days nor more than ninety days, or by both fine and imprisonment.

     L.1952, c. 9, p. 46, s. 6.

34:11-56.7.  Failure to furnish records;  interference with commissioner in  performance of duties
    Any employer who willfully fails to furnish required records and information  to the commissioner upon request, or who falsifies such records or who hinders,  delays, or otherwise interferes with the commissioner, or his authorized  representative, in the performance of his duties in the enforcement of this  act, or refuses such official entry into any place of employment which he is  authorized by this act to inspect, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon  conviction be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor  more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).

     L.1952, c. 9, p. 47, s. 7.

34:11-56.8.  Actions by or on behalf of employees;  damages
    If any employee, because of his or her employer's violation of the provisions of section two of this act, is discriminated against in the payment of wages, such employee may recover in a civil action the full amount of the salary or wages due from the employer plus an additional equal amount as liquidated damages, together with costs and such reasonable attorney's fees as may be allowed by the court, and any agreement between such employee and employer to work for less than such salary or wages shall be no defense to the action.  At the request of any employee paid less than the wage to which she may be entitled under this act, the commissioner may take an assignment of such  wage claim in trust for the assigning employee and may bring any legal action  necessary to collect such claim, including the liquidated damages provided by  this section without cost to the employee.  The court in such action shall, in  addition to any judgment awarded to the plaintiff or plaintiffs, allow a  reasonable attorney's fee to be paid by the defendant, and costs of the action.   The commissioner shall not be required to pay the filing fee, or other costs,  in connection with such action.  The commissioner shall have power to join  various claimants against the employer in one cause of action.

     L.1952, c. 9, p. 47, s. 8.

34:11-56.9.  Notice of alleged violation;  hearing
    If complaint shall be made to the commissioner, or if he shall have reason to believe that any provision of this act has been violated, he may cause notice of such alleged violation to be given to the alleged violator, giving the party so notified the opportunity to answer such complaint.  The alleged violator shall be given an opportunity, at his request, to be heard with regard  to such alleged violation, under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the commissioner provided that the complaining party and all interested persons shall be notified of such hearing and given an opportunity to be present.  If, as the result of such hearing, it shall appear that the purposes of this act may be served and any violation corrected without the institution of any prosecution, the commissioner shall not be obligated to institute any prosecution for any such violation.

     L.1952, c. 9, p. 48, s. 9.

34:11-56.10.  Partial invalidity
    The provisions of this act shall be construed as severable and if any part be held unconstitutional, or for any other reason invalid, the remaining parts shall not be affected thereby.

     L.1952, c. 9, p. 48, s. 10.

34:11-56.11.  Effective date
    This act shall take effect July first, one thousand nine hundred and fifty-two.

     L.1952, c. 9, p. 48, s. 11.

34:11-56.12  Notification to certain employees.
 
 	1. a. Every employer in this State, with 50 or more employees, shall conspicuously post notification, in a place or places accessible to all workers in each of the employer's workplaces, in a form issued by regulation promulgated by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, detailing the right to be free of gender inequity or bias in pay, compensation, benefits or other terms or conditions of employment under the "Law Against Discrimination," P.L.1945, c.169 (C.10:5-1 et seq.), P.L.1952, c.9 (C.34:11-56.1 et seq.), Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Pub.L. 88-352 (42 U.S.C. s.2000e et seq.), and the Equal Pay Act of 1963, Pub.L. 88-38 (29 U.S.C. s.206(d)), which prohibit wage or compensation discrimination based on gender.
 
	b.	The employer shall provide each worker of the employer with a written copy of the notification: not later than 30 days after the form of the notification is issued by the commissioner; at the time of the worker's hiring, if the worker is hired after the issuance; annually, on or before December 31 of each year; and at any time, upon the first request of the worker. The employer shall make the written copy of the notification available to each worker:
 
	(1)	By email delivery;
 
	(2)	Via printed material, including, but not limited to, a pay check insert, brochure or similar informational packet provided to new hires, an attachment to an employee manual or policy book, or flyer distributed at an employee meeting; or
 
	(3)	Through an Internet or Intranet website, if the site is for the exclusive use of all workers, can be accessed by all workers, and the employer provides notice to the workers of its posting.
 
	The notification provided by the employer pursuant to this subsection shall contain an acknowledgement that the worker has received the notification and has read and understands its terms. The acknowledgement shall be signed by the worker, in writing or by means of electronic verification, and returned to the employer within 30 days of its receipt.
 
	c.	The commissioner shall make the notification required by this section available in English, Spanish, and any other language that the commissioner determines is the first language of a significant number of workers in the State. This determination shall be, at the discretion of the commissioner, based on the numerical percentages of all workers in the State for whom English or Spanish is not a first language or in a manner consistent with any regulations promulgated by the commissioner for this purpose. The employer shall post and provide the notification in English, Spanish, and any other language for which the commissioner has made the notification available and which the employer reasonably believes is the first language of  a significant number of the employer's workforce.
 
	L.2012, c.57, s.1.

34:11-56.13  Short title.
 	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Diane B. Allen Equal Pay Act."

	L.2018, c.9, s.1.

34:11-56.14  Report to commissioner; terms defined.
 	5. a. Any employer, regardless of the location of the employer, who enters into a contract with a public body to provide qualifying services to the public body shall provide a report to the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, in a form issued by regulation promulgated by the commissioner, of information regarding the compensation and hours worked by employees categorized by gender, race, ethnicity, and job category.  Data regarding compensation and hours worked by employees shall be reported in the form by pay bands to be established by regulation promulgated by the commissioner.  The commissioner may establish a standard presumption for the number of hours worked by a fulltime employee or by a part-time employee for whom an employer does not track actual hours worked.  An employer shall provide a report for each establishment of the employer.
 
	b.	Any employer, regardless of the location of the employer, who enters into a contract with a public body to perform any public work for the public body shall provide to the commissioner, through certified payroll records required pursuant to P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.), information regarding the gender, race, job title, occupational category, and rate of total compensation of every employee of the employer employed in the State in connection with the contract.  The employer shall provide the commissioner, throughout the duration of the contract or contracts, with an update to the information whenever payroll records are required to be submitted pursuant to P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.).
 
	c.	The commissioner shall retain the information provided by the employer during any period of time that one or more contracts are in effect between the employer and any public body and not less than five years after the end of that period.  The retained employment information shall be made available by the commissioner to the Division on Civil Rights in the Department of Law and Public Safety, and, upon request, provided to anyone who is or was an employee of the employer during the period of any of the contracts between the employer and any public body, or any authorized representative of the employee.
 
	d.	For the purposes of the section:
 
	"Public body" means the State or any agency or instrumentality of the State;
 
	"Public work" means public work as defined in section 2 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.26) and which is subject to the provisions of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.). Public work shall not include the provision of goods or products.
 
	"Qualifying services" means the provision of any service to the State or to any other public body, except for public work as defined in section 2 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.26).
 
	"Service" means any act performed in exchange for payment, including the provision of professional services, but shall not include the sale of goods or products.
 
	L.2018, c.9, s.5.

34:11-56.25.  Public policy
    It is declared to be the public policy of this State to establish a prevailing wage level for workmen engaged in public works in order to safeguard  their efficiency and general well being and to protect them as well as their  employers from the effects of serious and unfair competition resulting from  wage levels detrimental to efficiency and well-being.

     L.1963, c. 150, s. 1.

34:11-56.26  Definitions.
	2.	As used in this act:
 
	(1) "Department" means the Department of Labor and Workforce Development of the State of New Jersey.
 
	(2) "Locality" means any political subdivision of the State, combination of the same or parts thereof, or any geographical area or areas classified, designated and fixed by the commissioner from time to time, provided that in determining the "locality," the commissioner shall be guided by the boundary lines of political subdivisions or parts thereof, or by a consideration of the areas with respect to which it has been the practice of employers of particular crafts or trades to engage in collective bargaining with the representatives of workers in such craft or trade.
 
	(3) "Maintenance work" means the repair of existing facilities when the size, type or extent of such facilities is not thereby changed or increased.  "Maintenance work" also means any work on a maintenance-related project that exceeds the scope of work and capabilities of in-house maintenance personnel, requires the solicitation of bids, and has an aggregate value exceeding $50,000.
 
	(4)	"Public body" means the State of New Jersey, any of its political subdivisions, any authority created by the Legislature of the State of New Jersey and any instrumentality or agency of the State of New Jersey or of any of its political subdivisions.
 
	(5)	"Public work" means construction, reconstruction, demolition, alteration, custom fabrication, duct cleaning, or repair work, or maintenance work, including painting, and decorating, done under contract and paid for in whole or in part out of the funds of a public body, except work performed under a rehabilitation program.  "Public work" shall also mean construction, reconstruction, demolition, alteration, custom fabrication, duct cleaning, or repair work, done on any property or premises, whether or not the work is paid for from public funds, if, at the time of the entering into of the contract the property or premises is owned by the public body or
 
	(a) Not less than 55% of the property or premises is leased by a public body, or is subject to an agreement to be subsequently leased by the public body; and
 
	(b) The portion of the property or premises that is leased or subject to an agreement to be subsequently leased by the public body measures more than 20,000 square feet.
 
	(6) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development or his duly authorized representatives.
 
	(7) "Workman" or "worker" includes laborer, mechanic, skilled or semi-skilled, laborer and apprentices or helpers employed by any contractor or subcontractor and engaged in the performance of services directly upon a public work, regardless of whether their work becomes a component part thereof, but does not include material suppliers or their employees who do not perform services at the job site.  For the purpose of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.), contractors or subcontractors engaged in custom fabrication shall not be regarded as material suppliers.
 
	(8) "Work performed under a rehabilitation program" means work arranged by and at a State institution primarily for teaching and upgrading the skills and employment opportunities of the inmates of such institutions.
 
	(9) "Prevailing wage" means the wage rate paid by virtue of collective bargaining agreements by employers employing a majority of workers of that craft or trade subject to said collective bargaining agreements, in the locality in which the public work is done.
 
	(10) "Act" means the provisions of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) and the rules and regulations issued hereunder.
 
	(11) "Prevailing wage contract threshold amount" means:
 
	(a) In the case of any public work paid for in whole or in part out of the funds of a municipality in the State of New Jersey or done on property or premises owned by a public body or leased or to be leased by the municipality, the dollar amount established for the then current calendar year by the commissioner through rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), which amount shall be equal to $9,850 on July 1, 1994 and which amount shall be adjusted on July 1 every five calendar years thereafter in direct proportion to the rise or fall in the average of the Consumer Price Indices for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers for the New York metropolitan and the Philadelphia metropolitan regions as reported by the United States Department of Labor during the last full calendar year preceding the date upon which the adjustment is made; and
 
	(b) In the case of any public work other than a public work described in paragraph (a) of this subsection, an amount equal to $2,000.
 
	(12) "Custom fabrication" means:
 
	(a) the fabrication of any of the following: plumbing, heating, cooling, ventilation or exhaust duct systems, mechanical insulation, or one or more signs in a project which cost a total of more than $30,000 and are part of a project upon completion; or
 
	(b) any other fabrication which is one or more entire modules or structures pre-fabricated to specifications for a particular project of public work with minimal construction work remaining other than installation, regardless of whether unforeseen construction work is required on the public work site to modify the custom fabricated item for the purpose of installation, for use in a project of public work or for use in a type or classification of a project of public work.  "Custom fabrication" shall not include components or materials, such as structural steel members or precast concrete, or smaller prefabricated components.
 
	L.1963, c.150, s.2; amended 1966, c.118; 1974, c.64; 1990, c.27, s.1; 1995, c.259, s.13; 2004, c.101; 2007, c.68, s.1; 2009, c.249; 2019, c.44, s.1; 2021, c.253; 2022, c.113; 2023, c.133.

34:11-56.27  Prevailing wage rate required in contract.
	3. a. Every contract in excess of the prevailing wage contract threshold amount for any public work to which any public body is a party or for public work to be done on property or premises owned by a public body or leased or to be leased by a public body shall contain a  provision stating the prevailing wage rate which can be paid (as shall be designated by the commissioner) to the workers employed in the performance of the contract and the contract shall contain a stipulation that such workers shall be paid not less than such prevailing wage rate.  Such  contract shall also contain a provision that in the event it is found that any worker, employed by the contractor or any subcontractor covered by said contract, has been paid a rate of wages less than the prevailing wage required to be paid by such contract, the public body, the lessee to whom the public body is leasing a property or premises or the lessor from whom the public body is leasing or will be leasing a property or premises may terminate the contractor's or subcontractor's right to proceed with the work, or such part of the work as to which there has been a failure to pay required wages and to prosecute the work to completion or otherwise. The contractor and his sureties shall be liable for any excess costs occasioned thereby to the public body, any lessee to whom the public body is leasing a property or premises or any lessor from whom the public body is leasing or will be leasing a property or premises.
 
	b.	The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, in consultation with the Division of Local Government Services, shall promulgate rules and regulations concerning the standardization of the contractual language necessary to effectuate the provisions of this section.

	L.1963,c.150,s.3; amended 1990, c.27, s.2; 1995, c.259, s.14; 2007, c.68, s.2; 2021, c.301, s.2.

34:11-56.27a  Lowest bidder of public work contract, proof of prevailing wage rates payment; rules, regulations.
	1. a. If a person makes the lowest bid for a contract with a public body for public work subject to the provisions of the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) and that bid is ten percent or more lower than the next lowest bid for the contract, the person making the lowest bid shall certify to the public body that the prevailing wage rates required by that act shall be paid. If the bidder does not provide the certification prior to award of the contract, the  public body shall award the contract to the next lowest responsible and responsive bidder. This certification shall be required only when a public body is engaging in competitive bidding for public work.
 
	b.	The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, in consultation with the Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs, shall promulgate rules and regulations concerning the standardization of the certification necessary to effectuate the provisions of this section.

	L.2021, c.301, s.1.

34:11-56.28  Specification of prevailing wage rate by craft in contract.
 	4.	The public body, any lessee to whom the public body is leasing a property or premises and any lessor from whom the public body is leasing or will be leasing a property or premises awarding any contract for public work or otherwise undertaking any public work shall ascertain from the commissioner the prevailing wage rate in the locality in which the public work is to be performed for each craft or trade needed to perform the contract and shall specify in the contract itself what the prevailing wage rate in the locality is for each craft or trade or classification of all workers needed to perform the contract during the anticipated term thereof. Nothing in this act however shall prohibit the payment of more than the prevailing wage rate to any worker employed on a public work.

	L.1963,c.150,s.4; amended 1990, c.27, s.3; 2007, c.68, s.3.

34:11-56.29. Record of wages paid by contractor and subcontractor  
	5. a. Every contractor and subcontractor shall keep an accurate record showing the name, craft or trade, and actual hourly rate of wages paid to each worker employed by him in connection with public work and such records shall be preserved for two years from date of payment.  The record shall be known as a certified payroll record and shall be open at all reasonable hours to the inspection of the public body awarding the contract, to any other party to the lease or agreement to lease pursuant to which the public work is done, and to the commissioner.
 
	b. (1) The department shall provide on its Internet website a secure process for the online submission of certified payroll records and a secure process for the inspection of those records by the public body awarding the contract, any other party to the lease or agreement to lease pursuant to which the public work is done, and to the commissioner.
 
	The certified payroll records that are made available by the department through a secure process on its Internet website for inspection by the public body awarding the contract, or any other party to the lease or agreement to lease pursuant to which the public work is done, shall be made available in full and without redaction to the public body awarding the contract, or any other party to the lease or agreement to lease pursuant to which the public work is done.
 
	The department shall post the certified payroll records on its Internet website for viewing by the public, and the department shall redact only the addresses and social security numbers of the workers from the certified payroll records for that purpose.
 
	(2) Certified payroll records shall be submitted by a contractor or subcontractor that is subject to this section to the public body awarding the contract or the party to the lease or agreement to lease pursuant to which the public work is done, and to the department through the secure process on its Internet website, each payroll period within 10 days of the date on which the wages were paid to a worker.  The contractor or subcontractor shall use the department's website to submit to the department the records required to be maintained pursuant to subsection a. of this section.
 
	(3) Contractors shall be required to provide certified payroll records to both the department through online submission and to the public body awarding the contract.  Online certified payroll record submission to the department does not relieve the contractor of the requirement to submit certified payroll records to the public body awarding the contract.  The public body awarding the contract and the department shall be entitled to original, unredacted certified payroll submissions.
 
	(4) Records submitted pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to the commissioner's powers provided by section 7 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.31).

    L.1963,c.150,s.5; amended 1990,c.27,s.4; 2023, c.138, s.2.

34:11-56.30.  Establishment of prevailing wage rate by commissioner
    The commissioner shall determine the prevailing wage rate and forthwith shall establish the prevailing wage in the locality in which the public work is  to be performed for each craft or trade or classification of all workmen needed  to perform public work contracts.  The prevailing wage shall be determined and  computed in accordance with rules and regulations issued by the commissioner as  may be required to carry out the provisions of this act; provided, however,  that employer contributions for employee benefits pursuant to a then existing  bona fide collective bargaining agreement shall be considered an integral part  of the wage rate paid by employers of any craft or trade in the locality under  consideration for the purpose of determining the prevailing wage under this  act.  Said wage determination shall be conclusive for a period of 2 years from  date of issuance unless superseded within said 2-year period by a later  determination.  The commissioner shall forthwith announce all said  determinations and give notice by mail of all determinations of prevailing wage  rates made pursuant to this section to any representative of any craft or  trade, any employer, or any representative of any group of employers who shall  in writing request the commissioner so to do.

     L.1963, c. 150, s. 6.

34:11-56.31  Powers of commissioner.
	7.	The commissioner shall have the authority to: 
 
	(a) investigate and ascertain the wages of workmen employed in any public work or other work for a public body in the State; 
 
	(b) enter and inspect the place of business or employment of any employer or workmen in any public work or other work for a public body in the State for the purpose of examining and inspecting any or all books, registers, payrolls, and other records of any such employer that in any way relate to or have a bearing upon the question of wages, hours, and other conditions of employment of any such workmen; copy any or all of such books, registers, payrolls, and other records as he or his authorized representative may deem necessary or appropriate; obtain proof of, and question, any worker's identity to determine whether the worker's identity is accurately and truthfully included or reported in any or all books, registers, payrolls, and other records of the employer that in any way relate to or have a bearing upon the question of wages, hours, and other conditions of employment in the public work; and question such workmen for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of this act have been and are being complied with; 
 
	(c) require from such employer full and correct statements in writing, including sworn statements, with respect to wages, hours, names, addresses, and such other information pertaining to his workmen and their employment as the commissioner or his authorized representative may deem necessary or appropriate; 
 
	(d) require any employer to file, within 10 days of receipt of a request, any records enumerated in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, sworn to as to their validity and accuracy. If the employer fails to provide the requested records within 10 days, the commissioner may direct within 15 days the fiscal or financial officer charged with the custody and disbursements of the funds of the public body which contracted for the public work immediately to withhold from payment to the employer up to 25% of the amount, not to exceed $100,000.00, to be paid to the employer under the terms of the contract pursuant to which the public work is being performed.  The amount withheld shall be immediately released upon receipt by the public body of a notice from the commissioner indicating that the request for records has been satisfied; and 
 
	(e) require any employer or contractor engaged in any work for a public body to file, with the commissioner and the public entity with which the employer or contractor is engaged in work, within 10 days of receipt of a request from the commissioner or the commissioner’s authorized representative, any or all records, books, registers, payrolls, and other records of any such employer or contractor that in any way relate to or have a bearing upon the question of wages, hours, and other conditions of employment of any such workmen and copies of any or all of such books, registers, payrolls, or other records as the commissioner or the commissioner’s authorized representative may deem necessary or appropriate.  If the employer fails to provide the requested records within 10 days, the commissioner may direct within 15 days the fiscal or financial officer charged with the custody and disbursements of the funds of the public body which contracted for the public work immediately to withhold from payment to the employer up to 25% of the amount, not to exceed $100,000.00, to be paid to the employer under the terms of the contract pursuant to which the public work is being performed.  The amount withheld shall be immediately released upon receipt by the public body of a notice from the commissioner indicating that the request for records has been satisfied.  The commissioner shall differentiate the manner of filing records for an employer or contractor that performs work that is not subject to the provisions of the “New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act,” P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) or that is not required to pay its workers the prevailing wage by any other provisions of the law.
 
	(f)  As used in this section: 
 
	“Public body” means the State, any of its political subdivisions, any authority created by the Legislature, and any instrumentality or agency of the State or of any of its political subdivisions.
 
	“Work for a public body” means construction, reconstruction, demolition, alteration, custom fabrication, duct cleaning, or repair work or maintenance work, which is done under contract and paid for in whole or in part out of the funds of a public body, done on any property or premises owned or leased by the public body or under agreement to be owned or leased by the public body, or undertaken in connection with any loan, loan guarantee, grant, incentive, expenditure, investment, tax exemption, or other financial assistance approved, funded, authorized, administered, or provided by a public body or undertaken to fulfill any condition of receiving any of the financial assistance.
 
	L.1963, c.150, s.7; amended 1987, c.451; 2015, c.281; 2025, c.152, s.2.

34:11-56.32.  Posting of prevailing wage rates; mandatory orientation meeting.
	8.	Contractors and subcontractors performing public work of a public body subject to the provisions of  the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) shall: 
 
	a.	Post the prevailing wage rates for each craft and classification involved as determined by the commissioner, including the effective date of any changes thereof, in prominent and easily accessible places at the site of the work or at such place or places as are used by them to pay workmen their wages; and
 
	b.	Conduct a mandatory orientation meeting for each employee on or up to three days before the employee's first day of a project that explains the employee's wages under the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) and the employee's classification under that law unless the employer has entered into a collective bargaining agreement with the employee's labor organization.  An employer may satisfy this requirement by conducting one orientation meeting to a group of employees if the employees commence employment on the same day.  Upon completion of the orientation, each employee shall be required to sign a form, promulgated by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, stating that the employee has received the orientation.  The contractor or subcontractor conducting the orientation shall retain each completed form for a period of no less than six years and shall make each completed form available to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development upon request by the department.  An employer that enters into a collective bargaining agreement with an employee's labor organization shall not be required to conduct an orientation or comply with the subsequent requirements of the orientation with that employee.

     L.1963, c. 150, s. 8; amended 2024, c.93.

34:11-56.33  Filing of written statements of amounts due workers; database of certified payroll information.
 	9. (a) Before final payment is made by or on behalf of any public body or before any lessee to whom the public body is leasing a property or premises or any lessor from whom the public body is leasing or will be leasing a property or premises makes such payment, of any sum or sums due on a public work, it shall be the duty of the treasurer of the public body or other officer or person charged with the custody and disbursement of the funds of the public body, the lessee to whom the public body is leasing a property or premises or the lessor from whom the public body is leasing or will be leasing a property or premises, as the case may be, to require the contractor and subcontractor to file written statements with the public body and the commissioner in a form satisfactory to the commissioner certifying to the amounts then due and owing from such contractor and subcontractor filing such statement to any and all workers for wages due on account of the public work, setting forth therein the names of the persons whose wages are unpaid and the amount due to each respectively, which statement shall be verified by the oath of the contractor or subcontractor, as the case may be, that he has read such statement subscribed by him, knows the contents thereof, and that the same is true of his own knowledge; provided, however, that nothing herein shall impair the right of a contractor to receive final payment because of the failure of any subcontractor to comply with provisions of this act.
 
	(b)	In case any worker shall have filed a protest in writing within three months from the date of the occurrence of the incident complained of with the commissioner, objecting to the payment to any contractor to the extent of the amount or amounts due or to become due to the worker for wages for work performed on a public work, the commissioner may direct the fiscal or financial officer of the public body or other person charged with the custody and disbursements of the funds of the public body, the lessee to whom the public body is leasing a property or premises or the lessor from whom the public body is leasing or will be leasing a property or premises, as the case may be, to deduct from the whole amount of any payment, the sum or sums admitted by any contractor in such statement or statements so filed to be due and owing by him on account of wages earned on such public work.
 
	Such fiscal or financial officer, the lessee to whom the public body is leasing a property or premises or the lessor from whom the public body is leasing or will be leasing a property or premises, shall withhold the amount so deducted for the benefit of the worker whose wages are unpaid as shown by the verified statement filed by such contractor, and shall pay directly to any worker the amount shown by such statement to be due to him for such wages.  Such payment shall thereby discharge the obligation of the contractor to the person receiving such payment to the extent of the amount thereof.
 
	L.1963, c.150, s.9; amended 1990, c.27, s.5; 2007, c.68, s.4; 2021, c.164, s.1.

34:11-56.34  Notice of failure to pay prevailing wages; protest by worker.
 	10. (a) The fiscal or financial officer of any public body, the lessee to whom the public body is leasing a property or premises or the lessor from whom the public body is leasing or will be leasing a property or premises, having public work performed under which any worker shall have been paid less than the prevailing wage shall forthwith notify the commissioner in writing of the name of the person or firm failing to pay the prevailing wages.

	(b)	Any worker may within two years from the date of the occurrence of the incident complained of file a protest in writing with the commissioner objecting to the amount of wages paid for service performed by him on a public work as being less than the prevailing wages for such services.

	(c)	It shall not constitute a failure to pay the prevailing wage rates for the work of a particular craft or classification where the prevailing wage rate determined for a specific craft or classification has been paid and thereafter one or more craft unions contend that the work should have been assigned to their members instead of the members of the specific craft to whom it was assigned or by whom it was performed.

	L.1963,c.150,s.10; amended 1990, c.27, s.6; 2007, c.68, s.5.

34:11-56.35  Penalties, stop-work orders.
  	11. (a) Any employer who willfully hinders or delays the commissioner in the performance of his duties in the enforcement of this act, or fails to make, keep, and preserve any records as required under the provisions of this act, or falsifies any such record, or refuses to make any such record accessible to the commissioner upon demand, or fails to timely respond to or furnish records required by a subpoena issued by the commissioner, or refuses to furnish a sworn statement of such record or any other information required for the proper enforcement of this act to the commissioner upon demand, or pays or agrees to pay wages at a rate less than the rate applicable under this act or otherwise violates any provision of this act or of any regulation or order issued under this act shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense and shall, upon conviction therefor, be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000 or be imprisoned for not less than 10 nor more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.  Each week, in any day of which a worker is paid less than the rate applicable to him under this act and each worker so paid, shall constitute a separate offense.  In addition to the foregoing fines, and in addition to or as an alternative to any criminal proceedings, if an employer fails to comply with any lawfully issued subpoena, or on the refusal of any witness to testify to any matter regarding which the witness may be lawfully interrogated, the commissioner may apply to the Superior Court to compel obedience by proceedings for contempt, in the same manner as in failure to comply with the requirements of a subpoena issued from the court or a refusal to testify in the court.
 
	(b)	As an alternative to or in addition to any other sanctions provided by law for violations of any provision of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.), when the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development finds that an employer has violated that act, the commissioner is authorized to assess and collect administrative penalties, up to a maximum of $2,500 for a first violation and up to a maximum of $5,000 for each subsequent violation, specified in a schedule of penalties to be promulgated as a rule or regulation by the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.). When determining the amount of the penalty imposed because of a violation, the commissioner shall consider factors which include the history of previous violations by the employer, the seriousness of the violation, the good faith of the employer and the size of the employer's business.  No administrative penalty shall be levied pursuant to this section unless the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development provides the alleged violator with notification of the violation and of the amount of the penalty by certified mail and an opportunity to request a hearing before the commissioner or his designee within 15 days following the receipt of the notice. If a hearing is requested, the commissioner shall issue a final order upon such hearing and a finding that a violation has occurred. If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order upon expiration of the 15-day period.  Payment of the penalty is due when a final order is issued or when the notice becomes a final order.  Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding commenced by the commissioner pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).  Any sum collected as a fine or penalty pursuant to this section shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	(c)	When the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development finds that the employer has violated provisions of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.), the commissioner may refer the matter to the Attorney General or his designee for investigation and prosecution.  Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to limit the authority of the Attorney General to investigate and prosecute violations of the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice, nor to limit the commissioner's ability to refer any matter for criminal investigation or prosecution.
 
	(d)	If the commissioner makes an initial determination that an employer has violated the provisions of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) by paying wages at rates less than the rates applicable under that act, whether or not the commissioner refers the matter to the Attorney General or other appropriate prosecutorial authority for investigation or prosecution pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, the commissioner may immediately issue a stop-work order to cease all business operations at one or more worksites or across all of the employer's worksites and places of business.  The stop-work order may be issued only against the employer found to be in violation or non-compliance.  If a stop-work order has been issued against a subcontractor pursuant to this subsection, the general contractor shall retain the right to terminate the subcontractor from the project.  The stop-work order shall remain in effect until the commissioner issues an order releasing the stop-work order upon finding that the employer has agreed to pay wages at the required rate and has paid any wages due and any penalty deemed satisfactory to the commissioner.  Once the stop-work order is issued, any employee affected by a stop-work order issued pursuant to this section shall be entitled to pay from the employer for the first ten days of work lost because of the stop-work order.  Upon request of any employee not paid wages, the commissioner can take assignment of the claim and bring any legal action necessary to collect all that is due.  As a condition for release from a stop-work order, the commissioner may require the employer to file with the department periodic reports for a probationary period that shall not exceed two years that demonstrate the employer's continued compliance with the provisions of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.).  The commissioner may assess a civil penalty of $5,000 per day against an employer for each day that it conducts business operations that are in violation of the stop-work order.  That penalty shall be collected by the commissioner in a summary proceeding in accordance with the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	L.1963, c.150, s.11; amended 1991, c.205, s.18; 2002, c.95; 2003, c.276, s.1; 2019, c.158, s.1; 2021, c.165, s.5.

34:11-56.36. Alternative sanction for payment of wages due  
     12.  As an alternative to any other sanctions or in addition thereto, herein or otherwise provided by law for violation of this act, the commissioner is authorized to supervise the payment of amounts due to workers under this act, and the employer may be required to make these payments to the commissioner to be held in a special account in trust for the workers, and paid on order of the commissioner directly to the worker or workers affected. The employer shall also pay the commissioner an administrative fee equal to not less than 10% or more than 25% of any payment made to the commissioner pursuant to this section.  The amount of the administrative fee shall be specified in a schedule of fees to be promulgated by rule or regulation of the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.). The fee shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor.  

    L.1963,c.150,s.12; amended 1991,c.205,s.19.  

34:11-56.37  List relative to contractors performing prevailing wage public work; database of certified statements.
	13. a. In the event that the commissioner shall determine, after investigation, that any contractor or subcontractor has failed to pay the prevailing wage he shall thereupon list and keep on record the name of such contractor or subcontractor and forthwith give notice by mail of such list to any public body who shall request the commissioner so to do. Where the person responsible denies that a failure to pay the prevailing wage has occurred, he shall have the right to apply to the commissioner for a hearing which must be afforded and a decision rendered within 48 hours of the request for a hearing. If the commissioner rules against the petitioning party he shall have the right to apply for injunctive relief in the Superior Court against the listing by the commissioner.
 
	b.	The commissioner shall create, maintain, and distribute an informational list for contractors and subcontractors who bid on and perform public work, which includes but need not be limited to wage payment, recordkeeping, and registration requirements, and applicable penalties, pursuant to the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) and "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.). The commissioner shall prominently display the informational list on a website maintained by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development and shall distribute to any contractor, subcontractor, or public body, upon request, the informational list, as well as the list of the names of contractors and subcontractors who have failed to pay prevailing wages as determined pursuant to subsection a. of this section, or who have failed to pay any State employer payroll tax.
 
	c.	The commissioner shall create, maintain, and distribute an informational list of labor organizations that represent workers who engage in public work, which shall contain information about required hourly rates, required fringe benefit rates, and regions in which the labor organizations represent workers.  The commissioner shall prominently display the informational list on a website maintained by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development and shall distribute to any contractor, subcontractor, labor organization, or public body, upon request, the informational list for use on public work, including projects for which the cost is below the prevailing wage contract threshold amount.
 
	d.	The commissioner shall create and maintain, in a manner accessible to the public on the website of the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, a Statewide database of the certified statements of contractors and subcontractors who bid on and perform public work that are required to be filed with the public body and the commissioner in accordance with subsection (a) of section 9 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.33).  The commissioner shall redact any personal identifying information of employees, and any other information as may be required by law, prior to a statement's publication on the database.

 	L.1963, c.150, s.13; amended 2015, c.282; 2019, c.61; 2021, c.164, s.2.

34:11-56.38  Prohibition against award of contract to non-complying contractors; definition; presumption.
	14.  The public body awarding any contract for public work, or otherwise undertaking any public work, or entering into a lease or agreement to lease pursuant to which public work is to be done, shall first ascertain from the commissioner the list of names of contractors or subcontractors who have failed to pay prevailing wages as determined in section 13 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.37), and no contract shall be awarded to such contractor or subcontractor, or to any firm, cooperative, corporation, or partnership in which such contractor or subcontractor has an interest until three years have elapsed from the date of listing as determined in section 13 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.37).  
 
	For purposes of this section, “cooperative” shall mean a system of collective ownership of a corporation or other legal entity in which the shareholders or other co-owners each also have a long term proprietary interest or other long term arrangement of control over the operations of the business.
 
	For purposes of this section, “vendor” shall mean any person, firm, corporation, or other entity which provides or offers or proposes to provide goods or services to or perform any contract.
 
	For purposes of this section, "interest" shall mean an interest in the firm, corporation, or partnership bidding on or performing public work, whether having the interest as an owner, partner, officer, manager, employee, agent, vendor, consultant, or representative.  The term may also include, but not be limited to, all instances in which the contractor or subcontractor listed by the commissioner under section 13 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.37) has received payments, whether those payments are in the form of cash or any other form of compensation from the firm, corporation, or partnership, or when the contractor or subcontractor listed by the commissioner under section 13 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.37) has entered into any contract or agreement with the firm, corporation, or partnership for services performed or to be performed, for services that have been or will be assigned or subletted, or for the sale, rental, or lease of vehicles, tools, equipment, or supplies during the period from the initiation of the proceedings under section 13 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.37) against the contractor or subcontractor until three years have elapsed from the date that the contractor or subcontractor has been listed by the commissioner under section 13 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.37).  The term "interest" shall not include shares held in a publicly traded corporation if the shares were not received as compensation after the initiation of proceedings under section 13 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.37) from a firm, corporation, or partnership bidding or performing public work.
 
	A rebuttable presumption that a contractor or subcontractor listed by the commissioner under section 13 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.37) has an interest in another firm, corporation or partnership may arise if the two share any of the following capacities or characteristics: (1) perform similar work within the same geographical area and within the same monetary range, (2) occupy the same premises, (3) have the same telephone number or fax number, (4) have the same email address or internet website, (5) employ substantially the same administrative employees, (6) utilize the same tools and equipment, (7) employ or engage the services of any listed person or persons involved in the direction or control of the other, or (8) list substantially the same work experience in order to obtain the requisite pre-qualification rating from the Department of the Treasury, or any other entity, to participate in any public work.
 
	If a rebuttable presumption has arisen that a contractor or subcontractor listed by the commissioner under section 13 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.37) has an interest in another firm, corporation or partnership, the adversely affected contractor or subcontractor, including the firm, corporation, or partnership, which would by virtue of a finding of "interest" be prevented under this section from being awarded public work, may request a hearing, which shall be conducted in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).

	L.1963,c.150,s.14; amended 1990, c.27, s.7; 2007, c.67, s.1; 2025, c.180, s.1.

34:11-56.39. Penalty for discrimination  
     15.  Any employer who discharges or in any other manner discriminates against any worker because the worker has made any complaint to his employer, to the public body or to the commissioner that he has not been paid wages in accordance with the provisions of this act, or because the worker has caused to be instituted or is about to cause to be instituted any proceeding under or related to this act, or because the worker has testified or is about to testify in any such proceeding shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense and shall, upon conviction therefor, be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000.  

    As an alternative to or in addition to any other sanctions provided by law for violations of any provision of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.), when the Commissioner of Labor finds that an employer has violated that act, the commissioner is authorized to assess and collect administrative penalties, up to a maximum of $250 for a first violation and up to a maximum of $500 for each subsequent violation, specified in a schedule of penalties to be promulgated as a rule or regulation by the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.). When determining the amount of the penalty imposed because of a violation, the commissioner shall consider factors which include the history of previous violations by the employer, the seriousness of the violation, the good faith of the employer and the size of the employer's business.  No administrative penalty shall be levied pursuant to this section unless the Commissioner of Labor provides the alleged violator with notification of the violation and of the amount of the penalty by certified mail and an opportunity to request a hearing before the commissioner or his designee within 15 days following the receipt of the notice.  If a hearing is requested, the commissioner shall issue a final order upon such hearing and a finding that a violation has occurred.  If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order upon expiration of the 15-day period.  Payment of the penalty is due when a final order is issued or when the notice becomes a final order. Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding commenced by the commissioner pursuant to "the penalty enforcement law" (N.J.S.2A:58-1 et seq.).  Any sum collected as a fine or penalty pursuant to this section shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor.  

    L.1963,c.150,s.15; amended 1991,c.205,s.20.  

34:11-56.40.  Action for recovery of full amount of prevailing wage
    If any workman is paid by an employer less than the prevailing wage to which  such workman is entitled under the provisions of this act such workman may  recover in a civil action the full amount of such prevailing wage less any  amount actually paid to him or her by the employer together with costs and such  reasonable attorney's fees as may be allowed by the court, and any agreement  between such workman and the employer to work for less than such prevailing  wage shall be no defense to the action.  Any workman shall be entitled to  maintain such action for and on behalf of himself or other workmen similarly  situated, and such workman and workmen may designate an agent or representative  to maintain such action for and on behalf of all workmen similarly situated.   At the request of any workman paid less than the prevailing wage to which such  workman was entitled under the provisions of this act the commissioner may take  an assignment of the wage claim in trust for the assigning workman and may  bring any legal action necessary to collect the claim, and the employer shall  be required to pay the costs and such reasonable attorney's fees as may be  allowed by the court.

     L.1963, c. 150, s. 16.

34:11-56.41.  Collective bargaining;  effect of act
    Nothing in this act shall be deemed to interfere with, impede, or in any way  diminish the right of workmen to bargain collectively through representatives  of their own choosing in order to establish wages in excess of any applicable  minimum under this act.

     L.1963, c. 150, s. 17.

34:11-56.42.  Partial invalidity
    If any provision of this act, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of the act and the application thereof, to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

     L.1963, c. 150, s. 18.

34:11-56.43.  Rules and regulations
    The commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate, rescind and enforce rules and regulations as may be required for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this act.

     L.1963, c. 150, s. 19.

34:11-56.44.  Short title
    This act shall be known as the  "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act."

     L.1963, c. 150, s. 20.

34:11-56.45.  Repeal of inconsistent acts
    All acts and parts of acts are repealed insofar as they are inconsistent herewith.

     L.1963, c. 150, s. 21.

34:11-56.46.  Effective date
    This act shall take effect January 1, 1964.

     L.1963, c. 150, s. 22.

34:11-56.47.  Action for damages permitted by certain persons bidding on public contracts; conditions; definitions
	1.  a.  Any person who submits a bid directly to a public body for a contract for any public work subject to the provisions of the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) and is not awarded the contract and whose bid is the lowest bid other than the bid accepted by the public body or, if, pursuant to law, the contract is awarded on the basis of factors other than or in addition to the lowest bid, whose bid is the highest in rank other than the bid accepted by the public body (hereinafter referred to in this section as the "plaintiff") may bring an action for damages in a court of competent jurisdiction against the contractor who was directly awarded the contract by the public body or any subcontractor of that contractor (hereinafter referred to in this section as the "defendant") alleging that the defendant has, in connection with work performed pursuant to the contract, violated the provisions of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) or failed to pay any contribution, tax, assessment or benefit required by any other applicable law.  If there is more than one losing bidder, a bidder with a higher bid than the second lowest bidder or lower rank than the second highest rank, if, pursuant to law, the contract is awarded on the basis of factors other than or in addition to the lowest bid, may bring the action if that bidder gives written notice of his intention to bring an action, sent by first-class mail and certified mail, return receipt requested, to every other losing bidder whose bid was lower than his or whose bid was higher in rank than his and none of the bidders notified files an action within 30 days following the date of their receipt of notice.  The written notice of intention to bring an action must contain the following: (1) a statement of the specific violations or failures to pay allegedly committed, which shall not preclude, in the course of the action, consideration of other violations or failures to pay as may be revealed in the course of discovery, (2) a statement that the action is to be filed pursuant to this act, and (3) a statement that the recipient of the notice may have the right to file an action and will be precluded from doing so if he does not file an action within 30 days of his receipt of the notice.  If no other losing bidder so notified files an action within 30 days of his receipt of the notice, the losing bidder who sent the notice shall file an action pursuant to this act within 15 days of the last day any of the recipients of the notice could have filed an action.  If more than one bidder files an action, all actions other than that filed by the bidder whose bid is the lowest of the bidders who filed actions, or, if, pursuant to law, the contract is awarded on the basis of factors other than or in addition to the lowest bid, whose bid is the highest in rank of the bidders who filed actions, shall be dismissed.

	b.  Upon a finding by the court that the plaintiff was a responsible bidder for the contract and a finding that one or more defendants violated the provisions of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) or failed to pay any contribution, tax, assessment or benefit required by any other applicable law in connection with work performed pursuant to the contract, and that the plaintiff submitted a bid for the contract which was less than the sum total of the bid accepted by the public body plus any additional amount that the defendant or defendants would have paid during the term of the contract to be in full compliance with P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) and other applicable laws in connection with the contract, the court shall order the defendant or defendants to pay to the plaintiff the entire amount of damages sustained plus costs and reasonable attorney's fees or, if the court finds the noncompliance to be intentional, three times the amount of damages sustained plus costs and reasonable attorney's fees, except that the court shall order no payment to the plaintiff if the court finds that the violation or failure to pay was caused by minor record keeping mistakes or minor computational errors or by other minor mistakes.  The occurrence of more than two violations or failures to pay shall lead to the rebuttable presumption that the violation or failure to pay at issue is not minor.  If there are two or more defendants, the court shall allocate the payments for damages sustained and attorney's fees among the defendants in a reasonable manner.  Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring payments to a plaintiff by any contractor or subcontractor who has not violated the provisions of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) or failed to pay any contribution, tax, assessment or benefit required by any other applicable law in connection with work performed pursuant to the contract.  A plaintiff may designate an agent or representative to maintain the action if the violation or failure to pay has an adverse effect on the agent or representative or, if the agent or representative is an organization or association, on any member of the organization or association.  If the plaintiff prevails, the agent or representative shall be entitled to reimbursement for costs and reasonable attorney's fees of the agent or representative but not to a financial interest in the damages awarded.

	c.  For the purposes of this section, the damages sustained by a plaintiff shall include the plaintiff's costs of preparing and submitting the bid and may, if sought by the plaintiff, include profits that the court determines the plaintiff would have made if the plaintiff had been awarded the contract and complied with P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) and other applicable laws.

	d.  If the court determines that the defendant did not, in connection with work performed pursuant to the contract, violate the provisions of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) or fail to pay any contribution, tax, assessment or benefit required by other applicable law, the court shall order the plaintiff to pay the costs and reasonable attorney's fees of the defendant.  Nothing herein shall preclude a defendant who is found to have committed minor record keeping mistakes, minor computational errors or other minor mistakes from being awarded relief pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1988, c.46 (C.2A:15-59.1).

	e.  As used in this section:

	"Person" means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association or business;

	"Contractor" means a person who is directly awarded a contract for a public work by a public body; and

	"Subcontractor" means any subcontractor or lower tier subcontractor of a contractor.

	L.1996,c.71.

34:11-56.48  Short title.

	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act."

	L.1999,c.238,s.1.

34:11-56.49  Findings, declarations relative to public works contractors.

	2.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	There is growing concern over the increasing number of construction industry workers on public works projects laboring under conditions which violate State labor laws and regulations concerning wages, unemployment and temporary disability insurance, workers' compensation insurance, and the payment of payroll taxes;

	b.	Contractors and subcontractors receiving the benefit of public tax dollars for their work should not be allowed to exploit their workers by denying them benefits and pay mandated by law;

	c.	It is therefore necessary and proper for the Legislature to establish a registration system for contractors and subcontractors engaged in public works projects in order to better enforce existing labor laws and regulations in the public works industry.

	L.1999,c.238,s.2.

34:11-56.50  Definitions relative to public works contractors.
	3.	As used in chapter 11 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes:
 
	"Apprenticeship Agreement" means a written agreement, complying with 29 C.F.R. s.29.7, between an apprentice and either the apprentice's program sponsor, or an apprenticeship committee acting as agent for a program sponsor, which contains the terms and conditions of the employment and training of the apprentice.
 
	"Apprenticeship cohort" means the group of individual apprentices registered to a specific individual program during a one-year time frame, except that a cohort does not include the apprentices whose apprenticeship agreement has been cancelled during the probationary period.
 
	"Apprenticeship committee" means those persons designated by the sponsor to administer the program.  A committee may be either joint or non-joint, as follows:
 
	A joint committee is composed of an equal number of representatives of the employer or employers and of the employees represented by a bona fide collective bargaining agent or agents.
 
	A non-joint committee, which may also be known as a unilateral or group non-joint committee, has employer representatives, but does not have a bona fide collective bargaining agent as a participant. A non-joint committee may include employees.
 
	"Apprenticeable occupation" means a skilled trade or technical occupation that is included on the United States Department of Labor's "List of Occupations Officially Recognized as Apprenticeable by the Office of Apprenticeship".
 
	"Apprenticeship program" means a plan containing all terms and conditions for the qualification, recruitment, selection, employment, and training of apprentices, as required under 29 C.F.R. ss.29 and 30, including such matters as the requirement for a written apprenticeship agreement.
 
	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development or his duly authorized representatives.
 
	"Completion rate" means the percentage of an apprenticeship cohort who receive a certificate of apprenticeship completion within one year of the projected completion date.
 
	"Contractor" means a person, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or other legal business entity or successor thereof who enters into a contract which is subject to the provisions of the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.), or who is required to pay its workers the prevailing wage by any other provision of law and includes any subcontractor or lower tier subcontractor of a contractor as defined herein.  With respect to the requirement that a contractor register with the department pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.51), a contractor who performs work for a public body and who is not otherwise required to register under that section shall be excluded from the definition of contractor as it pertains to that registration requirement.
 
	"Department" means the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	"Director" means the Director of the Division of Wage and Hour Compliance in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	"Worker" includes laborer, mechanic, skilled or semi-skilled laborer, and apprentices or helpers employed by any contractor or subcontractor and engaged in the performance of services directly upon a public work who have completed or are actively participating in a registered apprenticeship program, regardless of whether their work becomes a component part thereof, but does not include material suppliers or their employees who do not perform services at the job site.
 
	"Registered apprenticeship program" or "program" means an apprenticeship program which is registered with and approved by the United States Department of Labor, which provides each trainee with combined classroom and on-the-job training in an occupation recognized as an apprenticeable occupation, and which involves the attainment of manual, mechanical, or technical skills and knowledge which, in accordance with the industry standard for the specific apprenticeable occupation, are outlined under 29 C.F.R. s.29.5.
 
	"Sponsor" means any person, association, committee, or organization operating an apprenticeship program and in whose name the program is or will be registered or approved.
 
	L.1999, c.238, s.3; amended 2003, c.91, s.1; 2007, c.67, s.2; 2019, c.21, s.1; 2019, c.376, s.1; 2019, c.518, s.1; 2025, c.152, s.1.

34:11-56.51  Registration required for contractors, subcontractors.
	4.  a.  No contractor shall bid on any contract for public work as defined in section 2 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.26), or for which payment of the prevailing wage is required by any other provision of law, unless the contractor is registered pursuant to this act.  No contractor shall list a subcontractor in a bid proposal for the contract unless the subcontractor is registered pursuant to P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.) at the time the bid is made.  No contractor or subcontractor, including a subcontractor not listed in the bid proposal, shall engage in the performance of any public work subject to the contract, unless the contractor or subcontractor is registered pursuant to that act.
 
	b.  A partnership or joint venture shall be permitted to bid on heavy infrastructure projects, if each party to the partnership or joint venture is independently registered in compliance with this section.
 
	 (1)  Prior to being awarded a contract, a partnership or joint venture shall register with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development to obtain a Public Works Contractor Registration certificate and designate a primary contract manager to oversee contract administration and compliance.
 
	(2)  If any party to the partnership or joint venture fails to perform or comply with a contract or a portion thereof, all parties to the partnership or joint venture shall be held jointly and severally liable.  Such failure to perform or comply may result in penalties to the partnership or joint venture, including cancellation of the contract.
 
	c.  As used in this section, “heavy infrastructure project” means a public works project that involves the planning, design, construction, or maintenance of essential facilities and systems, including, but not limited to, roads, bridges, tunnels, railways, airports, seaports, transit systems, water and wastewater treatment facilities, stormwater systems, utilities, and environmental remediation efforts.
 
	L.1999, c.238, s.4; amended 2003, c.91, s.2; 2019, c.376, s.2; 2025, c.242.

34:11-56.51a  Subcontractor duties.
	7.	Subcontractors of a contractor registered pursuant to P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.) are not required to register under that act if they do not perform work at any construction site subject to that act.

	L.2021, c.423, s.7.

34:11-56.52.  Contractor, register, electronically, form, requisites.
	5. a. A contractor shall register electronically with the department on an online form provided by the commissioner.  The form shall require the following information:
 
	(1) The name, principal business address and telephone number of the contractor;
 
	(2) Whether the contractor is a corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other form of business entity;
 
	(3) If the contractor's principal business address is not within the State, the name and address of the contractor's custodian of records and agent for service of process in this State;
 
	(4) The name and address of each person with a financial interest in the contractor and the percentage interest, except that if the contractor is a publicly-traded corporation, the contractor shall supply the names and addresses of the corporation's officers;
 
	(5) The contractor's tax identification number and unemployment insurance registration number;
 
	(6) A certification form provided by the commissioner, with documentation satisfactory to the commissioner, that the contractor has all valid and effective licenses, registrations or certificates required by State law, including registrations or certifications required to do business in the State of New Jersey, and the contractor, if directly employing craftworkers, participates in a registered apprenticeship program as defined in section 3 of P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.50) for each craft they employ; and
 
	(7) A certification form provided by the commissioner, with supporting documentation, establishing to the satisfaction of the commissioner that the registered apprenticeship program, as defined in section 3 of P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.50), meets all of the requirements of section 6 of P.L.2021, c.423 (C.34:11-56.55a), and 29 C.F.R. ss.29.3, 29.4, 29.5, 29.6 and 29.7;
 
	(a) If it is determined by the commissioner that a registered apprenticeship program in which the contractor participates does not meet all of the requirements of 29 C.F.R. ss.29.3, 29.4, 29.5, 29.6 and 29.7, that determination of the commissioner shall, subject to the requirements of subsection b. of section 9 of P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.56), including the contractor's right to request a hearing, result in initial registration application denial, registration renewal denial, revocation, or suspension of the certificate of registration to perform public work in New Jersey;
 
	(b) The determination of the commissioner under this paragraph shall only impact the contractor's ability to obtain or maintain its public works contractor registration certificate under P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.), and shall not affect the status of the registered apprenticeship program for the purpose of its continued operation in New Jersey;
 
	(c) A determination by the commissioner under subparagraph (a) of this paragraph (7) that a registered apprenticeship program in which the contractor participates does not meet all of the requirements of 29 C.F.R. ss. 29.3, 29.4, 29.5, 29.6 and 29.7 shall result not only in initial registration application denial, registration renewal denial, revocation or suspension of that contractor's certificate of registration to perform public work in New Jersey, but also shall result in the initial registration application denial, registration renewal denial, revocation or suspension of every contractor who is meeting the apprenticeship program participation requirement through participation in the non-compliant registered apprenticeship program; provided that any initial registration application denial, registration renewal denial, revocation or suspension shall be subject to the requirements of subsection b. of section 9 of P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.56), including the contractor's right to request a hearing; and
 
	(8) Any other relevant and appropriate information as determined by the commissioner.
 
	b.	At the time of registration, and subsequently upon request, the contractor shall submit to the commissioner documentation demonstrating that the contractor has worker's compensation insurance coverage for all workers as required by law.

	L.1999, c.238, s.5; amended 2019, c.21, s.2; 2021, c.423, s.1; 2023, c.138, s.1.

34:11-56.53  Nonrefundable registration fees.
	6.	a.  The contractor shall pay an initial annual non-refundable registration fee of $500 to the commissioner.  The non-refundable registration fee for the second annual registration shall be $500.  Upon successful completion of two consecutive years of registration, a contractor may elect to register for a two-year period and pay a non-refundable registration fee of $750.
 
	b.	A contractor who is performing public work on the effective date of this act shall submit the registration application form and fee to the commissioner within 30 days of the effective date of this act.
 
	c.	Registration fees collected pursuant to this act shall be applied toward the enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards, Office of Wage and Hour Compliance, Public Contracts section and Registration section within the department.

	L.1999,c.238,s.6; amended 2003, c.91., s.3; 2021, c.423, s.2.

34:11-56.54  Issuance of certificate of registration.
	7.	Upon receipt of the fee, form and documentation required by section 5 of this act, and upon a finding that the applicant for the certificate of registration has met all of the requirements set forth at section 5 of P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.52), the commissioner shall issue a certificate of registration to the contractor.  A registration certificate shall be valid for one calendar year from the date of registration.  Registrations shall be renewed not less than 30 days before the expiration date of the immediately preceding registration.

	L.1999,c.238,s.7; amended 2021, c.423, s.3.

34:11-56.54a  Contractor, sponsor obligations, registration certificate renewal cycles; compliance.
	4.	a.  Each contractor or sponsor as defined herein, who is registered under P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.) to bid on and perform public work shall be under a continuing obligation between registration certificate renewal cycles to ensure compliance with the requirements of section 5 of P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.52).
 
	b.	When between registration certificate renewal cycles it is determined by the department that a contractor has failed to comply with the requirements of section 5 of P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.52), provided it is also determined by the department that the failure to comply with section 5 of P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.52) existed at the time of the contractor's most recent certificate of registration application, whether that application was for contractor registration renewal or initial approval, the department shall consider the resulting failure of the contractor to accurately complete its registration application to have been the making or causing to be made of a false, deceptive or fraudulent statement on the public works contractor registration form, which pursuant to paragraph (7) of subsection a. of section 9 of P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.56), constitutes grounds for revocation of the contractor's certificate of registration.
 
	c.	When between registration certificate renewal cycles it is determined by the department that a contractor has failed to comply with section 5 of P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.52), but where it is also determined by the department that the failure to comply with section 5 of P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.52) did not exist at the time of the contractor's most recent certificate of registration application, whether that application was for contractor registration renewal or initial approval, the department shall suspend the contractor's certificate of registration pursuant to this section either until the contractor establishes compliance with section 5 of P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.52) or until the beginning of the next registration certificate renewal cycle, whichever occurs first.
 
	d.	When a contractor has had its registration certificate either revoked or suspended under subsections b. or c. of this section, for failure between registration certificate renewal cycles to comply with section 5 of P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.52), that registration certificate revocation or suspension shall be taken into consideration by the department as a prior offense when determining whether to grant any subsequent certificate of registration application.

	L.2021, c.423, s.4.

34:11-56.55  Submission of all subcontractor registration certificates by contractor.
	8.	Each contractor shall, after the bid is made and prior to the awarding of the contract, submit to the public entity , including, but not limited to, any authority, board, or commission, the certificates of registration for all subcontractors listed in the bid proposal.  Applications for registration shall not be accepted as a substitute for a certificate of registration for the purposes of this section.
 
	L.1999, c.238, s.8; amended 2003, c.91, s.4; 2019, c.376, s.3.

34:11-56.55a  Registered apprenticeship program requisites.
	6.	A registered apprenticeship program shall require the completion of the on-the-job training hours which conform to the industry standards for learning the skills of a specific craft or trade, as well as on-the-job organized, related instruction in technical subjects related to the specific apprenticeable occupation in conformance with industry standards.  The industry standards for program completion shall be based upon the training requirements as registered and certified by the United States Department of Labor each individual occupation and craft title published by the United States Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration.
 
	The length of a program shall depend upon the complexity of the occupation.  Program duration shall be not less than one year and not more than six years.  During the program, the apprentice shall receive both structured on-the-job training and related classroom instruction.  For each year of the program, the apprentice shall receive at least 2,000 hours of on-the-job training and at least 144 hours of related classroom instruction.
 
	The program shall include all other recommended minimum requirements as outlined under 29 C.F.R. s.29.5 including, but not limited to, a successful demonstration of competency, the registration of program standards, the submission and publication of program completion rates which meet the program performance standards of enrollment and completion rates as outlined under 29 C.F.R. s.29.6, and meet the training recommendations, the terms and conditions of the employment and training agreement between the employer and the apprentice, and the publication of the graduated wages scales to be paid to the apprentice as outlined under 29 C.F.R. s.29.7.

	L.2021, c.423, s.6.

34:11-56.56  Violation; disorderly persons offense; other penalties; suspension; hearing.
	9.	a.  A contractor who: (1) willfully hinders or delays the commissioner in the performance of his duties in the enforcement of this act; (2) fails to make, keep, and preserve any records as required under the provisions of the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.); (3) falsifies any such record, or refuses to make any such record accessible to the commissioner upon demand; (4) refuses to furnish a sworn statement of such records or any other information required for the enforcement of this act to the commissioner upon demand; (5) pays or agrees to pay wages at a rate less than the rate prescribed by the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.); (6) willfully makes, or causes to be made, a false, deceptive or fraudulent statement on the public works contractor registration form; or (7) otherwise violates any provision of this act, shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense and shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment by a fine of not less than $2,500 nor more than $25,000 and disqualification from bidding on or engaging in public work for a period of up to three years.  Where the contractor has made or has caused to be made a false, deceptive or fraudulent statement on the public works contractor registration form in connection with the requirement of section 5 of P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.52) that the contractor participate in a registered apprenticeship program for each craft that the contractor employs, and where the false, deceptive or fraudulent statement was made by an officer or employee charged with the duty of completion of the registration form for a contractor, that officer or employee, upon conviction, shall be subject to punishment by the fine indicated in this subsection or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both.
 
	b.	As an alternative to or in addition to sanctions provided by the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.), the commissioner may, after providing the contractor with notice of any alleged violation of this act, and with an opportunity to request a hearing before the commissioner or his designee:
 
	(1)	Deny renewal, revoke or suspend the registration of a contractor for a period of not more than five years; or
 
	(2)	Require a contractor, as a condition of initial or continued registration, to provide a surety bond payable to the State.  The surety bond shall be for the benefit of workers damaged by any failure of a contractor to pay wages or benefits pursuant to or otherwise comply with the provisions of the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) or this act.  The surety bond shall be in the amount and form that the commissioner deems necessary for the protection of the contractor's workers, but shall not exceed $10,000 per worker.  The surety bond shall be issued by a surety that meets the requirements of N.J.S.2A:44-143.
 
	c.	The director may order the immediate suspension of a contractor's registration, prior to a formal hearing on the revocation of the contractor's registration pursuant to subsection b. of this section, if the director determines that ordering an immediate suspension is in the public interest and provided that the contractor is afforded an opportunity to contest the immediate suspension in the following manner:
 
	(1)	The director shall notify the contractor in writing of the immediate revocation and the contractor's rights under the subsection.
 
	(2)	The contractor may notify the director of its request for an opportunity to be heard and contest the immediate suspension in writing within 72 hours of its receipt of immediate suspension notification.
 
	(3)	Within seven business days of receipt of the notification from the contractor pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection, the director shall grant the contractor a hearing to contest the immediate suspension.  The director shall permit the contractor to present evidence at the hearing.
 
	(4)	The director shall issue a written decision within five business days of the hearing either upholding or reversing the contractor's immediate suspension.  The decision shall include the grounds for upholding or reversing the contractor's immediate suspension.
 
	(5)	If the contractor disagrees with the written decision, the contractor may appeal the decision to the commissioner, in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	d.	If the director intends to impose an immediate suspension as set forth in subsection c. of this section, based upon a rebuttable presumption as set forth in section 14 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.38), the director shall provide the contractor with a notice of intent to suspend and the contractor may request a hearing before the Director of the Division of Wage and Hour Compliance within 72 hours of the receipt of the notice of intent to suspend in order to present evidence expeditiously in support of the position that the suspension should not be imposed.  The suspension shall not take effect prior to the expiration of the 72-hour opportunity to request a hearing.  If such a request is not made, the suspension shall take effect at the end of the 72-hour period.  If such a request is made, the suspension shall take effect only after the director conducts the hearing.
 
	e.	If the director orders the immediate suspension of a contractor's registration pursuant to subsection b. of this section, the violation shall have no effect on the registration of any contractor or subcontractor, regardless of tier, in the contractual chain with the suspended contractor, unless the registration form for the contractual chain of contractors and subcontractors was filed by a sponsor, in which case all of the contractors of whatever tier who participated in the sponsor's apprenticeship program shall be suspended and their registrations shall be revoked by the commissioner.

	L.1999,c.238,s.9; amended 2003, c.91., s.5; 2007, c.67, s.3; 2021, c.423, s.5.

34:11-56.57  Regulations.

	10.	The commissioner may adopt regulations pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) to carry out the purposes of this act. 

	L.1999,c.238,s.10.

34:11-56.58  Prevailing wage levels for certain employees.
 	1. a. It is declared to be the public policy of this State to establish prevailing wage levels for the employees of contractors and subcontractors furnishing building services for any property or premises owned or leased by the State in order to safeguard the efficiency and general well-being of those employees and to protect them and their employers from the effects of serious and unfair competition based on low wage levels which are detrimental to efficiency and well-being.
 
	b.	It is further declared that:
 
	In 2018, over 30 million passengers traveled through Newark Liberty International Airport, making this airport, combined with the Newark Liberty International Airport Train Station, one of the busiest transit hubs in the country.
 
	The workers at the airport and train station often cannot afford employer-provided healthcare plans, and unaffordable healthcare expenses is one of the sources of the high rates of turnover for the workers in the airport and train station.
 
	Improved retention rates of workers in the airport and train station is an investment in service and safety for all who pass through the airport and train station and compensating these workers so that they can afford healthcare and receive a prevailing wage is a way to increase retention.
 
	L.2005, c.379, s.1; amended 2021, c.68, s.1.

34:11-56.59  Definitions relative to prevailing wage levels for certain employees.
	2.	As used in this act:
 
	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development or the commissioner's duly authorized representatives.
 
	"Building services" means any cleaning or building maintenance work, including but not limited to sweeping, vacuuming, floor cleaning, cleaning of rest rooms, collecting refuse or trash, window cleaning, engineering, securing, patrolling, or other work in connection with the care, securing, or maintenance of an existing building, except that "building services" shall not include any maintenance work or other public work for which a contractor is required to pay the "prevailing wage" as defined in section 2 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.26).
 
	"Leased by the State" means that not less than 55% of the property or premises is leased by the State, provided that the portion of the property or premises that is leased by the State measures more than 20,000 square feet.
 
	"Prevailing wage for building services and covered airport or related location workers" means the wage and benefit rates designated by the commissioner based on the determinations made by the General Services Administration pursuant to the federal McNamara-O'Hara Service Contract Act of 1965 (41 U.S.C. s.6701 et seq.), for the appropriate localities and classifications of building service employees; provided, however, that in no event shall the prevailing wage rate applicable to a covered airport or related location worker on and after September 1, 2021 and every year thereafter be less than the following:
 
	(1) any otherwise applicable minimum wage rate established through a policy of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey; and
 
	(2) an amount of wages or supplements equal to the rate for health and welfare for all occupations, designated by the commissioner based on the determinations made by the federal department of labor pursuant to the McNamara-O'Hara Service Contract Act of 1965 (41 U.S.C. s.6701 et seq.) for the geographic region in which the covered airport location is located and in effect on the date of the designation by the commissioner; and
 
	(3) paid leave equal to the paid leave requirements designated by the Commissioner the immediately preceding August 1, based on the determinations made by the General Services Administration pursuant to the McNamara-O'Hara Service Contract Act of 1965 (41 U.S.C. s.6701 et seq.).
 
	"The State" means the State of New Jersey and all of its departments, bureaus, boards, commissions, agencies and instrumentalities, including any State institutions of higher education, but does not include political subdivisions.
 
	"State institutions of higher education" means Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Rowan University, the New Jersey Institute of Technology, Montclair State University, and Kean University, and any of the State colleges or universities established pursuant to chapter 64 of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes, but does not include any county college established pursuant to chapter 64A of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes.
 
	"Covered airport or related location" means the Newark Liberty International Airport and the Newark Liberty International Airport Train Station.
 
	"Covered airport or related location employer" means: 
 
	(1) any person, corporation, limited liability company, or association employing any covered  airport or related location worker in an occupation,  industry,  trade, business or service; or 
 
	(2) any person who contracts with a person to perform work related to the preparation or delivery of food for consumption on airplanes departing from a covered airport or related location.
 
	"Covered airport or related location employer" shall not include a public agency.
 
	"Covered airport or related location worker" means:
 
	(1)	any person employed to perform work at a covered airport or related location, provided at least half of the employee's time during any workweek is performed at a covered airport and related location; or 
 
	(2)	any person who performs work related to the preparation or delivery of food for consumption on airplanes departing from a covered airport or related location. 
 
	"Covered airport or related location worker" shall not include persons employed in an executive, administrative, or professional capacity as defined in subparagraph 1 of paragraph (a) of section 13 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. s.213 et seq.), persons employed by a public agency.
 
	"Public agency" means:
 
	(1) any department or agency of the State of New Jersey and any political subdivision thereof;
 
	(2) the New Jersey Transit Corporation; and
 
	(3) the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.

	L.2005, c.379, s.2; amended 2012, c.45, s.119; 2017, c.178, s.65; 2021, c.68, s.2; 2021, c.282, s.67.

34:11-56.60  Contract to contain provision for prevailing wage, building services rates.
	3.	Every contract to furnish building services for any property or premises owned or leased by the State shall contain a provision stating the prevailing wage for building services rates that are applicable to the workers employed in the performance of the contract and shall contain a stipulation that those workers shall be paid not less than the indicated prevailing wage for building services rates.  The contract shall provide for annual adjustments of the prevailing wage for building services during the term of the contract, and shall provide that if it is found that any worker employed by the contractor or any subcontractor covered by the contract, has been paid less than the required prevailing wage, the State Treasurer may terminate the contractor or subcontractor's right to proceed with the work, and the contractor and his sureties shall be liable to the State for any excess costs occasioned by the termination.

	L.2005,c.379,s.3.

34:11-56.61  Record of employee wages, benefits.
 	4.	Each contractor and subcontractor shall keep an accurate record showing the name, classification, and actual hourly rate of wages and any benefits paid to each worker employed by him to perform building services pursuant to a State contract or subcontract, and shall preserve those records for two years after the date of payment.  Each covered airport or related location employer shall keep an accurate record showing the name, classification, and actual hourly rate of wages and any benefits paid to each covered airport or related location employee, and shall preserve those records for two years after the date of payment.  Such records shall be open at all reasonable hours to inspection by the Director of the Division of Purchase and Property and the commissioner.
 
	L.2005, c.379, s.4; amended 2021, c.68, s.3.

34:11-56.62  Civil action to recover prevailing wage.
 	5.	Any worker paid less than the prevailing wage for building services and covered airport or related location workers to which the worker is entitled by the provisions of this act may recover in a civil action the full amount of the prevailing wage for building services and covered airport or related location workers less any amount actually paid to the worker by the employer together with any costs and reasonable attorney's fees allowed by the court, and an agreement between the worker and the employer to work for less than the prevailing wage for building services and covered airport or related location workers shall not be a defense to the action.  The worker shall be entitled to maintain an action for and on behalf of the worker or other workers similarly situated and the worker or workers may designate an agent or representative to maintain such actions for and on behalf of all workers similarly situated.  At the request of any worker paid less than the prevailing wage for building services and covered airport or related location workers required under the provisions of this act, the commissioner may take an assignment of the wage claim in trust for the assigning worker or workers and may bring any legal action necessary to collect the claim, and the employer shall be required to pay any costs and such reasonable attorney's fee as are allowed by the court.
 
	L.2005, c.379, s.5; amended 2021, c.68, s.4.

34:11-56.63  Authority of commissioner.
 	6.	The commissioner shall have the authority to:

	a.	investigate and ascertain the wages of any employees of a contractor or subcontractor furnishing building services for any property or premises owned or leased by the State, or of any covered airport or related location workers;
 
	b.	enter and inspect the place of business or employment of any contractor or subcontractor furnishing building services for any property or premises owned or leased by the State, or of any covered airport or related location employer for the purpose of examining and inspecting any or all books, registers, payrolls, and other records of any such contractor or subcontractor, or of any covered airport or related location employer that in any way relate to or have a bearing upon the question of wages, hours, and other conditions of employment of any employees of such contractor or subcontractor, or of any covered airport or related location workers; copy any or all of such books, registers, payrolls, and other records as the commissioner may deem necessary or appropriate; and question the employees of such contractor or subcontractor or any covered airport or related location workers for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of this act have been and are being complied with;
 
	c.	require from such contractor or subcontractor, or covered airport or related location employer, full and correct statements in writing, including sworn statements, with respect to wages, hours, names, addresses, and other information pertaining to the contractor or subcontractor's workers, or covered airport or related location workers, and their employment as the commissioner may deem necessary or appropriate; and
 
	d.	require any contractor or subcontractor, or covered airport or related location employer, to file, within 10 days of receipt of a request, any records enumerated in subsections b. and c. of this section, sworn as to their validity and accuracy.  If the contractor or subcontractor fails to provide the requested records within 10 days, the State Treasurer may immediately withhold from payment to the employer up to 25% of the amount, not to exceed $100,000, to be paid to the employer under the terms of the contract pursuant to which the building services work is being performed.  The amount withheld shall be immediately released upon receipt by the State Treasurer of a notice from the commissioner indicating that the request for records has been satisfied.
 
	L.2005, c.379, s.6; amended 2021, c.68, s.5.

34:11-56.64  Violations; fines, penalties.
 	7.	Any contractor or subcontractor, or covered airport or related location employer, who willfully hinders or delays the commissioner in the performance of the commissioner's duties in the enforcement of this act, or fails to make, keep, and preserve any records as required under the provisions of this act, or falsifies any such record, or refuses to make any such record accessible to the commissioner upon demand, or refuses to furnish a sworn statement of such record or any other information required for the proper enforcement of this act to the commissioner upon demand, or pays or agrees to pay wages at a rate less than the rate applicable under this act or otherwise violates any provision of this act or of any regulation or order issued under this act shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense and shall, upon conviction therefor, be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000 or be imprisoned for not less than 10 nor more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.  Each week, in any day of which a worker is paid less than the rate applicable to that worker under this act and each worker so paid, shall constitute a separate offense.
 
	As an alternative to or in addition to any other sanctions provided by law for violations of any provision of this act, if the commissioner finds that a contractor or subcontractor, or covered airport or related location employer, has violated the act, the commissioner is authorized to assess and collect administrative penalties, up to a maximum of $250 for a first violation and up to a maximum of $500 for each subsequent violation, specified in a schedule of penalties to be promulgated as a rule or regulation by the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act,'' P.L.1968, c.410 (C. 52:14B-1 et seq.).  When determining the amount of the penalty imposed because of a violation, the commissioner shall consider factors which include the history of previous violations by the contractor or subcontractor, or covered airport or related location employer, the seriousness of the violation, the good faith of the contractor or subcontractor, or covered airport or related location employer, and the size of the contractor's or subcontractor's, or covered airport or related location employer's, business.  No administrative penalty shall be levied pursuant to this section unless the commissioner provides the alleged violator with notification of the violation and of the amount of the penalty by certified mail and an opportunity to request a hearing before the commissioner or the commissioner's designee within 15 days following the receipt of the notice.  If a hearing is requested, the commissioner shall issue a final order upon such hearing and a finding that a violation has occurred.  If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order upon expiration of the 15-day period.  Payment of the penalty shall be due when a final order is issued or when the notice becomes a final order.  Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding commenced by the commissioner pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).  Any sum collected as a fine or penalty pursuant to this section shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	L.2005, c.379, s.7; amended 2021, c.68, s.6.

34:11-56.65  Alternative, additional sanctions, penalties.
 	8.	As an alternative to any other sanctions or in addition thereto, herein or otherwise provided by law for violation of this act, the commissioner is authorized to supervise the payment of amounts due to workers under this act, and the contractor or subcontractor, or covered airport or related location employer, may be required to make these payments to the commissioner to be held in a special account in trust for the workers, and paid on order of the commissioner directly to the worker or workers affected.  The contractor or subcontractor, or covered airport or related location employer shall also pay the commissioner an administrative fee equal to not less than 10% or more than 25% of any payment made to the commissioner pursuant to this section.  The amount of the administrative fee shall be specified in a schedule of fees to be promulgated by rule or regulation of the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act,'' P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.). The fee shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	L.2005, c.379, s.8; amended 2021, c.68, s.7.

34:11-56.66  Retaliation against complaining worker; offense, other sanctions, fines, penalties.
	9.	Any contractor or subcontractor, or covered airport or related location employer, who discharges or in any other manner discriminates against any worker because the worker has made any complaint to the worker's employer, to the State Treasurer or to the commissioner that the worker has not been paid wages in accordance with the provisions of this act, or because the worker has caused to be instituted or is about to cause to be instituted any proceeding under or related to this act, or because the worker has testified or is about to testify in any such proceeding shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense and shall, upon conviction therefor, be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000.
 
	As an alternative to or in addition to any other sanctions provided by law for violations of any provision of this act, if the commissioner finds that a contractor or subcontractor, or a covered airport or related location employer, has violated the act, the commissioner is authorized to assess and collect administrative penalties, up to a maximum of $250 for a first violation and up to a maximum of $500 for each subsequent violation, specified in a schedule of penalties to be promulgated as a rule or regulation by the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act,'' P.L.1968, c. 410 (C. 52:14B-1 et seq.).  When determining the amount of the penalty imposed because of a violation, the commissioner shall consider factors which include the history of previous violations by the contractor or subcontractor, or covered airport or related location employer, the seriousness of the violation, the good faith of the contractor or subcontractor, or covered airport or related location employer, and the size of the contractor's or subcontractor's, or covered airport or related location employer's, business.  No administrative penalty shall be levied pursuant to this section unless the commissioner provides the alleged violator with notification of the violation and of the amount of the penalty by certified mail and an opportunity to request a hearing before the commissioner or the commissioner's designee within 15 days following the receipt of the notice.  If a hearing is requested, the commissioner shall issue a final order upon such hearing and a finding that a violation has occurred.  If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order upon expiration of the 15-day period. Payment of the penalty shall be due when a final order is issued or when the notice becomes a final order.  Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding commenced by the commissioner pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).  Any sum collected as a fine or penalty pursuant to this section shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	L.2005, c.379, s.9; amended 2021, c.68, s.8.

34:11-56.67  Collective bargaining rights unaffected.
	10. Nothing in this act shall be deemed to interfere with, impede, or in any way diminish the right of workers to bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing in order to establish wages in excess of any applicable minimum under this act.

	L.2005,c.379,s.10.

34:11-56.68  Severability.
	11. If any provision of this act, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of the act and the application thereof, to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

	L.2005,c.379,s.11.

34:11-56.69  Rules, regulations.
	12. The commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate, rescind and enforce rules and regulations as may be required for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this act.

	L.2005,c.379,s.12.

34:11-56.70  Special license authorizing employment at less than prevailing wage for building services rates.
	13.  For any occupation for which prevailing wage for building services rates are established by or pursuant to this act, the commissioner or the Director of Wage and Hour Compliance in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development may cause to be issued to any employee, including a learner, apprentice, or student, whose earning capacity is impaired by age or physical or developmental disability or injury, a special license authorizing employment at wages less than the prevailing wage for building services for a period of time as shall be fixed by the commissioner or the Director of Wage and Hour Compliance and stated in the license.

	Nothing in this section is intended to undermine the purposes of this act.

	L.2005,c.379,s.13.

34:11-56.70a  Covered airport, related location workers paid prevailing rate.
 	9.	Not earlier than September 1, 2021, every covered airport or related location employer shall pay a covered airport or related location worker a wage of not less than the prevailing wage rate applicable to that covered airport or related location worker. Nothing in this article shall alter or limit any employer's obligation to pay any otherwise applicable prevailing wage under the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.) or the prevailing wage levels for the employees of contractors and subcontractors furnishing building services established under P.L.2005, c.379 (C.34:11-56.58 et seq.).
 
	L.2021, c.68, s.9.

34:11-56.70b  Designation of supplemental benefits rate, paid leave requirements.
 	10.	On August 1, 2021 and each August 1 thereafter, the commissioner shall designate the supplemental benefits rate and paid leave requirements required under the determinations made by the General Services Administration pursuant to the federal McNamara-O'Hara Service Contract Act of 1965 (41 U.S.C. s.6701 et seq.). The commissioner shall publicly post the designated supplemental benefits rates and paid leave requirements.
 
	L.2021, c.68, s.10.

34:11-56.70c  Rules, regulations.
  	11.	The commissioner, in consultation with the Department of Transportation and the Attorney General, shall promulgate rules and regulations, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), within six months of the date of enactment of this act, to implement the provisions of this act.
 
	L.2021, c.68, s.11.

34:11-56.72  Findings, declarations relative to a skilled and trained workforce in certain construction work.
 	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	The use of unskilled and untrained workers at chemical manufacturing and processing facilities that generate, store, treat, handle, refine, process, and transport hazardous materials is a risk to public health and safety, and the risk to public health and safety is particularly high when workers are employed by outside contractors because they generally are less familiar with the operations of the facility and its emergency plans and the owner or operator of the facility has less incentive to invest in their training.
 
	b.	Requiring that workers employed by outside contractors at these facilities be paid at least at a rate equivalent to the prevailing journeyperson wage for their occupations, or be registered in approved apprenticeship programs, is necessary to provide an economic incentive for employers to use only the most skilled workers to perform work that poses a risk to public health and safety. The wage scale is also necessary to provide an economic incentive for the workers to obtain the mandatory advanced safety training required by section 3 of P.L.2020, c.65 (C.34:11-56.74).
 
	c.	Requiring that apprentices be registered in approved advanced safety training is necessary to ensure that these workers are receiving the proper training and on-the-job supervision and that the programs are subject to proper oversight.
 
	d.	The requirement that at least 60 percent of the journeypersons working for a contractor be graduates of an approved apprenticeship program is necessary to ensure that the majority of the journeypersons will have had appropriate classroom and laboratory instruction for their occupations.  A phase-in for this requirement will avoid disruption of the industry.
 
	L.2020, c.65, s.1.

34:11-56.73  Definitions relative to a skilled and trained workforce in certain construction work.
  	2.	As used in this act:

	"Apprenticeship program" means a registered apprenticeship program providing to each trainee combined classroom and on-the-job training under the direct and close supervision of a highly skilled worker in an occupation recognized as an apprenticeable trade, registered by the Office of Apprenticeship of the U.S. Department of Labor.
 
	"Approved advanced safety training for workers at high hazard facilities" means a curriculum approved by the State Office of Apprenticeship pursuant to section 4 of this act.
 
	"Labor organization" means an organization which represents, for purposes of collective bargaining, employees of contractors or subcontractors engaged in contracting subject to the provisions of subsection a. of section 3 of P.L.2020, c.65 (C.34:11-56.74), and has the present ability to refer, provide or represent a sufficient number of qualified employees to perform the contracted work in a manner consistent with the provisions of P.L.2020, c.65 (C.34:11-56.72 et seq.) and a plan mutually agreed upon by the labor organization and the owner or operator.
 
	"OEM" means original equipment manufacturer and refers to organizations who manufacture or fabricate equipment for sale directly to purchasers or other resellers.
 
	"Prevailing hourly wage rate" means the prevailing hourly wage rate set for the applicable occupation and geographic area pursuant to the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.).
 
	"Registered apprentice" means an apprentice registered in an apprenticeship program who is performing work covered by the standards of that apprenticeship program and receiving the supervision required by the standards of that apprenticeship program.
 
	"Skilled journeyperson" means a worker who:
 
	a.	Has either graduated from an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation, or has at least as many hours of on-the-job experience in the applicable occupation as would be required to graduate from an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation; and
 
	b.	Has completed within the prior two calendar years at least 20 hours of approved advanced safety training for workers at high hazard facilities, including approved advanced safety training that occurred in an approved apprenticeship program.  This requirement shall apply only to work performed on or after January 1, 2025.
 
	"Skilled and trained workforce" means a workforce that meets all of the following criteria:
 
	a. (1) All the workers shall, as of January 1, 2021, be paid at least 80 percent of the applicable prevailing hourly wage rate, and shall be either registered apprentices or skilled journeypersons; 
 
	(2)	All the workers shall, as of January 1, 2022, be paid at least 85 percent of the applicable prevailing hourly wage rate, and shall be either registered apprentices or skilled journeypersons;
 
	(3)	All the workers shall, as of January 1, 2023, be paid at least 90 percent of the applicable prevailing hourly wage rate, and shall be either registered apprentices or skilled journeypersons; and
 
	(4)	All the workers shall, as of January 1, 2024, be paid the applicable prevailing hourly wage rate, and shall be either registered apprentices or skilled journeypersons. 
 
	b.	All the workers have, as of January 1, 2025, completed within the prior two calendar years at least 20 hours of approved advanced safety training for workers at high hazard facilities.
 
	c. (1) As of January 1, 2021, at least 30 percent of the skilled journeypersons shall be graduates of an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation.
 
	(2)	As of January 1, 2022, at least 40 percent of the skilled journeypersons shall be graduates of an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation.
 
	(3)	As of January 1, 2023, at least 50 percent of the skilled journeypersons shall be graduates of an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation.
 
	(4)	As of January 1, 2024, at least 60 percent of the skilled journeypersons shall be graduates of an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation.
 
	(5)	As of January 1, 2025, all of the workers shall have completed within the prior two calendar years at least 20 hours of approved advanced safety training for workers at high hazard facilities, 
 
	except that the requirements of this subsection c. shall not apply to the extent that the contractor requests qualified workers from a labor organization that refers or provides qualified workers, but the organization is unable to refer or provide sufficient qualified workers within 48 hours of the request, Saturdays, Sundays, and Holidays excepted, and shall not apply to the extent that compliance is impracticable because an emergency requires immediate action to prevent harm to public health or safety or to the environment, but the criteria shall again apply as soon as the emergency is over or it becomes practicable for contractors to obtain a qualified workforce.
 
	"State Office of Apprenticeship" means the Office of Apprenticeship in the State Department of Labor and Workforce Development.  "The State Office of Apprenticeship" does not mean the Office of Apprenticeship in the United States Department of Labor.
 
	L.2020, c.65, s.2.

34:11-56.74  Use of skilled and trained workforce by owner, operator; exemptions.
 	3. a. An owner or operator of a stationary source that is engaged in activities described in Code 324110, 325110, 325180, or 325199 of the North American Industry Classification System, as that code read on January 1, 2017, and has one or more covered processes for which the owner or operator is required to prepare and submit a Risk Management Plan, shall, when contracting with outside contractors for the performance of construction, alteration, demolition, installation, repair, or maintenance work at the stationary source, require that the contractors performing the work, and any subcontractors of the contractors, use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all onsite work which is in an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades.  The requirement to use a skilled and trained workforce shall apply to the onsite workforce of each contractor and subcontractor.
 
	b.	This section shall not apply to:
 
	(1)	Oil and gas extraction operations, and shall not apply to any contract awarded before January 1, 2021, unless the contract is extended or renewed after that date, and shall not apply to the employees of the owner or operator of the stationary source, or prevent the owner or operator of the stationary source from using its own employees to perform any work that has not been assigned to contractors while the employees of the contractor are present and working; 
 
	(2)	Any owner or operator, or contractor or subcontractor of the owner or operator, who has entered into a project labor agreement or collectively bargained maintenance agreement with labor organizations with registered apprenticeship programs, if all contracted work at the facility or site subject to the provisions of this section is also subject to the provisions of the project labor agreement or collectively bargained maintenance agreement; or
 
	(3)	Contractors or subcontractors hired to perform OEM work for purposes of compliance with equipment warranty requirements.
 
	L.2020, c.65, s.3.

34:11-56.75  Curriculum for approved advanced safety training.
 	4.	The State Office of Apprenticeship, in consultation with the Department of Environmental Protection and the Commission on Higher Education, shall approve a curriculum of in-person classroom and laboratory instruction for approved advanced safety training for workers at high hazard facilities.  That safety training shall be included in any apprenticeship program for apprentices who will work for contractors or subcontractors at a stationary source subject to the provisions of this act, and shall be made available for employees of the contractors or subcontractors who had become skilled journeypersons before the training was included in their apprenticeship program.  The State Office of Apprenticeship shall be empowered to consider existing industry and trade safety programs for compatibility and fulfillment of requirements under this section.
 
	L.2020, c.65, s.4.

34:11-56.76  Rights, powers, duties.
  	5.	For the purpose of implementing the provisions of sections 1 through 4 of P.L.2020, c.65 (C.34:11-56.72 through C.34:11-56.75), the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall, and a worker employed in the performance of work subject to this act, the employer of the worker, or any designated representative of the worker or employer may, exercise all rights, powers or duties granted or imposed upon them by P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.).
 
	L.2020, c.65, s.5.

34:11-56.77  Definitions relative to waterfront prevailing wage standards.
	1.	For the purposes of this act:
	"Applicable waterfront prevailing wage rates" means the wage rates paid by virtue of the multiemployer collective bargaining agreements with waterfront employers in the Port of New York District, provided that if a collective bargaining agreement applying to a smaller locality or single waterfront facility stipulates wage rates different from the levels stipulated by the multiemployer collective bargaining agreements with waterfront employers in the Port of New York district, those different rates shall be the applicable waterfront prevailing wage rates for that locality or facility.  Contributions by a waterfront employer for benefits made pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement shall be considered an integral part of the wage paid by the waterfront employer for the purpose of determining the applicable waterfront prevailing wage rates for purpose of this act.
 
	"Carrier of freight by water" shall mean any person engaged, or who may hold himself out as willing to be engaged, whether as a common carrier, as a contract carrier, or otherwise, in the carriage of freight by water, except for carriage of liquid cargoes in bulk in tank vessels designed for use exclusively in such service, and except for carriage by barge of bulk cargoes consisting of only a single commodity loaded or carried without wrappers or containers and delivered by the carrier without transportation mark or count.
 
	"Classification" of longshoremen means categories of longshoremen, including: the kind of cargo they handle, such as break-bulk terminal cargo, break-bulk vessel cargo, or containers; job categories, such as laborers, equipment operators, checkers, crane operators, or mechanics; and duration of employment.
 
	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development or his duly authorized representatives.
 
	"Container" means any receptacle, box, carton or crate which is specifically designed and constructed so that it may be repeatedly used for the carriage of freight by a carrier of freight by water.
 
	"Department" means the Department of Labor and Workforce Development of the State of New Jersey.
 
	"Division" means the Division of Wage and Hour Compliance in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	"Financial assistance" means any loan, loan guarantee, grant, incentive, tax exemption or other financial assistance that is approved, funded, authorized, or administered by a public body, or otherwise provided by the public body.
 
	"Hiring agent" means an individual, who on behalf of any other person selects longshoremen for employment.
 
	"Locality" means any political subdivision of the State, combination of the same or parts thereof, or any geographical area or areas classified, designated and fixed by the commissioner from time to time, provided that in determining the "locality," the commissioner shall be guided by the boundary lines of political subdivisions or parts thereof, or by a consideration of the areas with respect to which it has been the practice of waterfront employers of classifications of longshoremen to engage in collective bargaining with the representatives of those classifications of longshoremen.
 
	"Longshoreman" means an individual, other than a hiring agent, who is employed for work at a waterfront facility to:
 
	(a)	move waterborne freight on a vessel berthed at waterfront facilities, or to or from a barge, lighter or railroad car for transfer to or from the vessel;
 
	(b)	engage in direct and immediate checking of the freight or its custodial accounting or in the recording or tabulation of the hours worked at waterfront facilities by longshoremen;
 
	(c)	directly and immediately supervise longshoremen; or
 
	(d)	perform any other labor or services incidental to the movement of waterborne freight on vessels berthed at waterfront facilities, including, but not limited to, cargo repairmen, coopers, general maintenance workers, mechanical and miscellaneous workers, horse and cattle fitters, grain ceilers, port watchmen, and marine carpenters.
 
	"Marine terminal" means an area located in the State which includes piers, and is used primarily for the moving, warehousing, distributing or packing of waterborne freight or freight to or from those piers, and which, inclusive of such piers, is under common ownership or control.
 
	"Person" means an individual or any partnership, joint venture, association, corporation or any other legal entity other than a governmental entity.
 
	"Pier" includes any wharf, pier, dock or quay.
 
	"Port watchman" includes any watchman, gateman, groundsman, detective, guard, guardian or protector of property employed by the operator of any pier or other waterfront terminal or by a carrier of freight by water to perform services in such capacity on any pier or other waterfront terminal.
 
	"Public body" means the State of New Jersey, any of its political subdivisions, and any authority, instrumentality, or agency of the State of New Jersey or of any of its political subdivisions.
 
	"Public waterfront facility" means a waterfront facility located in the State which:
 
	(a)	is owned, operated or administered by a public body;
 
	(b)	receives financial assistance that is approved, funded, authorized, or administered by a public body, or otherwise provided by the public body; or
 
	(c)	is owned, operated or administered by a waterfront employer who receives financial assistance that is approved, funded, authorized, or administered by a public body, or otherwise provided by the public body.
 
	"Stevedore" means an employer of longshoremen who is a contractor or subcontractor, but not an employee, engaged for compensation pursuant to a contract or arrangement with a carrier of waterborne freight or operator of a waterfront facility, to move waterborne freight carried or consigned for carriage by the carrier on, onto, or from vessels of the carrier berthed at waterfront facilities, including:
 
	(a)	a contractor engaged for compensation pursuant to a contract or arrangement with a public entity, the United States, or any other state or territory thereof, to move freight carried or consigned for carriage between any point in a waterfront facility and a point outside of the waterfront facility on vessels berthed at the waterfront facility, or
 
	(b)	a contractor engaged for compensation pursuant to a contract or arrangement with any person to perform labor or services incidental to the movement of waterborne freight on, onto, or from vessels berthed at waterfront facilities, including, but not limited to, cargo storage, cargo repairing, coopering, general maintenance, mechanical and miscellaneous work, horse and cattle fitting, grain ceiling, and marine carpentry, or
 
	(c)	a contractor engaged for compensation pursuant to a contract or arrangement with any other person to perform labor or services involving, or incidental to, the movement of freight into or out of containers, which have been or which will be carried by a carrier of freight by water, on vessels berthed at waterfront facilities.
 
	"Waterborne freight" shall mean freight carried by or consigned for carriage by carriers of freight by water, including ships' stores, baggage and mail carried by or consigned for carriage by carriers of freight by water.
 
	"Waterfront employer" means an operator of a waterfront facility, stevedore, or carrier of freight by water who employs longshoremen at a waterfront facility.
 
	"Waterfront facility" means any marine terminal or pier, or any other waterfront terminal located in the State.
 
	"Waterfront terminal" includes any warehouse, depot or other terminal located in the State, whether enclosed or open, any part of which is used by any person to perform labor or services involving, or incidental to, the movement of waterborne freight or freight.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.1.

34:11-56.78  Longshoreman's rate of wages.
	2.	Any waterfront employer who employs longshoremen at a waterfront facility shall pay each longshoreman a rate of wages not less than the applicable waterfront prevailing wage rate.  Every waterfront employer employing longshoremen at waterfront facilities shall keep an accurate record showing the name, classification, and hourly rate of wages actually paid to each longshoreman employed by the employer in connection with waterfront facilities.  The records shall be preserved for two years from the date of payment, and shall be open at all reasonable hours to the inspection of the commissioner, of any public body which owns, administers or provides financial assistance to the waterfront facility where the longshoremen are employed, and of any labor organization representing longshoremen working at that waterfront facility or other waterfront facilities in the State.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.2.

34:11-56.79  Determination, establishment, publicizing of waterfront prevailing wage rates.
	3.	The commissioner shall determine, establish and make public the waterfront prevailing wage rates for each waterfront facility and for each classification of longshoremen working at the facility.  All determinations of the waterfront prevailing wage rates made pursuant to this section shall be announced by the commissioner and prominently displayed on a webpage maintained by the department.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.3.

34:11-56.80  Authority of commissioner.
	4.	The commissioner shall have the authority to: 
 
	a.	investigate and ascertain the wages of longshoremen employed in any waterfront facility in the State; 
 
	b.	enter and inspect the place of business or employment of any waterfront employer employing longshoremen at any waterfront facility in the State, and question those employees and investigate any facts, conditions or matters which the commissioner deems appropriate to determine whether any person has violated any provision of this act or rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this act or which may aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this act; 
 
	c.	administer oaths and examine witnesses under oath, issue subpoenas, compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of papers, books, accounts, records, payrolls, documents, and testimony, and take depositions and affidavits in any proceeding before the commissioner;
 
	d.	Copy any books, registers, payrolls, and other records as the commissioner deems necessary or appropriate; obtain proof of, and question, any longshoreman's identity to determine whether the longshoreman's identity is accurately and truthfully included or reported in any books, registers, payrolls, and other records of the waterfront employer and question the longshoremen for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of this act have been and are being complied with;
 
	e.	obtain from the waterfront employers full and correct statements in writing, including sworn statements, regarding wages, hours, names, addresses, and such other information pertaining to the waterfront employer's longshoremen and their employment as the commissioner deems necessary or appropriate; and 
 
	f.	require any waterfront employer to file, within 10 days of receipt of a request, any records enumerated in this section, sworn to as to their validity and accuracy.  In the case of a public waterfront facility in which a public body has an agreement to make payments to a waterfront employer, if the waterfront employer fails to provide the requested records within 10 days, the commissioner may direct within 15 days the fiscal or financial officer charged with the custody and disbursements of the funds of the public body immediately to withhold from payment to the waterfront employer up to 25 percent of the amount, not to exceed $100,000, to be paid to the waterfront employer under the terms of the agreement.  The amount withheld shall be immediately released upon receipt by the public body of a notice from the commissioner indicating that the request for records has been satisfied.
 
	If a person fails to comply with any subpoena lawfully issued, or on the refusal of any witness to testify to any matter regarding which he may be lawfully interrogated, it shall be the duty of the Superior Court, on application by the commissioner, to compel obedience by proceedings for contempt, as in the case of disobedience of the requirements of a subpoena issued from the court or a refusal to testify in the court.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.4.

34:11-56.81  Posting of waterfront prevailing wage rates.
	5.	Waterfront employers employing longshoremen at waterfront facilities shall post the waterfront prevailing wage rates for each classification involved as determined by the commissioner, including the effective date of any changes thereof, in prominent and easily accessible places at the site of the work or at such place or places as are used by them to pay longshoremen their wages.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.5.

34:11-56.82  Filing complaint with commissioner.
	6.	Any longshoreman or representative of longshoremen may file with the commissioner a written complaint that the amount of wages paid for work performed by the longshoreman at a waterfront facility is less than the applicable waterfront prevailing wage rate for that work, or a written complaint the longshoreman has suffered a discharge or other discrimination in violation of section 11 of this act, but the complaint may not be filed later than two years after the alleged underpayment or discrimination occurs.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.6.

34:11-56.83  Violations relative to performance of duties by the commissioner.
	7. a. Any waterfront employer who willfully hinders or delays the commissioner in the performance of his duties in the enforcement of this act, or who fails to make, keep, and preserve any records as required under the provisions of this act, or falsifies any such record, or refuses to make any such record accessible to the commissioner upon demand, or refuses to furnish a sworn statement of such record or any other information required for the proper enforcement of this act to the commissioner upon demand, or pays or agrees to pay wages at a rate less than the rate applicable under this act, or, during the time that the waterfront employer is included on the debarment list established by the commissioner pursuant to section 9 of this act, employs longshoremen at a waterfront facility, or who discriminates against a longshoreman in violation of section 11 of this act, or otherwise violates any provision of this act or of any regulation or order issued under this act, shall have violated the provisions of this act and be guilty of a disorderly persons offense and shall, upon conviction therefor, be fined not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,500 or be imprisoned for not less than 10 nor more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.  Each week, in which there is a day in which the waterfront employer employs longshoremen while on the debarment list or in which a longshoreman is paid less than the rate applicable under this act and each longshoreman so paid, shall constitute a separate offense.  Such fines shall be in addition to the payment of any wage deficiencies.
 
	b.	As an alternative to, or in addition to, any other sanctions provided by law for violations of any provision of this act, when the commissioner finds that an waterfront employer has violated that act, the commissioner is authorized to assess and collect administrative penalties, up to a maximum of $2,500 for a first violation and up to a maximum of $5,000 for each subsequent violation, specified in a schedule of penalties to be promulgated as a rule or regulation by the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).  When determining the amount of the penalty imposed because of a violation, the commissioner shall consider factors which include the history of previous violations by the waterfront employer, the seriousness of the violation, the good faith of the waterfront employer and the size of the waterfront employer's business.  No administrative penalty shall be levied pursuant to this section unless the commissioner provides the alleged violator with notification of the violation and of the amount of the penalty by certified mail and an opportunity to request a hearing before the commissioner or his designee within 15 days following the receipt of the notice.  If a hearing is requested, the commissioner shall issue a final order upon such hearing and a finding that a violation has occurred.  If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order upon expiration of the 15-day period.  Payment of the penalty is due when a final order is issued or when the notice becomes a final order. Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding commenced by the commissioner pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).  Any sum collected as a fine or penalty pursuant to this section shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the division.
 
	c.	When the commissioner finds that the waterfront employer has violated provisions of this act, the commissioner may refer the matter to the Attorney General or his designee for criminal investigation and prosecution.  Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to limit the authority of the Attorney General to investigate and prosecute violations of the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice, nor to limit the commissioner's ability to refer any matter for criminal investigation or prosecution.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.7.

34:11-56.84  Waterfront employer's payment to commissioner.
	8.	As an alternative to, or in addition to, any other sanctions provided by law for violation of this act, the commissioner is authorized to supervise the payment of amounts due to longshoremen under this act, and the waterfront employer may be required to make these payments to the commissioner to be held in a special account in trust for the longshoremen, and paid on order of the commissioner directly to the longshoreman or longshoremen affected.  The waterfront employer shall also pay the commissioner an administrative fee equal to not less than 10 percent or more than 25 percent of any payment made to the commissioner pursuant to this section.  The amount of the administrative fee shall be specified in a schedule of fees to be promulgated by rule or regulation of the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).  The fee shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.8.

34:11-56.85  Debarment list.
	9.	If the commissioner determines that a waterfront employer has on more than one occasion failed to pay the waterfront prevailing wage, the commissioner shall add the name of the waterfront employer to a debarment list established and maintained by the commissioner of waterfront employers determined to have failed to pay the waterfront prevailing wage.  The debarment list and each updating of the list shall be prominently displayed on a website maintained by the department.  Any waterfront employer placed on the debarment list pursuant to this section shall remain on the list until three years have elapsed from the date of listing.  If the waterfront employer denies that a failure to pay the waterfront prevailing wage has occurred, the employer may request a hearing, which shall be conducted in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c. 410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	It shall be a violation of this act for any waterfront employer to employ longshoremen at a waterfront facility, whether or not the facility is a public waterfront facility, during the time that the waterfront employer is included on the debarment list established by the commissioner pursuant to this section.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.9.

34:11-56.86  Financial assistance, contract restrictions by public body.
	10. No public body shall approve, fund, authorize, or administer, or otherwise provide financial assistance to a waterfront facility, by means of any new or renewed agreement to do so, without first ascertaining that no waterfront employer employing longshoreman at the facility is on the current debarment list of names of waterfront employers who have failed to pay waterfront prevailing wages required by this act.  No contract shall be awarded by a public body to any listed waterfront employer or to any other waterfront employer in which the listed waterfront employer has an interest.
 
	For purposes of this section, "interest" means an interest, affiliation, relationship or connection of a waterfront employer listed pursuant to section 9 of this act in or with another waterfront employer employing, or seeking to employ, longshoremen at a waterfront facility, whether having the interest is as an owner, partner, officer, manager, employee, agent, consultant or representative.  The listed waterfront employer shall be regarded as having an interest in another waterfront employer if the listed waterfront employer enters into a contract or agreement with the other waterfront employer for services performed or to be performed, for services that have been or will be assigned or subletted, or for the sale, rental or lease of vehicles, tools, equipment or supplies during the period from the initiation of the proceedings under section 9 of this act against the waterfront employer until three years have elapsed from the date that the waterfront employer was listed by the commissioner under section 9 of this act.  The term "interest" shall not include shares held in a publicly traded corporation if the shares were not received as compensation after the initiation of proceedings under section 9 of this act.
 
	A rebuttable presumption that a waterfront employer listed by the commissioner under section 9 of this act has an interest in another waterfront employer may arise if the two share any of the following capacities or characteristics: occupy the same premises, have the same telephone number or fax number, have the same email address or internet website, employ substantially the same administrative employees, utilize the same tools and equipment, or employ or engage the services of any listed person or persons involved in the direction or control of the other.
 
	If the rebuttable presumption that a listed waterfront employer has an interest in another waterfront employer results in a determination to include of the other waterfront employer in the debarment list, the other waterfront employer may request a hearing to challenge the determination, to be conducted in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).

	L. 2021, c.336, s.10.

34:11-56.87  Penalty for discharging complaining longshoreman.
	11. Any waterfront employer who discharges or in any other manner discriminates against any longshoreman because the longshoreman has made any complaint to his waterfront employer, to a representative of the longshoreman, a public body, or the commissioner that he has not been paid wages in accordance with the provisions of this act, or because the longshoreman has caused to be instituted or is about to cause to be instituted any proceeding under or related to this act, or because the longshoreman has testified or is about to testify in any such proceeding, or because the longshoreman has requested information from the waterfront employer relevant to such a proceeding, shall be in violation of this act, shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense, and shall, upon conviction therefor, be fined not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,500.  Such fines shall be in addition to the payment of any wage deficiencies.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.11.

34:11-56.88  Recovery of funds by longshoreman.
	12. If any longshoreman is paid by a waterfront employer less than the waterfront prevailing wage to which the longshoreman is entitled under the provisions of this act, or suffers discharge or other discrimination in violation of section 11 of this act, that longshoreman may recover in a civil action the full amount of such waterfront prevailing wage less any amount actually paid to the longshoremen by the waterfront employer together with costs and reasonable attorney's fees as allowed by the court, and in the case of discharge or other discrimination, reinstatement to employment with payment of any wages lost because of the discharge or discrimination.  An agreement between longshoremen and a waterfront employer to pay less than the prevailing wage shall not be a defense to the action.  Any longshoreman shall be entitled to maintain such action for and on behalf of himself or other longshoremen similarly situated, and the longshoreman or longshoremen may designate an agent or representative to maintain such action for and on behalf of all longshoremen similarly situated.  At the request of any longshoreman paid less than the waterfront prevailing wage to which such longshoreman was entitled under the provisions of this act, the commissioner may take an assignment of the wage claim in trust for the assigning longshoreman and may bring any legal action necessary to collect the claim, and the waterfront employer shall be required to pay the costs and such reasonable attorney's fees as may be allowed by the court.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.12.

34:11-56.89  Immunity.
	13. Nothing in this act shall be deemed to interfere with, impede, or in any way diminish the right of longshoremen to bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing in order to establish wage rates that are different than wage rates set by this act.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.13.

34:11-56.90  Registration form for waterfront employer.
	14. Except for waterfront employers located in the Port of New York district, no waterfront employer shall be permitted to operate in New Jersey, unless it is registered with the department as a waterfront employer on a form, which may be an electronic form provided by the commissioner.  The form shall require the following information:
 
	a.	The name, principal business address and telephone number of the waterfront employer; 
 
	b.	Whether the waterfront employer is a corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other form of business entity; 
 
	c.	If the waterfront employer's principal business address is not within the State, the name and address of the waterfront employer's custodian of records and agent for service of process in this State; 
 
	d.	The name and address of each person with a financial interest in the waterfront employer and the percentage interest, except that if the waterfront employer is a publicly-traded corporation, the waterfront employer shall supply the names and addresses of the corporation's officers;
 
	e. 	The waterfront employer's tax identification number and unemployment insurance registration number;
 
	f.	A certification form provided by the commissioner, with documentation satisfactory to the commissioner, that the waterfront employer has all valid and effective licenses, registrations or certificates required by State law, including registrations or certifications required to do business in the State of New Jersey; and
 
	g.	Other relevant and appropriate information as determined by the commissioner.
 
	At the time of registration, and subsequently upon request, the waterfront employer shall submit to the commissioner documentation demonstrating that the waterfront employer has workers' compensation insurance coverage for all workers as required by law.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.14.

34:11-56.91  Registration fee.
	15. The waterfront employer shall pay an initial annual non-refundable registration fee of $300 to the commissioner.  The non-refundable registration fee for the second annual registration shall be $300.  Upon successful completion of two consecutive years of registration, a waterfront employer may elect to register for a two-year period and pay a non-refundable registration fee of $500.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.15.

34:11-56.92  Registration of contractor operating on the effective date of this act.
	16. A contractor who is operating on the effective date of this act shall submit the registration application form and fee to the Commissioner within 30 days of the effective date of this act.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.16.

34:11-56.93  Use of registration fees.
	17.  Registration fees collected pursuant to this act shall be applied toward the enforcement and administration costs of the division.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.17.

34:11-56.94  Certificate of registration issuance.
	18. Upon receipt of the fee, form and documentation required by sections 14 and 15 of this act, the commissioner shall issue a certificate of registration to the waterfront employer.  A registration certificate shall be valid for one calendar year from the date of registration.  Registrations shall be renewed not less than 30 days prior to the expiration date of the immediately preceding registration.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.18.

34:11-56.95  Submission of waterfront employer's certificate to public body.
	19. Each waterfront employer shall, as a condition to receipt of any financial assistance from a public body, submit to the public body the waterfront employer's certificate of registration and the certificates of registration for all known subcontractors who are waterfront employers.  Applications for registration shall not be acceptable as a substitute for a certificate of registration for the purposes of compliance with this section.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.19.

34:11-56.96  Commissioner's authorization of sanctions.
	20. a. The commissioner is authorized, as an alternative to or in addition to any other sanctions or remedies provided by this act, to take the actions indicated in subsection b. of this section if a waterfront employer:
 
	(1)	Willfully hinders or delays the commissioner in the performance of his duties under this act; 
 
	(2)	Fails to make, keep and preserve any records required under the provisions of this act; 
 
	(3)	Falsifies any required record, or refuses to make it accessible to the commissioner upon demand; 
 
	(4)	Refuses to furnish a sworn statement of any records or other information required for the enforcement of this act to the commissioner on demand; 
 
	(5)	Pays or agrees to pay wages at a rate less than the rate prescribed under this act; or
 
	(6)	Otherwise violates any provision of this act. 
 
	b.	The commissioner may, after providing the waterfront employer with notice of the alleged violation and an opportunity to request a hearing before the commissioner or his designee:
 
	(1) Deny renewal, revoke or suspend the registration of a waterfront employer for a period of not more than five years; or
 
	(2) Require a waterfront employer, as a condition of initial or continued registration, to provide a surety bond payable to the State.  The surety bond shall be for the benefit of workers damaged by any failure of a waterfront employer to pay wages or benefits pursuant to or otherwise comply with the provisions of this act.  The surety bond shall be in the amount and form that the Commissioner deems necessary for the protection of the waterfront employer's workers, but shall not exceed $10,000 per worker.  The surety bond shall be issued by surety that meets the requirements of N.J.S.2A:44-143.
 
	c.	The commissioner is authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate, rescind and enforce rules and regulations as may be required for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this act.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.20.

34:11-56.97  Rules, regulations.
	21. The commissioner is authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate, rescind and enforce rules and regulations as may be required for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this act.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.21.

34:11-56.98  Severability.
	22. The provisions of this act shall be deemed to be severable and if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or other part of this act is declared to be unconstitutional or preempted by federal law, or the applicability thereof to any person or facility is held invalid, the remainder of this act shall not thereby be deemed to be unconstitutional, preempted or invalid.

	L. 2021, c.336, s.22.

34:11-56.99  Definitions relative to data center construction.
	1.	As used in this act: 
 
	“Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	“Contractor” means any general contractor or subcontractor performing work on a data center construction project.
 
	“Data center construction project” means the construction, reconstruction, demolition, alteration, custom fabrication, or repair work, done on any property or premises in which the operations consist primarily of using computer servers and related equipment and support staff for the processing, storage, and distribution of electronic data that is designed to have an electrical usage of five megawatts or greater annually after construction.
 
L.2025, c.335, s.1.

34:11-56.100  Prevailing wage rates. 
	2.	Not less than the prevailing wage rate for a worker's craft or trade, as determined by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.), shall be paid to a worker employed in the performance of any construction undertaken in connection with a data center construction project that is designed to have an annual usage of  five megawatts or greater after construction.
 
L.2025, c.335, s.2.

34:11-56.101  Contractor requirements.
	3.	a.  A contractor shall not perform work on a data center construction project unless the contractor:
 
	(1)	is registered and in compliance with "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.);
 
	(2)	has not been debarred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development from engaging in public works contracts in the State;
 
	(3)	submits certified payroll records pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1963, c.150 C.34:11-56.29; 
 
	(4)	has a workers’ compensation experience modifier rate of 0.95 or lower;
 
	(5)	submits the Log of Work-Related Injuries and Illnesses (OSHA Form 300) for the previous three years;
 
	(6)	discloses all federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration citations received in the previous 10 years; and
 
	(7)	provides evidence of a safety plan that is compliant with the requirements established by the federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration with relevant data which may include, but is not limited to, a safety manual and records of employee participation.
 
	For the purposes of paragraphs (5) through (7) of this subsection, the information required to be maintained and made available shall also be made available upon request to the New Jersey Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	b.	(1)  A contractor shall provide proof of workers’ compensation insurance; general liability insurance of not less than $2 million per occurrence; and owned and leased motor vehicle insurance of not less than $2 million per occurrence.
 
	(2)  A contractor shall not provide insurance coverage on behalf of a subcontractor. 
 
	(3)	A contractor shall provide a performance and payment bond in accordance with N.J.S.2A:44-143 through N.J.S.2A:44-147 in an amount not less than 150 percent of the value of the contract.
 
	For the purposes of paragraphs (1) through (3) of this subsection, the information required to be maintained and made available shall also be made available upon request to the New Jersey Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	c. (1) A contractor shall be jointly and severally liable for any wages, benefits, or other amounts owed to any worker not appropriately paid by a subcontractor on the data center construction project. 
 
	 (2) Temporary labor services shall not be utilized unless the workers provided are verifiably enrolled in an apprenticeship program registered by the Office of Apprenticeship of the United States Department of Labor and meeting the standards established by that office, or registered by a State apprenticeship agency recognized by that office.
 
	d.	A contractor shall maintain daily sign-in sheets, which shall be submitted to the awarding authority on a weekly basis and shall include the following printed information: 
 
	(1)	the worker’s name;
 
	(2)	the name of the worker’s contractor; and
 
	(3)	the worker’s arrival time and time of departure.
 
	e.	(1)  All workers employed on a data center construction project shall complete general construction training meeting or exceeding OSHA-10 standards.  
 
	(2)	A contractor shall ensure that at least one onsite supervisor or foreperson has completed construction training meeting or exceeding OSHA-30 standards.  
 
	(3)	For every 15 workers employed by a contractor on the worksite, one worker shall have completed construction training meeting or exceeding OSHA-30 standards.
 
	(4)	Any worker operating heavy construction equipment or power actuated tools shall provide proof of equipment-specific training.
 
	f.	All workers employed on a data center construction project shall undergo drug testing.
 
	g.	The commissioner shall adopt rules and regulations pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) to carry out the purposes of this act.
 
L.2025, c.335, s.3.

34:11-56.102  Project labor agreement; State and local community interests. 
	4.	A data center construction project designed to have an annual electrical usage of 25 megawatts or greater after construction may include a project labor agreement with the labor organizations with collective bargaining agreements that are or were the basis for a determination of the prevailing wage, where it shall be determined prior to the commencement of the construction that the project advances the State and local community interests on energy, efficiency, quality, safety, timeliness, and a skilled labor force.
 
L.2025, c.335, s.4.

34:11-57  Definitions.
	34:11-57.	As used in this article:

	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development or any person or persons in the department designated in writing by him for the purposes of this article.
 
	"Community-based organization" means a public, or nonprofit private, organization funded with public or private funds, or both, that provides services to day laborers, migrant laborers, temporary laborers, low wage workers, or any other type of employee.
 
	"Department" means the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	"Employee" means any natural person who works for another for hire.
 
	"Employer" means any person, partnership, firm or corporation employing another for hire.
 
	"Legal services organization" means a public, or nonprofit private, organization funded with public or private funds, or both, that provides counseling or advice related to wage protection laws, preparation of legal documents, or representation of any person before a court or administrative agency.
 
	"State employer tax laws" means the workers' compensation law, R.S.34:15-1 et seq., the "unemployment compensation law," R.S.43:21-1 et seq., the "Temporary Disability Benefits Law," P.L.1948, c.110 (C.43:21-25 et al.), P.L.2008, c.17 (C.43:21-39.1 et al.), and the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq.
 
	"State wage and hour laws" means article 1 of chapter 11 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes and all acts supplementing that article (R.S.34:11-2 et al.), P.L.1966, c.113 and all acts supplementing that act (C.34:11-56a et al.), P.L.2005, c.379 (C.34:11-56.58 et seq.), and article 3 of chapter 11 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes (R.S.34:11-57 et seq.), but "State wage and hour laws" do not include the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.), or "The Public Works Contractor Registration Act," P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.48 et seq.).
 
	"Wages" means any moneys due an employee from the employer whether payable by the hour, day, week, semimonthly, monthly or yearly and shall include commissions, bonus, piecework compensation and any other benefits arising out of an employment contract.
 
	amended 1964, c.92, s.1; 2019, c.212, s.6; 2019, c.374, s.1.

34:11-58  Claims; investigation; judgment.
 	34:11-58. a. An employee may file a claim for wages against an employer under this section or any of the other State wage and hours laws for wages owed related to work performed, including but not limited to wages owed related to unpaid minimum wages, unpaid overtime compensation, wages lost because of unlawful discharge or other discriminatory acts taken in retaliation against the employee, up to six years prior to the date the claim for wages is filed.

	b.	An employer found to owe an employee wages shall pay the employee the wages owed plus liquidated damages equal to not more than 200% of the wages owed, exclusive of any costs or fees.

	c.	The commissioner is authorized and empowered to investigate any claim for wages due an employee and in such investigation may summon the defendant, subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and shall upon such proceeding make a decision or award when the sum in controversy, exclusive of costs, does not exceed $50,000.

	Such decision or award shall be a judgment when a certified copy thereof is filed with the Superior Court.

	Such judgment shall be entered in the same manner and have the same effect and be subject to the same proceedings as are judgments rendered in suits duly heard and determined by courts of competent jurisdiction.

	d.	Upon an investigation of a wage claim initiated pursuant to this section or any of the other State wage and hours laws, if an employer fails to provide sufficient employee records, as required to be kept under any State wage and hour laws, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the employee worked for the employer for the period of time and for the amount of wages as alleged in the wage claim.  The rebuttable presumption shall not apply to an employer that can demonstrate it does not have sufficient employee records as a result of record destruction due to a natural disaster.

	e.	The commissioner is authorized to supervise the payment of amounts, including liquidated damages, due to employees under an award made pursuant to this section, and the employer may be required to make these payments to the commissioner to be held in a special account in trust for the employees, and paid on order of the commissioner directly to the employee or employees affected.  The employer shall also pay the commissioner an administrative fee equal to not less than 10% or more than 25% of any payment made to the commissioner pursuant to this section.  The amount of the administrative fee shall be specified in a schedule of fees to be promulgated by rule or regulation of the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).  The fee shall be applied to enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.

	f.	Upon issuing a decision, under this section or any of the other State wage and hours laws, finding wages due to an employee in an amount equal to or greater than $5,000, the commissioner shall:

	(1)	inform the employer that the commissioner may conduct an audit of the employer or any successor firm of the employer pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2009, c.194 (C.34:1A-1.12); and

	(2)	notify the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury of the decision and may recommend that the division conduct an audit of the employer to ensure the proper withholding and payment of payroll and other taxes by the employer.

	g.	No payment of an amount of wages owed or related damages, including wages or damages related to retaliation, shall be required under the provisions of this section, or under the provisions of any of the other State wage and hour laws, which results in a violator paying wages owed or damages more than one time for the same violation.

	amended 1953, c.33, s.40; 1964, c.92, s.2; 1985, c.135, s.1; 1991, c.205, s.4; 2006, c.25; 2019, c.212, s.7.

34:11-58.1  Failure of employer to comply.
	8. a. If an employer fails to comply with a final determination of the commissioner or a judgment of a court, including a small claims court, made under the provisions of State wage and hour laws or of section 10 of P.L.1999, c.90 (C.2C:40-2), to pay an employee any wages owed or damages awarded within ten days of the time that the determination or judgement requires the payment, the commissioner may do either or both of the following:
 
	(1)	issue, in the manner provided in subsection b. of section 2 of P.L.2009, c.194 (C.34:1A-1.12), a written determination directing any appropriate agency to suspend one or more licenses held by the employer or any successor firm of the employer until the employer complies with the determination or judgement; or
 
	(2)	issue a stop-work order against the violators requiring the cessation of all business operations at one or more worksites or across all of the employer's worksites and places of business.  The stop-work order shall be effective when served upon the violator or at a place of business or employment by posting a copy of the stop-work order in a conspicuous location at the place of business or employment.  The stop-work order shall remain in effect until the commissioner issues an order releasing the stop-work order upon a finding that the violation has been corrected.  As a condition of release of a stop-work order under this section, the commissioner may require the employer against whom the stop-work order had been issued to file with the department periodic reports for a probationary period of two years.  The commissioner may assess a civil penalty of $5,000 per day against an employer for each day that it conducts business operations that are in violation of the stop-work order.  That penalty shall be collected by the commissioner in a summary proceeding in accordance with the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	b.	Stop-work orders and any penalties imposed under a stop-work order against a corporation, partnership, limited liability corporation, or sole proprietorship shall be effective against any successor entity that has one or more of the same principals or officers as the corporation, partnership, or sole proprietorship against which the stop-work order was issued and that is engaged in the same or equivalent trade or activity.
 
	c.	Any employee affected by a stop-work order issued pursuant to this section shall be paid by the employer for the first ten days of work lost because of the stop-work order.
 
	d.	A rebuttable presumption that an employer has established a successor entity shall arise if the two share at least two of the following capacities or characteristics:
 
	(1)	perform similar work within the same geographical area;
 
	(2)	occupy the same premises;
 
	(3)	have the same telephone or fax number;
 
	(4)	have the same email address or Internet website;
 
	(5)	employ substantially the same work force, administrative employees, or both;
 
	(6)	utilize the same tools, facilities, or equipment;
 
	(7)	employ or engage the services of any person or persons involved in the direction or control of the other; or
 
	(8)	list substantially the same work experience.
 
	L.2019, c.212, s.8; amended 2021, c.165, s.6.

34:11-58.2  Joint and several liability for client employer and labor contractor; definitions.
  	 9. a. A client employer and a labor contractor providing workers to the client employer shall be subject to joint and several liability and shall share civil legal responsibility for any violations of the provisions of State wage and hour laws or State employer tax laws, or violations of the provisions of section 10 of P.L.1999, c.90 (C.2C:40A-2) regarding compliance with State wage and hour laws or State employer tax laws, including provisions of those laws regarding retaliatory actions against employees for exercising their rights under any of those laws and provisions of those laws regarding the misclassification of workers, and both the client employer and the labor contractor may be subject to any remedy provided for violations of those laws.  A client employer shall not shift to the labor contractor any legal duties or liabilities under the provisions of the "Worker Health and Safety Act," P.L.1965, c.154 (C.34:6A-1 et seq.) or "The Worker and Community Right to Know Act," P.L.1983, c.315 (C.34:5A-1 et seq.) with respect to workers supplied by the labor contractor.  A waiver of the provisions of this section is contrary to public policy, and is void and unenforceable.
 
	 b.	This section shall not be interpreted as:
 
	(1)	imposing individual liability on a homeowner for labor or services received at the home or the owner of a home-based business for labor or services received at the home; or
 
	(2)	restricting or limiting the rights of a client employer to recover from a labor contractor any expense to the client employer, or the rights of a labor contractor to recover from a client employer any expense to the labor contractor, resulting from any violation by the labor contractor or client employer of the provisions of State wage and hour laws or State employer tax laws, or of section 10 of P.L.1999, c.90 (C.2C:40A-2), or restricting or limiting the provisions in contracts between client employers and labor contractors regarding the recovery of expenses pursuant to this paragraph.
 
	c.	Any person acting on behalf of an employer, including a client employer or labor contractor, who violates any provision of State wage and hour laws or State employer tax laws, or any provision of section 10 of P.L.1999, c.90 (C.2C:40A-2) regarding compliance with State wage and hour laws or State employer tax laws, including any provision of those laws concerning the misclassification of workers, may be held liable as the employer for the violation.  For the purposes of this section, "person acting on behalf of an employer" includes an individual acting on behalf of an employer who is an owner, director, officer, or manager of the employer.
 
	d.	As used in this section:
 
	"Client employer" means a business entity, regardless of its form, that obtains or is provided workers, directly from a labor contractor or indirectly from a subcontractor, to perform labor or services within its usual course of business, but does not include a "contractor" as defined in section 3 of P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.50).
 
	"Labor contractor" means any individual or entity that supplies, either with or without a contract, directly or indirectly, a client employer with workers to perform labor or services within the client employer's usual course of business, except that "labor contractor" does not include a bona fide labor organization or apprenticeship program, or a hiring hall operated pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement.
 
	"Usual course of business" means the regular and customary work of a business, performed within or upon the premises or worksite of the client employer, or any other place of business of the client employer for which services or labor are performed.
 
	L.2019, c.212, s.9; amended 2019, c.374, s.2.

34:11-58.3  Provision of written copy of statement to employees.
 	10.	Each employer shall provide each current employee and each newly hired employee of the employer, a written copy of the statement produced by the department pursuant to section 11 of P.L.2019, c.212 (C.34:11-58.4) of the employee's rights under the provisions of State wage and hour laws and the provisions of section 10 of P.L.1999, c.90 (C.2C:40A-2), with an explanation of how to file a claim or take an action pursuant to those laws.


	L.2019, c.212, s.10.

34:11-58.4  Actions of department supporting enforcement; statement of employee rights.
 	11.	The department, for the purpose of supporting the enforcement of the provisions of State wage and hour laws and the provisions of section 10 of P.L.1999, c.90 (C.2C:40A-2), 
may contract with community-based organizations and legal services organizations to 
disseminate information to day laborers, migrant laborers, temporary laborers, or any other type of employee concerning the protections afforded by State wage and hour laws and section 10 of P.L.1999, c.90 (C.2C:40A-2), and the process by which an individual may take actions under those laws
 and shall produce, and make available to the public on the website of the department in printable form, a statement of employee rights under the provisions of State wage and hour laws and the provisions of section 10 of P.L.1999, c.90 (C.2C:40A-2), with an explanation of how to file a claim or take an action pursuant to those laws.

	The contracts entered into between the department and community-based organizations and legal services organizations pursuant to this section shall require that the organizations make all services accessible to persons with limited English proficiency.  Any payment made to an organization under a contract shall be regarded as an enforcement and administrative cost of the Division of Workplace Standards of the department.

	The department, and any community-based organization or legal services organization contracting with the department pursuant to this section, shall provide any individual seeking assistance to file a complaint or take an action regarding unpaid wages with a description of all of the applicable remedies available to the individual under State wage and hour laws and section 10 of P.L.1999, c.90 (C.2C:40A-2), including the individual's right to obtain liquidated damages, and that that right to damages is waived if the individual agrees to accept payment of the unpaid wages supervised by the commissioner.

	L.2019, c.212, s.11.

34:11-58.5  Annual report; posting of information.
 	12. a. The commissioner, in consultation with the Administrative Director of the Courts and the Attorney General, shall compile and prominently place on a website, maintained by the department and available to the public, an annual report evaluating the effectiveness and efficiency of the enforcement and administration of wage claims and wage collections.  The report shall include, but not be limited to:

	(1)	the number of complaints, investigations, prosecutions, dispositions, and business license suspensions and revocations, the number and amount of penalties, the amount of wages recovered, and the number of workers affected; 

	(2)	an enumeration and description of all community-based and legal services organizations contracted by the department to support the enforcement; and

	(3)	recommendations for strengthening the implementation and enforcement of P.L.2019, c.212 (C.34:11-58.1 et al.).

	b.	The commissioner, in consultation with the Administrative Director of the Courts and the Attorney General, shall compile and prominently place on a website, maintained by the department and available to the public, the following information regarding each wage claim in which an employer was found to have been in violation of one or more State wage and hour laws in a final determination by the commissioner or a judgement of a court made during the preceding period of not less than 12 months:

	(1)	the name and address of the employer;

	(2)	the nature of the claim, including whether it is a claim for one or more of the following: unpaid wages; failure to pay the minimum wage; failure to pay required overtime; or retaliation against an employee in connection with State wage and hour laws;

	(3)	the number of affected employees, and the amount of wages found owed; and

	(4)	any findings, penalties, and business license suspensions or revocations that resulted from the wage claim.

	The information on a claim shall be placed on the website not more than 30 days after the final determination or judgement is made.

	L.2019, c.212, s.12.

34:11-58.6  Crime of pattern of wage nonpayment.
	13. a. A person commits the crime of pattern of wage nonpayment if the person knowingly commits an act that violates the provisions of N.J.S.2C:40A-2, N.J.S.2C:20-2 if the property stolen consists of compensation the employer failed to provide to an employee as required under the provisions of any State wage and hour law as defined in R.S.34:11-57, subsection a. of section 10 of P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.10), or subsection a. of section 25 of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a24), if the person has, on two or more prior occasions, been convicted of a violation of the provisions of any of those laws.  It shall not be a defense that the violations were not part of a common plan or scheme, or did not have similar methods of commission.

	b.	Pattern of wage non-payment is a crime of the third degree, except that the presumption of nonimprisonment set forth in subsection e. of N.J.S.2C:44-1 for persons who have not previously been convicted of an offense shall not apply.  Notwithstanding the provisions of N.J.S.2C:1-8 or any other law, a conviction of pattern of wage non-payment shall not merge with a conviction of violation of N.J.S.2C:40A-2, N.J.S.2C:20-2, subsection a. of section 10 of P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.10), subsection a. of section 25 of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a24), or any other criminal offense, nor shall such other conviction merge with a conviction under this section.

	c.	An employer found to be in violation of this section shall be deemed to have caused loss to the employees in the amount by which the employees were paid less than the full wages agreed upon or required by law and shall be subject to the provisions of N.J.S.2C:43-3 regarding fines and restitution to victims and be subject to other pertinent provisions of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes, including, but not limited to, N.J.S.2C:43-4, 2C:43-6 and 2C:44-1.

	L.2019, c.212, s.13.

34:11-59.  Claim docketed;  summons;  service
    An employee may file a written claim for wages against an employer in the wage collection division of the department which shall be entered in a book to be called the wage collection docket.

    Upon the filing of claim, the department shall issue a summons returnable between the hours of nine o'clock in the forenoon and three o'clock in the afternoon, both inclusive, which shall also specify a certain time and place for the appearance of the defendant, not less than five nor more than fifteen days from the date of such process, which summons shall be served at least five  days before the time of appearance mentioned therein, by reading the same to  the defendant and delivering to him a copy thereof if he shall be found and if  not found by leaving a copy thereof in his house or with some other person of  his family over the age of fourteen years.  Such persons being served with  summons and complaint shall be informed of the contents thereof and the person  serving the summons shall indorse thereon a return of the time and manner he  executed the same, and sign his name thereon.  At the time and place specified  in the summons, the commissioner shall inquire in a summary way into the merits of the employee's claim and defenses of the defendant, if any.

34:11-60.  Process to run throughout State;  by whom served
	34:11-60.	Process of the wage collection division shall run throughout the State. Service of process shall be made either by a process server of the department.

	amended 2023, c.250, s.37.

34:11-61.  Commissioner may administer oaths, take testimony, etc.; process  in name of commissioner
    The commissioner shall have power to administer oaths, hear testimony and take or cause to be taken depositions of witnesses residing within or without the state.  The summonses, subpoenas, and orders to take testimony and for production of documents, emanating from the wage collection division shall issue in the name of the commissioner and under the seal of the department.

34:11-62.    Set-off; dismissal where balance due defendant exceeds $1,000.00 
    Set-off; dismissal where balance due defendant exceeds $1,000.00.  If the defendant files a set-off against the plaintiff for more than $1,000.00 and at the trial it shall be proved that the balance exceeding $1,000.00 is due the defendant then suit shall be dismissed unless the defendant consents to accept judgment for $1,000.00 and costs in full settlement of this claim, but in no event shall a counterclaim for unliquidated damages be set up against plaintiff for wages in the wage collection section. 

   Amended by L.  1985, c. 135, s. 2, eff. April 12, 1985. 

34:11-63.    Appeals, procedure  
     34:11-63. From any judgment which may be obtained in the wage collection division, except such as shall be given by confession, either party may, upon filing a notice of appeal with the wage collection division within twenty days after judgment shall be given, appeal to the Superior Court. The appellant shall give a bond in every case, except where the judgment appealed from is partially in his favor and no set-off against his demand has been allowed by the division, or where the court otherwise orders. The bond shall be secured by one sufficient surety, either a freeholder in the county or a surety company authorized to do business in New Jersey, and shall be in double the amount of such judgment or of any off-set allowed by the division, conditioned that the appellant shall prosecute his appeal in the Superior Court, stand to and abide the judgment of the court, and pay such costs as shall be taxed against him if the judgment be affirmed. The wage collection division shall then prepare a transcript of the record to be filed in the Superior Court.  

    Amended 1953,c.33,s.41; 1991,c.91,s.354.  

34:11-65.    Evidence on appeal
    Upon the trial of any appeal either party may produce any witness not produced or sworn in the court below, or any documentary evidence not offered or admitted in the court below, if otherwise legal and competent, without notice to the opposite party.

34:11-66.    Jury trial, procedure  
     34:11-66. Nothing in this article shall prevent the claimant from instituting an action for his claim in any court of competent jurisdiction or be construed to deny or limit the right of the plaintiff or defendant to a trial by jury. Where either party demands a trial by jury, he shall pay, at least two days before the return date or the adjourned date of hearing of his cause, the statutory jury fee to the wage collection division and thereupon the wage collection division of the department shall file the entire record, in the cause, in the Superior Court, for trial by jury of the issues presented by the claimant and defendant. The jury fee so received shall be paid to the court wherein the cause is to be tried by the judge and jury. The judgment shall be docketed in the Superior Court as are other judgments of the wage collection division.  

    Amended 1953,c.33,s.43; 1991,c.91,s.355.  

34:11-67.    Fees and costs  
     34:11-67. No filing fee shall be charged by the wage collection division, for accepting a wage claim, and no advance fees shall be charged by constables making service of process on wage claims of the wage collection division, nor shall any fee be charged by any county clerk for filing of any award or determination of the wage collection division or sheriff for execution and levy but the collection of any wage claim either by execution or otherwise shall carry taxed costs of service, filing, recording fees, executions, and similar items, in accordance with the schedule of costs as prescribed for the Superior Court, Law Division, Special Civil Part. All moneys received by way of taxed costs shall be retained by the wage collection division and at the end of each calendar year shall be paid into the State treasury for the use of the State.  

    Amended 1953,c.33,s.44; 1971,c.154,s.8; 1991,c.91,s.356.  

34:11-67.1  Owners' responsibility for wage claims against subcontractors.
	1. a. (1) For any contract entered into on or after January 1, 2020 for construction, reconstruction, demolition, alteration, maintenance, including painting and decorating, or repair in the State other than work on an owner-occupied residence, including, but not limited to, any such work performed under a contract entered into on or after January 1, 2020 under which workers are required by any State law to be paid the prevailing wage rates set pursuant to the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.), the contractor entering into a contract shall assume, and be responsible for, any debt owed to a worker, or third party on the worker's behalf, incurred by a subcontractor at any tier acting under, by, or for the contractor for the worker's performance of labor under the contract, unless the worker's performance of labor under the contract is pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement to which the employing contractor or subcontractor is signatory, wherein there are lawful remedies by which unpaid wages may be collected.
 
	(2) The contractor's responsibility under the provisions of this section shall extend to unpaid wages plus any interest owed, and shall extend to penalties or liquidated damages.
 
	(3) A contractor or any other person shall not evade, or commit any act that negates, the requirements of this section.  This section does not prohibit a contractor or subcontractor at any tier from establishing by contract or enforcing any otherwise lawful remedies against a subcontractor it hires for responsibility created by the nonpayment of wages by that subcontractor or by a subcontractor at any tier working under that subcontractor.
 
	b. (1) The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development may enforce against a contractor the responsibility for unpaid wages created by this section by any action that the commissioner is authorized to undertake regarding responsibility for unpaid wages under the provisions of chapter 11 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes, unless the worker's performance of labor under the contract is pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement to which the employing contractor or subcontractor is signatory, wherein there are lawful remedies by which unpaid wages may be collected.
 
	(2) A joint labor-management cooperation committee established pursuant to the federal Labor Management Cooperation Act of 1978 (29 U.S.C. s.175a) which includes a union representing any of the workers employed in a project, or a union, whether or not the union represents workers employed in the project, subject to the provisions of this section may bring an action in any court of competent jurisdiction against a contractor or subcontractor at any tier for unpaid wages owed to a worker by the contractor or subcontractor for the performance of any work subject to the provisions of this section, including unpaid wages owed by the contractor, pursuant to subsection a. of this section.  The committee or union shall notify the Department of Labor and Workforce Development when the committee or union brings the action.  The court shall award a prevailing plaintiff in such an action its reasonable attorney's fees and costs, including expert witness fees.  Prior to commencement of an action against a contractor to enforce the responsibility created by subsection a. of this section, the committee or union shall provide the contractor and subcontractor that employed the worker with at least 30 days' notice by first-class mail.  The notice need only describe the general nature of the claim and shall not limit the responsibility of the contractor or preclude subsequent amendments of an action to encompass additional workers employed by the subcontractor, unless the worker's performance of labor under the contract is pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement to which the employing contractor or subcontractor is signatory, wherein there are lawful remedies by which unpaid wages may be collected.
 
	(3) No party other than the parties indicated in this subsection b. may bring an action against a contractor to enforce the responsibility created by subsection a. of this section.
 
	(4) Prior to a union representing a worker who is not a member of its union in accordance with this subsection b., the worker shall consent in writing to the representation.  
 
	c. (1) Upon request by a contractor, project manager, or contractor to a subcontractor, the subcontractor shall provide payroll records of its employees who are providing labor on work subject to the provisions of this section, which payroll records shall include all wages.  The payroll records shall not be modified except to prevent disclosure of an individual's full social security number, but shall provide the last four digits of the social security number.
 
	(2) Upon request of a contractor to a project manager, contractor, or subcontractor, the subcontractor and any lower tier subcontractors under contract to the subcontractor shall provide the contractor information that includes the project name, name and address of the subcontractor, contractor with whom the subcontractor is under contract, anticipated start date, duration, and estimated journeyworker and apprentice hours, and contact information for its subcontractors on the project.
 
	(3) A subcontractor's failure to comply with this section shall not relieve a contractor from any of the obligations contained in this section.
 
	(4) Any subcontractor who fails to provide records or information requested pursuant to this subsection within 14 days of when the request was made shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $7,500 for each day the employer fails to provide the requested records or information, collectible by the commissioner in a summary proceeding pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).  The commissioner shall have the authority to waive this penalty.
 
	d.	Unless otherwise provided by law, property of the contractor may be attached, after trial, for the payment of any judgment received pursuant to this section.
 
	e.	An action brought pursuant to this section shall be filed within two years from the date of the occurrence of the incident alleged in the action.
 
	f.	This section shall not apply to work performed by an employee of the State, a special district, a city, a county, a city and county, or any political subdivision of the State.
 
	g.	For purposes of this section, "contractor" means a contractor that has a direct contractual relationship with an owner and "subcontractor" means a contractor that does not have a direct contractual relationship with an owner, including a contractor that has a contractual relationship with a contractor or with another subcontractor.
 
	h.	Nothing in this section shall alter the obligation under any other provision of State law of a contractor to pay in a timely manner a contractor, or of a contractor to pay in a timely manner a subcontractor, or any penalties for failing to do so, except that the contractor may withhold as "disputed" all sums owed if a subcontractor does not provide in a timely manner the information requested under paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection c. of this section, until that information is provided.
 
	L.2019, c.510, s.1; amended 2023, c.210.

34:11-67.2  Severability.
	2.	If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or other part of this act shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, including any judgment made pursuant to R.S.1:1-10 that the part is unconstitutional, invalid, or inoperative, the judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this act, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section or other part directly involved in the controversy in which the judgment shall have been rendered.
 
	L.2019, c.510, s.2.

34:11-68    Records required relative to collection, transportation of solid waste.
 
	1. a. Every contract with a public body under which a contractor or subcontractor engages in the work of the collection or transportation of solid waste, including any recyclable materials other than recycled or reclaimed asphalt or concrete, for the public body shall contain a provision requiring the contractor and subcontractor to keep an accurate record showing the name, the actual hourly rate of wages paid to, and the actual daily, overtime and weekly hours worked by, each individual engaged in the collection and transportation work done under the contract, and any other records deemed necessary by the commissioner for the enforcement of wage payments, and the records shall be preserved for two years from the date of payment.  The record shall be open at all reasonable hours to the inspection of the public body awarding the contract, any other party to the contract, and the commissioner, and the contractor or subcontractor shall submit a certified payroll record showing only the name, the actual hourly rate of wages paid to, and the actual daily, overtime and weekly hours worked by each individual engaged in the collection and transportation work done under the contract, in a form satisfactory to the commissioner, to the public body for each payroll period not more than 10 days after the payment of wages.  The public body shall make the certified payroll record open at all reasonable hours to the inspection of any party to the contract, the commissioner, and any member of the public.
 
	b.	With respect to any contract with a public body for the collection or transportation of solid waste, including any recyclable materials other than recycled or reclaimed asphalt or concrete, the commissioner shall have the authority to investigate and ascertain the wages of workers employed in connection with the contract, enter and inspect the place of business or employment of the workers to question the workers and examine, inspect and copy any books, registers, payrolls, and other records regarding the wages, hours, and other conditions of employment of the workers, require from the contractor or subcontractor written statements, including sworn statements, regarding wages, hours, names, addresses, and other information about the workers the commissioner deems appropriate, and require the contractor or subcontractor to file, within 10 days of receipt of a request, any records enumerated in this section, sworn to as to their validity and accuracy.  If the contractor or subcontractor fails to provide the requested records within 10 days, the commissioner may direct within 15 days the fiscal or financial officer charged with the custody and disbursements of the funds of the public body which contracted for the work to withhold immediately from payment to the contractor or subcontractor up to 25% of the amount, not to exceed $100,000, to be paid to the contractor or subcontractor under the terms of the contract.  The amount withheld shall be immediately released upon receipt by the public body of a notice from the commissioner indicating that the request for records has been satisfied.
 
	c.	Any contractor or subcontractor who willfully hinders or delays the commissioner in the performance of his duties in the enforcement of this section, or fails to make, keep or preserve any records required under the provisions of this act, or falsifies any of the records, or refuses to furnish or make available any of the records to the commissioner upon demand, otherwise violates any provision of this act or any regulation or order issued under this act, shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for not less than 10 nor more than 90 days, or by both the fine and imprisonment.  As an alternative to or in addition to any other sanctions, if the commissioner finds that the contractor or subcontractor has violated this act, the commissioner is authorized to assess and collect administrative penalties, up to a maximum of $2,500 for a first violation and up to a maximum of $5,000 for each subsequent violation, specified in a schedule of penalties to be promulgated as a rule or regulation by the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).  When determining the amount of the penalty imposed because of a violation, the commissioner shall consider factors including the history of previous violations, the seriousness of the violation, the good faith of the contractor or subcontractor and the size of the business.  No administrative penalty shall be levied pursuant to this section unless the commissioner provides the alleged violator with notification of the violation and of the amount of the penalty by certified mail and an opportunity to request a hearing within 15 days following the receipt of the notice.  If a hearing is requested, the commissioner shall issue a final order upon such hearing and a finding that a violation has occurred.  If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order upon expiration of the 15-day period.  Payment of the penalty is due when a final order is issued or when the notice becomes a final order.  Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding commenced by the commissioner pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.). Any sum collected as a fine or penalty pursuant to this section shall be applied toward enforcement and administrative costs of the Division of Wage and Hour Compliance  in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	d.	For the purposes of this section:
 
	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development or his duly authorized representatives.
 
	"Public body" means the State of New Jersey, any of its political subdivisions, any authority created by the Legislature of the State of New Jersey and any instrumentality or agency of the State of New Jersey or of any of its political subdivisions.
 
	"Contractor" or "subcontractor" means a contractor or subcontractor who employs less than 1,000 employees in the State of New Jersey.
 
	L.2009, c.88, s.1.

34:11-69  Findings, declarations.
	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that:
 
	a.	Domestic workers provide valuable services in industries such as in-home child care, house cleaning, home care, cooking, gardening, and other household occupations.
 
	b.	The labor domestic workers provide is an important contribution to the State's economy and prosperity, including, but not limited to, by providing support services that enable other individuals to participate in the workforce.
 
	c.	Many domestic workers are women, immigrants, and persons of color who work in or about private homes, isolated from other workers.
 
	d.	Since 2007, the National Domestic Workers Alliance (NDWA) has advocated for respect for domestic workers by including them in national, State, and local labor protection laws.  In September 2020, NDWA affiliates, Adhikaar, Casa Freehold, New Labor and Wind of the Spirit, in collaboration with the Center for Women at Work at Rutgers University, released a report which found low pay, lack of benefits, and rampant wage theft occurs throughout the domestic worker industry and that there is a lack of enforcement regarding existing rights of domestic workers.
 
	e.	At least 10 other states and two cities have enacted legislation to provide rights, benefits, and protections for domestic workers.
 
	f.	The Legislature therefore finds that it is in the best interest of the State of New Jersey and its residents to provide rights, benefits, and protections to the countless domestic workers providing valuable services throughout the State.
 
L.2023, c.262, s.1.

34:11-70  Definitions.
	2.	As used in P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.):
 
	"Casual work" means work that is:
 
	(1)	irregular, uncertain, or incidental in nature and duration; and
 
	(2)	different in nature from the type of paid work in which the worker is customarily engaged.
 
	"Domestic services" means services of a household nature and performed by an individual in or about a private home on a permanent or temporary basis and includes services performed by a domestic worker.
 
	"Domestic worker" or "worker" means hourly and salaried employees, full-time and part-time individuals, and temporary individuals and is narrowly construed to mean any worker who: 
 
	(1)	works for one or more employers; and 
 
	(2)	is an individual who works in residence for the purposes of providing any of the following services: caring for a child; serving as a companion or caretaker for a sick, convalescing, or elderly person or a person with a disability; housekeeping or house cleaning; cooking; providing food or butler service; parking cars; cleaning laundry; gardening; personal organizing; or for any other domestic service purpose, provided that the term domestic worker does not include:
 
	(a)	A family member, with "family member" meaning a spouse, child, parent, sibling, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, first cousin, grandparent, grandchild, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, stepparent, stepchild, stepbrother, stepsister, half-brother, or half-sister, whether the individual is related by blood, marriage, or adoption;
 
	(b)	An individual primarily engaged in house sitting, pet sitting, or dog walking;
 
	(c)	An individual working at a business operated primarily out of the residence, such as a home day-care business;
 
	(d)	An individual whose primary work involves household repair or maintenance, such as a roofer, plumber, mason, painter, or other similar contractor;
 
	(e)	An employee of the State or the United States; or
 
	(f)	An individual established as a kinship legal guardian, as defined by section 2 of P.L.2001, c.250 (C.3B:12A-2), of a child who lives in the residence or an individual who participates in the Kinship Navigator Program, as authorized by the Department of Children and Families, as a caregiver of a child who lives in the residence and receives services provided by a kinship navigator service provider.
 
	"Department" means the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	"Employment agency" means any person or entity that procures, or attempts to procure, any workers for referral to a third party.
 
	"Hiring entity" means any employer, as defined in section 1 of P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.1), who employs a domestic worker and also means any person, firm, business, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, or other entity, including referral, employment, and internet based or on-demand platforms, that provides compensation directly or indirectly to a domestic worker for the performance of domestic services and any person or persons acting directly or indirectly in the interest of the employer in relation to the domestic worker.
 
	"Live-in domestic worker" includes any individuals, who, as part of their employment, reside in the personal residence of the employer.
 
	"Referral agency" means any person or entity that procures, or attempts to procure, directly or indirectly through placement in a physical or virtual labor pool:
 
	(1)	employees; and
 
	(2)	after the procurement does not continue involvement in the terms of exchange of domestic services with the employees in any way, with the exception of the following:
 
	(a)	continuing to display, host, or advertise, either through physical means or virtual means, the workers' contact information, job qualifications, resume, image, or digital profile which employers or clients can use to independently contact employees about employment; or
 
	(b)	removing, either through physical means or virtual means, the workers' contact information, job qualifications, resume, image, or digital profile, which employers or clients can use to independently contact employees, upon the mandate of any federal, State, or local laws.
 
	"Remuneration for work" means compensation due to the work of a domestic worker, payable in legal tender of the United States or checks on banks convertible into cash on demand at full face value, subject to any deductions, charges, or allowances as may be permitted by rules of the department.
 
	"Written" or "writing" means a printed or printable communication in physical or electronic form, including a communication that is transmitted through email, text message, or a computer system, or is otherwise sent and maintained electronically.
 
L.2023, c.262, s.2.

34:11-71  Domestic worker, casual work, work less than five hours per month, prohibited unless governed by written contract.
	13. a. No hiring entity shall employ or engage a domestic worker, except for casual work or work of less than five hours per month, unless the engagement is governed by a written contract governing the following: a specific list of job duties; hourly wage and overtime wage; weekly schedule including number of hours per week; the manner and frequency of payment; breaks for rest and meals; paid or unpaid leave including sick time; paid holidays; any other benefits provided; modes of transportation required and whether provided; value of housing if provided; sleeping period and personal time for live-in workers; the term of the contract; and any other terms and conditions as agreed upon by the domestic worker and employer or as mandated pursuant to this act. The written agreement shall be signed and dated by all parties after ample opportunity to review.
 
	b.	The written agreement required under this section shall not be construed to waive the protections of domestic workers under federal, State, and local laws and shall not contain any:
 
	(1)	Mandatory pre-dispute arbitration agreement for claims made by a covered domestic worker against a domestic work hiring entity regarding the local rights of the worker; and
 
	(2)	Non-disclosure agreement, or non-competition or non-disparagement agreement, limiting the ability of the covered domestic worker to seek compensation for performing domestic services after the worker ceases to receive compensation from the domestic work hiring entity for the performance of domestic services.  
 
	c.	The agreement shall be in English and such other language as may be preferred by the worker. The hiring entity shall make reasonable efforts to determine if the worker would prefer the agreement to be in another language.
 
	d.	The department shall make available model contracts complying with this act shall in multiple languages on its Internet website.
 
	e.	A referral and employment agency shall provide domestic workers and hiring entities with information concerning the contract requirements of this act at the time a hiring entity is connected with a worker and shall make any model contracts adopted by the department available to the hiring entity.
 
L.2023, c.262, s.13.

34:11-72  Domestic worker, uninterrupted paid rest period.
	14. a. An employer of a domestic worker shall allow the domestic worker an uninterrupted paid rest period of not less than ten minutes for each four consecutive hours worked, unless the nature of the work prevents the domestic worker from being relieved of all duties for such period of time, such as some types of child care and caretaker work for a sick, elderly or disabled person.  In those types of work where the domestic worker is not relieved of all work duties, an "on-duty" rest period shall be provided.  The employer shall pay the domestic worker for the time spent on a rest break at the domestic worker's regular rate of pay.
 
	b.	The employer shall allow an uninterrupted 30-minute meal break after more than five consecutive hours worked. Unless the domestic worker is relieved of all work duties during such 30-minute period and is permitted to leave the work site during that break, the meal period shall be considered an "on-duty" meal period and shall be paid at the domestic worker's regular rate of pay.
 
	c.	An "on-duty" meal or rest period shall be permitted only when the nature of the work prevents a domestic worker from being relieved of all duties and when, by written agreement between the parties, an "on-duty" meal or rest period is agreed to.  The agreement may be revoked by the domestic worker, in writing, at any time.  The domestic worker may, to the extent possible given the domestic worker's duties for the employer, engage in personal activities, such as resting, eating a meal, drinking a beverage, making a personal telephone call, or making other personal choices during "on-duty" meal or rest periods.
 
	d.	The employer shall not impede or discourage a domestic worker from taking any meal or rest breaks.
 
	e.	In the case of a violation of this section, the domestic work employer involved shall be liable to the domestic worker for an amount equal to one hour of pay at the domestic worker's regular rate of compensation, but not more than two hours of such pay, for each workday that the meal or rest period was not provided. The department shall determine through the agency's complaint and adjudication process whether or not violations occurred by the employer and whether or not the domestic worker is entitled to the remedy.
 
L.2023, c.262, s.14.

34:11-73  Live-in domestic worker, work more than six consecutive days, same employer, without 24-hour rest, prohibited.
	15.	A "live-in" domestic worker shall not be required to work more than six consecutive days for the same employer without a 24-hour period of rest, which may be unpaid.
 
L.2023, c.262, s.15.

34:11-74  Domestic worker employer, minimum two-week notification before termination; live-in domestic worker employer, minimum four-week notification before termination.
	16. a. An employer of a domestic worker shall provide a minimum two-week notification period before termination of employment, and for live-in domestic workers a minimum four-week notification period before termination of employment.
 
	b.	The employer may terminate the employment without complying with the full notification period based on a good-faith belief and without reckless disregard or willful ignorance of the truth that the domestic worker has engaged in significant misconduct.
 
	c.	Failure to provide notification as required under this section shall entitle the domestic worker to severance pay in the amount of the worker's regular hourly rate multiplied by the regular number of hours worked over the period of time during which the required notification was not provided.
 
	d.	As used in this section, the term "significant misconduct" means that the domestic worker abused, neglected, or caused any other harmful conduct against the employer, members of the employer's family, or individuals residing in the employer's household.
 
	e.	The notification requirement in this section shall not apply if:
 
	(1) a domestic worker completes placement in a particular position and is not immediately placed or scheduled for another position by an employer if the employer is a temporary help service firm, employment agency, or other staffing or placement agency, health care service firm, home health agency, or hospice provider, but the domestic worker remains on the employer's payroll for future placement opportunities; or
 
	(2) a domestic worker is employed by an employer that is an individual and not a temporary help service firm, employment agency, or other staffing or placement agency, health care service firm, home health agency, or hospice provider, whether or not the employer is the person receiving care from the domestic worker, and the domestic worker completes or fulfills all duties of the position, and there is no longer a practicable need for the position, including, but not limited to, if the domestic worker's employer is an individual who has employed the domestic worker to care for a person who is terminally ill and the terminally ill person passes away.
 
L.2023, c.262, s.16.

34:11-75  Domestic worker, personal records, information, monitoring.
	17.	No hiring entity shall:
 
	a.	Keep or hold the original copies of any personal documents of a domestic worker;
 
	b.	Monitor or record, through any means, the activities of a domestic worker: 
 
	(1)	using any bathroom or similar facility; 
 
	(2)	in the living quarters of a domestic worker; or 
 
	(3)	while the worker is engaged in any activities associated with dressing or changing clothes; or
 
	c.	Monitor, record, or interfere with the private communications of a domestic worker.
 
L.2023, c.262, s.17.

34:11-76  Hiring entity, domestic worker, notification of rights, information, complaint, violation of rights.
	18. a. A hiring entity shall provide to a domestic worker notification of the rights of domestic workers under P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.), and information on how to file a complaint for violation of these rights, as shall be determined by the department by regulation.
 
	b.	A hiring entity shall create and maintain records documenting hours worked, pay rate, meals and rest breaks, leave time earned and used, if applicable, and the existence of a written agreement, all pursuant to requirements established by regulation by the department.  If a hiring entity does not maintain the required records or does not allow the department reasonable access to the records, an adverse inference may be drawn with respect to facts alleged regarding the issues about which records were not kept.
 
	c.	The department shall maintain the confidentiality of all records it obtains in connection with enforcement activities to the full extent permitted by law.
 
L.2023, c.262, s.18.

34:11-77  Hiring entity, domestic worker, interfere, restrain, deny exercise of, attempt, rights, prohibited; actions considered retaliation.
	19. a. It shall be unlawful for a hiring entity or any other person to interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of, or the attempt to exercise, any right set forth in P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.).
 
	b.	The minimum requirements of sections 13 through 18 of P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-71 through 34:11-76) shall be deemed incorporated into any contract, whether actual or implied, between the employer and the domestic worker.
 
	c.	A material breach by a hiring entity of a contract with a domestic worker shall constitute a violation of P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.), without regard to whether the breach is of a provision required by this act.
 
	d.	No hiring entity or any other person shall take or threaten retaliatory action against any person because a domestic worker has exercised rights or pursued a claim of violation under P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.). These rights include the right to demand compliance with protections established by written agreement; the right to file a complaint or inform any person about an employer's alleged violation of this act; the right to cooperate with the department in any investigation pursuant to this act; and the right to inform any person of the rights established under this act.
 
	e.	No hiring entity or any other person shall communicate to a person exercising rights protected under P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.) the willingness or intent to contact, report to, or to make an implied or express assertion to report to a government agency regarding the suspected citizenship or immigration status of a domestic worker or family member of a domestic worker because the worker has or has expressed an intent to exercise rights protected under this act or because of a belief the worker may do so.
 
	f.	The protections of this section shall apply to any person who mistakenly but in good faith alleges a violation of P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.).
 
	g.	It shall be considered a rebuttable presumption of retaliation if the hiring entity or any other person takes an adverse action against a domestic worker within 90 calendar days of the worker's exercise of rights protected in P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.).  However, in the case of temporary or seasonal employment that ended before the close of the 90-calendar-day period, the presumption also applies if the hiring entity fails to rehire a former domestic worker at the next opportunity for work in the same position.  The hiring entity may rebut the presumption with clear and convincing evidence that the adverse action would have been taken in the absence of such protected activity.  If a domestic worker declines to be rehired for the same position or resigns from the position, the presumption in this subsection g. shall not apply.
 
	h.	Proof of retaliation under P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.) shall be sufficient upon a showing that the hiring entity or any other person has taken an adverse action against a person and the persons exercise or rights protected in P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.) was a motivating factor in the absence of that protected activity.
 
	i.	A complaint or other communication by any person triggers the protection of P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.) regardless of whether the complaint or communication is in writing or makes explicit reference to P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.).
 
L.2023, c.262, s.19.

34:11-78  Guidelines, regulations promulgated.
	20.	The department shall promulgate appropriate guidelines and regulations to effectuate the purposes of P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.).
 
L.2023, c.262, s.20.

34:11-79  Overlapping employment relationship, domestic worker, subject to joint, several liability, concurrent fines, penalties.
	21. a. Individuals and employers with an overlapping employment relationship with a domestic worker are subject to joint and several liability, and concurrent fines and penalties, in connection with P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.).
 
	b.	A domestic worker or other person representing a domestic worker may report to the department any suspected violation of P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.).
 
	c.	The department shall take any steps as it deems appropriate to resolve complaints and enforce P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.), including, but not limited to, establishing a system to receive complaints regarding noncompliance with P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.), investigating alleged violations in a timely manner and resolving complaints through a separate "referral" process for claims of domestic workers.
 
	d.	The department shall have the power to subpoena records and testimony from any party to a complaint.  The records shall be provided to the department within 30 days after receipt of the subpoena.
 
	e.	Any person alleging a violation of P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.) shall file a complaint with the department within two years of the date that the person knew or should have known of the alleged violation.
 
	f.	Upon establishment of a system of administrative adjudication, the department shall have the power to impose the penalties and fines for a violation of P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.), and to provide or obtain appropriate relief.  Remedies may include reinstatement and full restitution to the domestic worker for lost wages and benefits, including presumed damages to be awarded to a domestic worker for the hiring entity's or employer's violation of P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.).  The department shall determine by regulation an amount of presumed damages. 
 
	g.	A hiring entity or an employer who knowingly retaliates against an employee for any activity protected under P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.), or any other knowing violation of P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.), shall be a crime of the fourth degree.  Otherwise, it shall be a disorderly persons offense and the hiring entity or employer shall, upon conviction for a violation, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 not more than $2,000 for an initial violation and not less than $200 nor more than $4,000 for each subsequent violation.  Each day during which any violation of P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.) continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense, and the employment of any domestic worker in violation of P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.), shall, with respect to each domestic worker employed, constitute a separate and violation.
 
	h.	Any domestic worker or person who is aggrieved by a violation of P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.), or the department may bring civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction against a hiring entity or an employer violating P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.).  Nothing in P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.) or its implementing regulations shall be construed to require a complaint to be filed with the department before bringing an action in court.  Upon prevailing in an action brought pursuant to this section, an aggrieved person shall be entitled to any legal or equitable relief as may be appropriate to remedy the violation, that is not duplicative of any relief provided to the person in administrative proceedings, including, without limitation, reinstatement in employment, back pay, and injunctive relief.  The aggrieved person shall be entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees and costs.
 
L.2023, c.262, s.21.

34:11-80  "Domestic Work Enforcement Program" established.
	22. a. The department shall, upon appropriation of funds to the department for purposes of this section, establish and maintain a Domestic Work Enforcement Program in collaboration with qualified organizations.  P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.) requires the department to issue a competitive request to community-based organizations (CBOs) to provide education and outreach services in this program and would prescribe requirements for these organizations.  The CBOs would be responsible for developing and consulting with the department regarding the core education and outreach materials, as specified.  The program shall increase the capacity and expertise of the department to improve education and enforcement of labor standards in the domestic work industry.  The program shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
 
	(1)	Education and training for domestic work employees and  employers addressing minimum wage, overtime, sick leave, recordkeeping, wage adjudication, and retaliation, along with new rights extended by P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.);
 
	(2)	Training for domestic worker leaders to provide peer-to-peer support and wraparound service referrals to domestic work employees who have elected to file wage claims or take other actions seeking remedy from hiring entities or employers;
 
	(3)	Development of core training curriculum to be used in the education and training of domestic work employees and employers;
 
	(4)	Provision of technical and legal assistance to domestic work employees through a Statewide telephone help line and the promotion of the help line to domestic worker populations; and
 
	(5)	Development of an online resource hub to provide information for employers on State labor laws and guidelines on fair employment.
 
	b.	Qualified organizations that collaborate under subsection a. of this section shall issue reports and meet quarterly with the department to review the implementation and success of the program.
 
	c.	(1) A nonprofit organization that has a minimum of five years of experience working with domestic work employees or employers; or
 
	(2)	An organization that works with nonprofit organizations that has a minimum of five years of experience working with domestic work employees or employers.
 
L.2023, c.262, s.22.

34:11-81  Construction of act; severability.
	23. a. Nothing in P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.) shall be construed to diminish any rights or protections granted to domestic workers by any other law.
 
	b.	If any provision of P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.) or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.), which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of P.L.2023, c.262 (C.34:11-69 et al.) are severable.
 
L.2023, c.262, s.23.

34:11A-1.    Short title 
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Construction Workers' Fringe Benefit Security Act." 

   L. 1987, c. 150, s. 1. 

34:11A-2.    Definitions 
    As used in this act: 

   a.   "Construction employer" means a person in the business of building, constructing, altering or repairing any building, road, bridge or structure in this State; 

   b.   "Construction fund" means all moneys in the custody of the owner of a project, which moneys are designated for the construction, alteration or repair of any private or public project; 

   c.   "Fringe benefits" means any benefits agreed to be paid by a construction employer to a fringe benefit fund; 

   d.   "Fringe benefit fund" means any fund established pursuant to the terms of a collective bargaining agreement entered into between a construction employer and a representative labor organization, or pursuant to the terms of a fringe benefit trust indenture entered into between the trustees of a fund and the construction employer, for the collection, investment and payment of fringe benefits; 

   e.   "Prime contractor" means a construction employer who has a direct contract with the owner of a public or private project; 

   f.   "Private project" means the construction, repair or alteration of any building, road, bridge or structure or any other improvements to real property for any person other than this State, any agency, commission or department thereof, or any county, municipality or school district or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 

   g.   "Public project" means the construction, alteration or repair of any building, road, bridge or structure or any other improvements to real property for this State, any agency, commission or department thereof, or any county, municipality or school district or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 

   h.   "Public project owner" means the head of the public agency with jurisdiction over the public project; 

   i.   "Subcontractor" means a construction employer who has a contract with a prime contractor or with the subcontractor of the prime contractor; and 

   j.   "Worker" means any person engaged in a skilled or unskilled construction trade or craft in this State. 

   L. 1987, c. 150, s. 2. 

34:11A-3.    Applicable fringe benefit funds 
    The provisions of this act shall apply only to fringe benefit funds which are a. located within and established for the benefit of workers in this State or b. located outside of the State but which cover workers employed by any construction employer in the construction, repair or alteration of any private project or public project within this State. 

   L. 1987, c. 150, s. 3. 

34:11A-4.    Relief for delinquent payment 
    a. (1) If a subcontractor is at least four weeks delinquent in the payment of fringe benefits, as certified by the trustees of the specific fringe benefit fund or by their designated representative, the fringe benefit fund shall be entitled to the relief provided pursuant to section 5 of this act; provided that the fringe benefit fund shall have given written notice within 45 days of the date of the existence of a delinquency by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the prime contractor and the subcontractor advising them of the delinquency. 

   (2)  If the delinquency is not rectified within 30 days after receipt of notice by the prime contractor, the fringe benefit fund shall give written notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the subcontractor, prime contractor and private or public project owner of the fringe benefit funds claimed for payment of fringe benefits from the construction fund. 

   b.   If a prime contractor is at least four weeks delinquent in the payment of fringe benefits, as certified by the trustees of the specific fringe benefit fund or by their designated representative, the fringe benefit fund shall be entitled to the relief provided pursuant to section 5 of this act; provided that the fringe benefit fund shall have given written notice within 45 days of the date of the existence of a delinquency by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the prime contractor and the private or public project owner, advising them of the delinquency. 

   c.   The written notices required under this section shall not be filed with any county clerk or in any public registry.  If the notices cannot be delivered by certified mail, they may be sent by personal service. 

   d.   The remedies provided herein are effective as against the construction fund.  No rights against the real property upon which the project is constructed, altered or repaired shall be created by this act. 

   L. 1987, c. 150, s. 4. 

34:11A-5.    Withholding of fringe benefit funds 
    a.   Upon receipt of the notice required by paragraph (2) of subsection a. of section 4 of this act or subsection b. of section 4 of this act, a private or public project owner shall withhold from the sums otherwise due the prime contractor, a sum equal to the amount claimed due by the fringe benefit fund and any further sums subsequently demanded by the fringe benefit fund arising out of work performed at the private or public project, which sums shall be segregated from the construction fund and held in trust by the private or public project owner or deposited with the clerk of the Superior Court and paid to the fringe benefit fund claiming the delinquency. 

   b.   The amount withheld or deposited by the private or public project owner shall not exceed the amount due and owing from that owner to the prime contractor at the time notice is received by the owner. 

   c.   The extent to which notice for a subcontractor delinquency shall create liability upon the owner shall be limited to the amount due and owing, at the time notice is received, by the owner to the prime contractor, or by the prime contractor to the delinquent subcontractor or by the subcontractor who is in privity with the delinquent subcontractor, whichever is less. 

   d.   Payment by the private or public project owner to the fringe benefit fund shall be made within 45 days of such demand, unless and only to the extent that the subcontractor or prime contractor against whom such delinquency claim has been asserted notifies the owner and the fringe benefit fund in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, prior to the expiration of the 45 day period that it contests the claim of the fringe benefit fund.  Whenever a notice of contest has been sent by the claimed delinquent construction employer, the private or public project owner shall hold a sum in the amount claimed due by the fringe benefit fund as trustee and payment therefrom shall be made upon the entry of a final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction or upon receipt of the consent of all of the parties. 

   L. 1987, c. 150, s. 5. 

34:11A-6.    Release from obligation 
    Any private or public project owner, prime contractor or subcontractor who makes a proper payment to a fringe benefit fund or deposits the payment with the clerk of the Superior Court, in accordance with section 5 of this act, shall be released of any obligation to any party in privity with that private or public project owner, prime contractor or subcontractor, to the extent of the payment or deposit made. 

   L. 1987, c. 150, s. 6. 

34:11A-7.    Actions commenced by fringe benefit fund 
    With regard to actions commenced by a fringe benefit fund in the courts of this State, the private or public project owner shall not be named a party in such action if the total delinquent sum demanded by the fringe benefit fund is deposited with the clerk of the Superior Court prior to the commencement of an action. 

   L. 1987, c. 150, s. 7. 

34:11A-8.    Entitlement to remedies 
    Fringe benefit funds entitled to the remedies against a private or public project owner provided pursuant to sections 4 and 5 of this act are entitled only to those fringe benefits earned by workers on the particular project constructed for the owner. 

   L. 1987, c. 150, s. 8. 

34:11A-9.    Insolvency 
    If a construction employer files for insolvency or makes an assignment of rights pursuant to the laws of this State, any delinquent fringe benefits shall be entitled to the same priority as delinquent wages in such proceedings. 

   L. 1987, c. 150, s. 9. 

34:11A-10.   Responsibility for damages 
    If a notice filed pursuant to section 4 of this act is willfully or knowingly in excess of the amounts due the fringe benefit fund, the fund shall be responsible for any damages incurred. 

   L. 1987, c. 150, s. 10. 

34:11A-11.   Responsibility for costs, fees 
    All costs and fees arising out of the procedures established in section 5 of this act shall be the responsibility of the delinquent party.  Where no delinquency is determined, the costs, fees, and damages arising out of the procedures established in section 5 of this act shall be the responsibility of the fringe benefit fund. 

   L. 1987, c. 150, s. 11. 

34:11A-12.   Additional remedies 
    The remedies provided pursuant to the act shall be in addition and not in lieu of any other remedies provided under the laws of this State. 

   L. 1987, c. 150, s. 12. 

34:11A-13.  Notification to employees on coverage for treatment of breast cancer
	9.  An employer in this State who provides coverage to his employees or their dependents for treatment of breast cancer shall annually and upon request of an employee at other times during the year, notify his employees whether the employees' coverage for treatment of breast cancer is subject to the requirements of P.L.1997, c.149 (C.17:48-6q et al.) concerning the minimum time a patient shall be permitted to remain at an inpatient care facility following a mastectomy.

	L.1997,c.149,s.9.

34:11A-14  Notification to employees by employers with self-funded health plans
	18.  An employer who provides a comprehensive self-funded health benefits plan to his employees or their dependents in this State shall annually, and upon request of an employee at other times during the year, notify his employees that they are covered by a self-insured plan that is not subject to regulation by the State of New Jersey, and specify which mandated health insurance benefits, established by statute, are not covered by the self-insured plan.  The Commissioner of Health and Senior Services shall notify the Commissioner of Labor of any health insurance mandates enacted into law, and the Commissioner of Labor shall notify employers in a timely manner of the health insurance mandates subject to the provisions of this section.

	L.1997,c.192,s.18.

34:11A-15  Notification to employees of coverage for biologically-based mental illness.

	9.	An employer in this State who provides health benefits coverage to his employees or their dependents for treatment of biologically-based mental illness shall annually, and upon request of an employee at other times during the year, notify his employees whether the employees' coverage for treatment of biologically-based mental illness is subject to the requirements of this act.

	L.1999,c.106,s.9.

34:11A-16  Findings, declarations relative to notification with regard to health benefits plans.

	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	Many employers in this State offer health benefits coverage to their employees under a health benefits plan as an incentive to attract and retain qualified employees.

	b.	Health benefits coverage is very important to employees and their families and the availability of such coverage through an employer can be the determining factor as to whether an individual accepts employment with a particular employer.

	c.	According to data tabulated by the Urban Institute based on the 1999 National Survey of America's Families, approximately 5.5 million New Jersey residents, which includes employees and their dependents, were covered by an employer-sponsored health benefits plan in 1999.

	d.	In certain instances, an employer may make a business decision not to continue an employee health benefits plan, due to rising health care costs and other economic factors, and may not always notify the employees beforehand of its decision.

	e.	It is a disservice to the working people of this State not to require that an employer provide prior notification to its employees when the employee health benefits plan will be terminated, for whatever reason.

	L.2003,c.27,s.1.

34:11A-17  Notice by employer of termination, change of benefits.

	2.	An employer that provides a health benefits plan as defined in section 2 of P.L.1997, c.192 (C.26:2S-2) to its employees in this State shall provide, in writing, 30 days' prior notice to those employees before the health benefits plan is terminated; except that, in the case of an employer that changes a health benefits plan, the employer shall immediately notify its employees in writing of the change upon receipt by the employer of notification from the health insurer that its employees will be covered by the new plan.

	L.2003,c.27,s.2.

34:11A-18  Violations, penalties.

	3. a. The Commissioner of Labor shall enforce and administer the provisions of sections 1 through 4 of this act, and the commissioner or his authorized representatives are empowered to investigate violations of those provisions.

	b.	When the commissioner finds that an employer has violated this act by failing to provide the notice required pursuant to section 2 of this act, the commissioner is authorized to assess and collect administrative penalties specified in a schedule of penalties to be promulgated by the commissioner by regulation.  The penalty amount shall be based on the number of employees covered under the health benefits plan and shall not exceed $200 an employee.

	c.	No administrative penalty shall be levied pursuant to this section unless the commissioner provides the alleged violator with notification of the violation and of the amount of the penalty by certified mail and an opportunity to request a hearing before the commissioner or his designee within 15 days following the receipt of the notice.  If a hearing is requested, the commissioner shall issue a final order upon that hearing and a finding that a violation has occurred.  If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order upon expiration of the 15-day period.  Payment of the penalty is due when a final order is issued or when the notice becomes a final order.

	d.	Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding commenced by the commissioner pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).

	L.2003,c.27,s.3.

34:11A-19  Regulations.

	4.	The Commissioner of Labor shall promulgate regulations pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), necessary to effectuate the provisions of sections 1 through 4 of this act.

	L.2003,c.27,s.4.

34:11A-20  Regulations relative to employer providing health benefits plan and domestic partners.

	57.   a. An employer that provides a health benefits plan as defined in section 2 of P.L.1997, c.192 (C.26:2S-2) to its employees and their dependents in this State may require that an employee contribute a portion or the full amount of the cost of dependent coverage under the plan for the employee's domestic partner as defined in section 3 of P.L.2003, c.246 (C.26:8A-3).

	b.	Nothing in P.L.2003, c.246 (C.26:8A-1 et al.) shall be construed to require an employer to provide dependent coverage for an employee's domestic partner.

	c.	Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the provisions of subsections a. and b. of this section shall not be deemed to be an unlawful discrimination under the "Law Against Discrimination," P.L.1945, c.169 (C.10:5-1 et seq.).

	L.2003,c.246,s.57.

34:11B-1.    Short title  
     This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Family Leave Act."

  

    L.1989, c.261, s.1.  

34:11B-2.    Findings, declarations  
     The Legislature finds and declares that the number of families in the State in which both parents or a single parent is employed outside of the home has increased dramatically and continues to increase and that due to lack of employment policies to accommodate working parents, many individuals are forced to choose between job security and parenting or providing care for ill family members.  The Legislature further finds that it is necessary to promote the economic security of families by guaranteeing jobs to wage earners who choose to take a period of leave upon the birth or placement for adoption of a child or serious health condition of a family member.  The Legislature, therefore, declares that it is the policy of the State to protect and promote the stability and economic security of family units.  The Legislature further declares that employees should be entitled to take a period of leave upon the birth or placement for adoption of a child or serious health condition of a family member without risk of termination of employment or retaliation by employers and without loss of certain benefits.  

    L.1989, c.261, s.2.  

34:11B-3  Definitions.
	3.	As used in this act:
 
	a.	"Child" means a biological, adopted, foster child, or resource family child, stepchild, legal ward, or child of a parent, including a child who becomes the child of a parent pursuant to a valid written agreement between the parent and a gestational carrier.
 
	b.	"Director" means the Director of the Division on Civil Rights.
 
	c.	"Division" means the Division on Civil Rights in the Department of Law and Public Safety.
 
	d.	"Employ" means to suffer or permit to work for compensation and includes ongoing, contractual relationships in which the employer retains substantial direct or indirect control over the employee's employment opportunities or terms and conditions of employment.
 
	e.	"Employee" means a person who is employed for at least three months by an employer, with respect to whom benefits are sought under this act, for not less than 250 base hours during the immediately preceding 12-month period.  Any time, up to a maximum of 90 calendar days, during which a person is laid off or furloughed by an employer due to that employer curtailing operations because of a state of emergency declared after October 22, 2012, shall be regarded as time in which the person is employed for the purpose of determining eligibility for leave time under this act.  In making the determination, the base hours per week during the layoff or furlough shall be deemed to be the same as the average number of hours worked per week during the rest of the 12-month period.
 
	f.	"Employer" means a person or corporation, partnership, individual proprietorship, joint venture, firm, company, or other similar legal entity which engages the services of an employee and which:
 
	(1)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2019, c.37)
 
	(2)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2019, c.37)
 
	(3)	With respect to the period of time from the 1,095th day following the effective date of P.L.1989, c.261 (C.34:11B-1 et seq.) through June 30, 2019, employs 50 or more employees for each working day during each of 20 or more calendar workweeks in the then current or immediately preceding calendar year; 
 
	(4)	With respect to any period of time from June 30, 2019 until the effective date of P.L.2025, c.279, employs 30 or more employees for each working day during each of 20 or more calendar workweeks in the then current or immediately preceding calendar year; and	
 
	(5)	With respect to any period of time after the effective date of P.L.2025, c.279, employs 15 or more employees for each working day during each of 20 or more calendar workweeks in the then current or immediately preceding calendar year.
 
	"Employer" includes the State, any political subdivision thereof, and all public offices, agencies, boards or bodies.
 
	g.	"Employment benefits" means all benefits and policies provided or made available to employees by an employer and includes group life insurance, health insurance, disability insurance, sick leave, annual leave, pensions, or other similar benefits.
 
	h.	"Parent" means a person who is the biological parent, adoptive parent, foster parent, resource family parent, step-parent, parent-in-law or legal guardian, having a "parent-child relationship" with a child as defined by law, or having sole or joint legal or physical custody, care, guardianship, or visitation with a child, or who became the parent of the child pursuant to a valid written agreement between the parent and a gestational carrier.
 
	i.	"Family leave" means leave from employment so that the employee may provide care made necessary by reason of:
 
	(1)	the birth of a child of the employee, including a child born pursuant to a valid written agreement between the employee and a gestational carrier;
 
	(2)	the placement of a child into foster care with the employee or in connection with adoption of such child by the employee; 
 
	(3)	the serious health condition of a family member of the employee; or
 
	(4)	in the event of a state of emergency declared by the Governor, or when indicated to be needed by the Commissioner of Health or other public health authority, an epidemic of a communicable disease, a known or suspected exposure to the communicable disease, or efforts to prevent spread of a communicable disease, which:
 
	(a)	requires in-home care or treatment of a child due to the closure of the school or place of care of the child of the employee, by order of a public official due to the epidemic or other public health emergency;
 
	(b)	prompts the issuance by a public health authority of a determination, including by mandatory quarantine, requiring or imposing responsive or prophylactic measures as a result of illness caused by an epidemic of a communicable disease or known or suspected exposure to the communicable disease because the presence in the community of a family member in need of care by the employee, would jeopardize the health of others; or
 
	(c)	results in the recommendation of a health care provider or public health authority, that a family member in need of care by the employee voluntarily undergo self-quarantine as a result of suspected exposure to a communicable disease because the presence in the community of that family member in need of care by the employee, would jeopardize the health of others.
 
	j.	"Family member" means a child, parent, parent-in-law, sibling, grandparent, grandchild, spouse, domestic partner, or one partner in a civil union couple, or any other individual related by blood to the employee, and any other individual that the employee shows to have a close association with the employee which is the equivalent of a family relationship.
 
	k.	"Reduced leave schedule" means leave scheduled for fewer than an employee's usual number of hours worked per workweek but not for fewer than an employee's usual number of hours worked per workday, unless agreed to by the employee and the employer.
 
	l.	"Serious health condition" means an illness, injury, impairment, or physical or mental condition which requires:
 
	(1)	inpatient care in a hospital, hospice, or residential medical care facility; or
 
	(2)	continuing medical treatment or continuing supervision by a health care provider.
 
	m.	"State of emergency" means a natural or man-made disaster or emergency for which a state of emergency has been declared by the President of the United States or the Governor or for which a state of emergency has been declared by a municipal emergency management coordinator.
 
	n.	"Health care provider" means a duly licensed health care provider or other health care provider deemed appropriate by the director.
 
	L.1989, c.261, s.3; amended 2004, c.130, s.111; 2006, c.103, s.89; 2013, c.221, s.1; 2019, c.37, s.1; 2020, c.17, s.2; 2020, c.23, s.1; 2025, c.279, s.1.

34:11B-4  Family leave; duration, frequency, payment, certification, denial.
 	4.	An employee of an employer in this State subject to the provisions of this act shall be entitled to a family leave of 12 weeks in any 24-month period upon advance notice to the employer in the manner specified by the provisions of sections 11 and 12 of P.L.2008, c.17 (C.43:21-39.2 and 43:21-39.3), unless the employer denies family leave to the employee pursuant to subsection h. of this section.
 
	a.	In the case of a family member who has a serious health condition, the leave may be taken intermittently when medically necessary, in the manner specified by the provisions of section 11 of P.L.2008, c.17 (C.43:21-39.2).
 
	b.	In the case of the foster care placement, birth or adoption of a healthy child, the leave may be taken intermittently in the manner specified by the provisions of paragraph (2) of subsection a. of section 12 of P.L.2008, c.17 (C.43:21-39.3).
 
	c.	Leave taken because of the birth or placement for adoption of a child may commence at any time within a year after the date of the foster care placement, birth or placement for adoption.
 
	d.	Family leave required by this act may be paid, unpaid, or a combination of paid and unpaid leave.  If an employer provides paid family leave for fewer than 12 workweeks, the additional weeks of leave added to attain the 12-workweek total required by this act may be unpaid. 
 
	e.	An employer may require that any period of family leave be supported by certification issued by a duly licensed health care provider or any other health care provider determined by the director to be capable of providing adequate certification as described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection, or where the leave is for an epidemic of a communicable disease, a known or suspected exposure to a communicable disease, or efforts to prevent spread of a communicable disease, certification issued by a school, place of care for children, public health authority, public official, or health care provider, as described in paragraph (3) of this subsection. 
 
	(1)	Where the certification is for the serious health condition of a family member of the employee, the certification shall be sufficient if it states: (a) the date on which the serious health condition commenced; (b) the probable duration of the condition; and (c) the medical facts within the provider's knowledge regarding the condition; 
 
	(2)	Where the certification is for the birth or placement of the child, the certification need only state the date of birth or date of placement, whichever is appropriate;
 
	(3)	Where the certification is for an epidemic of a communicable disease, a known or suspected exposure to the communicable disease, or efforts to prevent spread of the communicable disease, the certification shall be sufficient if it includes:
 
	(a)	for leave taken to provide in-home care or treatment of a child due to the closure of the school or place of care of the child of the employee, by order of a public official due to the epidemic or other public health emergency, the date on which the closure of the school or place of care of the child of the employee commenced and the reason for such closure;
 
	(b)	for leave taken due to a public health authority's issuance of a determination requiring or imposing responsive or prophylactic measures as a result of illness caused by an epidemic of a communicable disease or known or suspected exposure to the communicable disease because the presence in the community of a family member in need of care by the employee would jeopardize the health of others, the date of issuance of the determination and the probable duration of the determination; or
 
	(c)	for leave taken because a health care provider or public health authority recommends that a family member in need of care by the employee voluntarily undergo self-quarantine as a result of suspected exposure to a communicable disease because the presence in the community of that family member in need of care by the employee would jeopardize the health of others, the date of the recommendation, the probable duration of the condition, and the medical or other facts within the health care provider or public health authority's knowledge regarding the condition.
 
	In any case in which the employer has reason to doubt the validity of the certification provided pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection, the employer may require, at its own expense, that an employee obtain an opinion regarding the serious health condition from a second health care provider designated or approved, but not employed on a regular basis, by the employer. If the second opinion differs from the certification provided pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection, the employer may require, at its own expense, that the employee obtain the opinion of a third health care provider designated or approved jointly by the employer and the employee concerning the serious health condition.  The opinion of the third health care provider shall be considered to be final and shall be binding on the employer and the employee. 
 
	f.	In any case in which the necessity for leave under this act is foreseeable, based upon placement of a child into foster care an expected birth or placement of the child for adoption, the employee shall provide the employer with prior notice of the expected birth or placement of the child for adoption or foster care in the manner specified by the provisions of section 11 of P.L.2008, c.17 (C.43:21-39.2).
 
	g.	No employee shall, during any period of leave taken pursuant to this section, perform services on a full-time basis for any person for whom the employee did not provide those services immediately prior to commencement of the leave. 
 
	h.	An employer may deny family leave to the employee if:
 
	(1)	The employee is a salaried employee who is among the highest paid 5% of the employer's employees or the seven highest paid employees of the employer, whichever is greater;
 
	(2)	The denial is necessary to prevent substantial and grievous economic injury to the employer's operations; and
 
	(3)	The employer notifies the employee of its intent to deny the leave at the time the employer determines that the denial is necessary.
 
	The provisions of this subsection shall not apply when, in the event of a state of emergency declared by the Governor or when indicated to be needed by the Commissioner of Health or other public health authority, the family leave is for an epidemic of a communicable disease, a known or suspected exposure to a communicable disease, or efforts to prevent spread of a communicable disease.
 
	i.	In any case in which the leave has already commenced at the time of the notification pursuant to paragraph (3) of subsection h. of this section, the employee shall return to work within 10 working days of the date of notification.
 
	j.	In the case of leave taken due to an epidemic of a communicable disease, a known or suspected exposure to the communicable disease, or efforts to prevent spread of the communicable disease, the leave may be taken intermittently if: (1) the covered individual provides the employer with prior notice of the leave as soon as practicable; and (2) the covered individual makes a reasonable effort to schedule the leave so as not to unduly disrupt the operations of the employer and, if possible, provide the employer, prior to the commencement of the intermittent leave, with a regular schedule of the day or days of the week on which the intermittent leave will be taken.
 
	L.1989, c.261, s.4; amended 2019, c.37, s.2; 2020, c.17, s.3; 2020, c.23, s.2.

34:11B-5  Reduced leave schedule.
 	5.	An employee shall be entitled, at the option of the employee, to take this leave on a reduced leave schedule, except that:
 
	a.	The employee shall not be entitled to a reduced leave schedule for a period exceeding 12 consecutive months for any one period of leave; and
 
	b.	If the leave is taken upon the foster care placement, birth or adoption of a healthy child, the leave may be taken on an intermittent basis in the manner specified by the provisions of paragraph (2) of subsection a. of section 12 of P.L.2008, c.17 (C.43:21-39.3).
 
	The employee shall make a reasonable effort to schedule reduced leave so as not to disrupt unduly the operations of the employer and the employee shall provide the employer with prior notice of the care, medical treatment, or continuing supervision by a health care provider necessary due to a serious health condition of a family member, in a manner which is reasonable and practicable.  
 
	L.1989, c.261, s.5; amended 2019, c.37, s.3.

34:11B-6.    Employees to be informed of their rights and obligations  
     An employer shall display conspicuous notice of its employees' rights and obligations pursuant to the provisions of this act, and use other appropriate means to keep its employees so informed.  

    L.1989, c.261, s.6.  

34:11B-7.    Return from leave; conditions  
     An employee who exercises the right to family leave under section 4 of this act shall, upon the expiration of the leave, be entitled to be restored by the employer to the position held by the employee when the leave commenced or to an equivalent position of like seniority, status, employment benefits, pay, and other terms and conditions of employment. If during a leave provided by this act, the employer experiences a reduction in force or layoff and the employee would have lost his position had the employee not been on leave, as a result of the reduction in force or pursuant to the good faith operation of a bona fide layoff and recall system including a system under a collective bargaining agreement where applicable, the employee shall not be entitled to reinstatement to the former or an equivalent position.  The employee shall retain all rights under any applicable layoff and recall system, including a system under a collective bargaining agreement, as if the employee had not taken the leave.  

    L.1989, c.261, s.7.  

34:11B-8.    Continuation of health benefits during leave  
     a.   During a leave taken under section 4 of this act, the employer shall maintain coverage under any group health insurance policy, group subscriber contract or health care plan at the level and under the conditions coverage would have been provided if the employee had continued in employment continuously from the date the employee commenced the leave to the date the employee returns to work pursuant to section 7 of this act or the date on which the employee's coverage would have expired had the employee not been on leave, whichever is sooner.  

    b.   During a leave taken under section 4 of this act, the employer shall provide any employment benefits that are not required to be maintained pursuant to subsection a. of this section pursuant to the employer's policy with regard to employment benefits for employees on temporary leave from employment.  

    L.1989, c.261, s.8.  

34:11B-9.    Withholding of rights, benefits; discharge of employee, unlawful  
     a.   It shall be unlawful for any employer to interfere with, restrain or deny the exercise of, or the attempt to exercise, the rights provided under this act or to withhold the benefits provided for under this act.  

    b.   It shall be unlawful for an employer to discharge or discriminate against an individual for opposing a practice made unlawful by this act.

  

    c.   It shall be unlawful for a person to discharge or discriminate against an individual because the individual:

  

    (1)  has filed a charge, or has instituted or caused to be instituted a proceeding, under or related to this act;

  

    (2)  has given or is about to give information in connection with an inquiry or proceeding relating to a right provided under this act; or

  

    (3)  has testified or is about to testify in an inquiry or proceeding relating to a right provided under this act.

  

    L.1989, c.261, s.9.  

34:11B-10.   Penalty for violation by employer  
     The penalty for an employer violating this act is, in addition to other relief or affirmative action provided by law, not more than $2,000.00 for the first offense and not more than $5,000.00 for the second and each subsequent offense, to be recovered in a summary civil action in the name of the Attorney General and collected pursuant to "the penalty enforcement law," N.J.S.2A:58-1 et seq.  

    L.1989, c.261, s.10.  

34:11B-11.   Suits, complaints, permitted; punitive damages  
     Any person may initiate suit in Superior Court or file a complaint with the division on either an individual or class basis.  In addition to the remedies provided in section 16 of P.L.1945, c.169 (C.10:5-17), the aggrieved party may be awarded punitive damages in an amount not greater than $10,000.00 except that in the case of a class action or a director's complaint the total amount of punitive damages shall not exceed $500,000.00 or 1% of the net worth of the defendant, whichever is less. In determining the amount of punitive damages, the court or director shall consider, among other relevant factors, the amount of compensatory damages awarded, the amount of civil penalty to be paid by the employer, the frequency and persistence of the violation of this act by the employer, the resources of the employer, the number of persons adversely affected by the violation, and the extent to which the employer's failure to comply with this act was intentional.  

    L.1989, c.261, s.11.  

34:11B-12.   Award of attorneys' fees  
     In an action or complaint brought under this act, the prevailing party may be awarded reasonable attorneys' fees as part of the cost, provided however, that no attorneys' fees shall be awarded to the employer unless there is a determination that the action was brought in bad faith.  

    L.1989, c.261, s.12.  

34:11B-13.   Family leave in addition to temporary disability benefits  
     Family leave granted under this act is in addition to, and shall not abridge nor conflict with, any rights pursuant to the "Temporary Disability Benefits Law," P.L.1948, c.110 (C.43:21-25 et seq.).  

    L.1989, c.261, s.13.  

34:11B-14.   Benefits provided by collective bargaining agreement; reduction prohibited  
     No provision of this act shall be deemed to justify an employer in reducing employment benefits provided by the employer or required by a collective bargaining agreement which are in excess of those required by this act.  Nor shall any provision of this act, or any regulations promulgated to implement or enforce this act, be construed to prohibit the negotiation and provision through collective bargaining agreements of leave policies or benefit programs which provide benefits in excess of those required by this act.  This provision shall apply irrespective of the date that a collective bargaining agreement takes effect.  

    L.1989, c.261, s.14.  

34:11B-15.   Reports on impact, benefits of act  
     a.   The director shall provide reports to the Governor, the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the General Assembly, each of which reports shall describe the actual or potential costs, impact or benefits of this act on businesses which have:  

    (1)  Not less than 100 employees;

  

    (2)  Less than 100 employees but not less than 75 employees; and

  

    (3)  Less than 75 employees but not less than 50 employees; and

  

    (4)  Less than 50 employees.

  

    Each report shall also indicate the total number of employees in each of the categories indicated above, the total number of employees in each category to which the provisions of this act apply and the total number of employees from each category who utilize the benefits under this act.  

    b.   The first report shall be provided not later than the end of the second year following the effective date of this act.  The second report shall be provided not later than the end of the fourth year following the effective date of this act.  Thereafter, a report shall be provided on an annual basis. 

    L.1989, c.261, s.15.  

34:11B-16.   Rules, regulations  
     The director shall promulgate rules and regulations in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), deemed necessary for the implementation and enforcement of this act.  

    L.1989, c.261, s.16.  

34:11C-1  Short title.
 
 	1.	This act shall be known as the "New Jersey Security and Financial Empowerment Act" or "NJ SAFE Act."
 
	L.2013, c.82, s.1.

34:11C-2  Definitions relative to victims of domestic, sexual violence.
  
	2.	As used in this act:

	"Employee" means a person who is employed for at least 12 months by an employer, with respect to whom benefits are sought under this act, for not less than 1,000 base hours during the immediately preceding 12-month period. Any time, up to a maximum of 90 calendar days, during which a person is laid off or furloughed by an employer due to that employer curtailing operations because of a state of emergency declared after October 22, 2012, shall be regarded as time in which the person is employed for the purpose of determining eligibility for leave time under this act. In making the determination, the base hours per week during the layoff or furlough shall be deemed to be the same as the average number of hours worked per week during the rest of the 12-month period.
 
	"Employer" means a person or corporation, partnership, individual proprietorship, joint venture, firm or company, or other similar legal entity which engages the services of an employee and employs 25 or more employees for each working day during each of 20 or more calendar workweeks in the then current or immediately preceding calendar year.  "Employer" includes the State, any political subdivision thereof, and all public offices, agencies, boards, or bodies.
 
	"State of emergency" means a natural or man-made disaster or emergency for which a state of emergency has been declared by the President of the United States or the Governor, or for which a state of emergency has been declared by a municipal emergency management coordinator.
 
	L.2013, c.82, s.2; amended 2013, c.221, s.2.

34:11C-3  Regulations relative to unpaid leave for employees, family members affected by certain offenses.
 	3. a. Any employee of an employer in the State who was a victim of an incident of domestic violence as defined in section 3 of P.L.1991, c.261 (C.2C:25-19) or a sexually violent offense as defined in section 3 of P.L.1998, c.71 (C.30:4-27.26), or whose parent-in-law, sibling, grandparent, grandchild, child, parent, spouse, domestic partner, or civil union partner individual, or any other individual related by blood to the employee, and any other individual that the employee shows to have a close association with the employee which is the equivalent of a family relationship, was a victim shall be entitled to unpaid leave of no more than 20 days in one 12-month period, to be used in the 12-month period next following any incident of domestic violence or any sexually violent offense as provided in this section.  For purposes of this section, each incident of domestic violence or any sexually violent offense shall constitute a separate offense for which an employee is entitled to unpaid leave, provided that the employee has not exhausted the allotted 20 days for the 12-month period.  The unpaid leave may be taken intermittently in intervals of no less than one day, as needed for the purpose of engaging in any of the following activities as they relate to the incident of domestic violence or sexually violent offense:
 
	(1)	seeking medical attention for, or recovering from, physical or psychological injuries caused by domestic or sexual violence to the employee or the employee's parent-in-law, sibling, grandparent, grandchild, child, parent, spouse, domestic partner, or civil union partner individual, or any other individual related by blood to the employee, and any other individual that the employee shows to have a close association with the employee which is the equivalent of a family relationship;
 
	(2)	obtaining services from a victim services organization for the employee or the employee's parent-in-law, sibling, grandparent, grandchild, child, parent, spouse, domestic partner, or civil union partner individual, or any other individual related by blood to the employee, and any other individual that the employee shows to have a close association with the employee which is the equivalent;
 
	(3)	obtaining psychological or other counseling for the employee or the employee's parent-in-law, sibling, grandparent, grandchild, child, parent, spouse, domestic partner, or civil union partner individual, or any other individual related by blood to the employee, and any other individual that the employee shows to have a close association with the employee which is the equivalent of a family relationship;
 
	(4)	participating in safety planning, temporarily or permanently relocating, or taking other actions to increase the safety of the employee or the employee's parent-in-law, sibling, grandparent, grandchild, child, parent, spouse, domestic partner, or civil union partner individual, or any other individual related by blood to the employee, and any other individual that the employee shows to have a close association with the employee which is the equivalent of a family relationship, from future domestic or sexual violence or to ensure economic security;
 
	(5)	seeking legal assistance or remedies to ensure the health and safety of the employee or the employee's parent-in-law, sibling, grandparent, grandchild, child, parent, spouse, domestic partner, or civil union partner, individual, or any other individual related by blood to the employee, and any other individual that the employee shows to have a close association with the employee which is the equivalent of a family relationship, including preparing for, or participating in, any civil or criminal legal proceeding related to or derived from domestic or sexual violence; or
 
	(6)	attending, participating in, or preparing for a criminal or civil court proceeding relating to an incident of domestic or sexual violence of which the employee or the employee's parent-in-law, sibling, grandparent, grandchild, child, parent, spouse, domestic partner, or civil union partner, or any other individual related by blood to the employee, and any other individual that the employee shows to have a close association with the employee which is the equivalent of a family relationship, was a victim.
 
	An eligible employee may elect to use any of the accrued paid vacation leave, personal leave, or medical or sick leave of the employee, or any family temporary disability leave benefits provided pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1948, c.110 (C.43:21-27), during any part of the 20-day period of unpaid leave provided under this subsection.  In such case, any paid leave provided by the employer, and accrued pursuant to established policies of the employer, or family temporary disability leave benefits, shall run concurrently with the unpaid leave provided under this subsection and, accordingly, the employee shall receive pay pursuant to the employer's applicable paid leave policy, or family temporary disability leave benefits, during the period of otherwise unpaid leave.  If an employee requests leave for a reason covered by both this subsection and the "Family Leave Act," P.L.1989, c.261 (C.34:11B-1 et seq.) or the federal "Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993," Pub.L.103-3 (29 U.S.C. s.2601 et seq.), the leave shall count simultaneously against the employee's entitlement under each respective law.
 
	Leave granted under this section shall not conflict with any rights pursuant to the "Family Leave Act," P.L.1989, c.261 (C.34:11B-1 et seq.), the "Temporary Disability Benefits Law," P.L.1948, c.110 (C.43:21-25 et al.), or the federal "Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993," Pub.L.103-3 (29 U.S.C. s.2601 et seq.).
 
	b.	Prior to taking the leave provided for in this section, an employee shall, if the necessity for the leave is foreseeable, provide the employer with written notice of the need for the leave, unless an emergency or other unforeseen circumstances precludes prior notice. The notice shall be provided to the employer as far in advance as is reasonable and practical under the circumstances.  
 
	c.	Nothing contained in this act shall be construed to prohibit an employer from requiring that a period of leave provided pursuant to this section be supported by the employee with documentation of the domestic violence or sexually violent offense which is the basis for the leave. If the employer requires the documentation, the employee shall be regarded as having provided sufficient documentation if the employee provides one or more of the following:
 
	(1)	a domestic violence restraining order or other documentation of equitable relief issued by a court of competent jurisdiction;
 
	(2)	a letter or other written documentation from the county or municipal prosecutor documenting the domestic violence or sexually violent offense;
 
	(3)	documentation of the conviction of a person for the domestic violence or sexually violent offense;
 
	(4)	medical documentation of the domestic violence or sexually violent offense;
 
	(5)	certification from a certified Domestic Violence Specialist or the director of a designated domestic violence agency or Rape Crisis Center, that the employee or employee's parent-in-law, sibling, grandparent, grandchild, child, parent, spouse, domestic partner, or civil union partner, or any other individual related by blood to the employee, and any other individual that the employee shows to have a close association with the employee which is the equivalent of a family relationship, is a victim of domestic violence or a sexually violent offense; or
 
	(6)	other documentation or certification of the domestic violence or sexually violent offense provided by a social worker, member of the clergy, shelter worker, or other professional who has assisted the employee or employee's parent-in-law, sibling, grandparent, grandchild, child, parent, spouse, domestic partner, or civil union partner, or any other individual related by blood to the employee, and any other individual that the employee shows to have a close association with the employee which is the equivalent of a family relationship, in dealing with the domestic violence or sexually violent offenses.
 
	For the purposes of this subsection:
 
	"Certified Domestic Violence Specialist" means a person who has fulfilled the requirements of certification as a Domestic Violence Specialist established by the New Jersey Association of Domestic Violence Professionals; and "designated domestic violence agency" means a county-wide organization with a primary purpose to provide services to victims of domestic violence, and which provides services that conform to the core domestic violence services profile as defined by the Division of Child Protection and Permanency in the Department of Children and Families and is under contract with the division for the express purpose of providing the services.
 
	"Rape Crisis Center" means an office, institution, or center offering assistance to victims of sexual offenses through crisis intervention, medical and legal information, and follow-up counseling.
 
	d.	An employer shall display conspicuous notice of its employees' rights and obligations pursuant to the provisions of this act, in such form and in such manner as the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall prescribe, and use other appropriate means to keep its employees so informed.
 
	e.	No provision of this act shall be construed as requiring or permitting an employer to reduce employment benefits provided by the employer or required by a collective bargaining agreement which are in excess of those required by this act. Nor shall any provision of this act be construed to prohibit the negotiation and provision through collective bargaining agreements of leave policies or benefit programs which provide benefits in excess of those required by this act. This provision shall apply irrespective of the date that a collective bargaining agreement takes effect.
 
	Nothing contained in this act shall be construed as permitting an employer to:
 
	(1)	rescind or reduce any employment benefit accrued prior to the date on which the leave taken pursuant to this act commenced; or
 
	(2)	rescind or reduce any employment benefit, unless the rescission or reduction of the benefit is based on changes that would have occurred if an employee continued to work without taking the leave provided pursuant to this section.
 
	f.	All information provided to an employer pursuant to subsection c. of this section, and any information regarding a leave taken pursuant to this section and any failure of an employee to return to work, shall be retained in the strictest confidentiality, unless the disclosure is voluntarily authorized in writing by the employee or is required by a federal or State law, rule, or regulation.
 
	L.2013, c.82, s.3; amended 2019, c.37, s.4.

34:11C-4  Certain actions by employer prohibited.
 
 	4.	An employer shall not discharge, harass or otherwise discriminate or retaliate or threaten to discharge, harass or otherwise discriminate or retaliate against an employee with respect to the compensation, terms, conditions or privileges of employment on the basis that the employee took or requested any leave to which the employee was entitled pursuant to section 3 of this act or on the basis that the employee refused to authorize the release of information deemed confidential pursuant to subsection f. of section 3 of this act.
 
	L.2013, c.82, s.4.

34:11C-5  Violations; penalties.
  
	5. a. Upon a violation of any of the provisions of section 3 or section 4 of this act, an employee or former employee may institute a civil action in the Superior Court for relief. All remedies available in common law tort actions shall be available to a prevailing plaintiff. The court may also order any or all of the following relief:
 
	(1)	an assessment of a civil fine of not less than $1,000 and not more than $2,000 for the first violation of any of the provisions of section 3 or section 4 of this act and not more than $5,000 for each subsequent violation;
 
	(2)	an injunction to restrain the continued violation of any of the provisions of section 3 or section 4 of this act;
 
	(3)	reinstatement of the employee to the same position or to a position equivalent to that which the employee held prior to unlawful discharge or retaliatory action;
 
	(4)	reinstatement of full fringe benefits and seniority rights;
 
	(5)	Compensation for any lost wages, benefits and other remuneration;
 
	(6)	payment of reasonable costs and attorney's fees.
 
	b.	An action brought under this section shall be commenced within one year of the date of the alleged violation.
 
	c.	A private cause of action provided for in this section shall be the sole remedy for a violation of this act.
 
	L.2013, c.82, s.5.

34:11D-1  Definitions relative to earned sick leave.
 	1.	For the purposes of this act:

	"Benefit year" means the period of 12 consecutive months established by an employer in which an employee shall accrue and use earned sick leave as provided pursuant to section 2 of this act, provided that once the starting date of the benefit year is established by the employer it shall not be changed unless the employer notifies the commissioner of the change in accordance with regulations promulgated pursuant to this act.  The commissioner shall impose a benefit year on any employer that the commissioner determines is changing the benefit year at times or in ways that prevent the accrual or use of earned sick leave by an employee.
 
	"Certified Domestic Violence Specialist" means a person who has fulfilled the requirements of certification as a Domestic Violence Specialist established by the New Jersey Association of Domestic Violence Professionals.
 
	"Child" means a biological, adopted, or foster child, stepchild or legal ward of an employee, child of a domestic partner or civil union partner of the employee.
 
	"Civil union" means a civil union as defined in section 2 of P.L.2006, c.103 (C.37:1-29).
 
	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	"Department" means the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	"Designated domestic violence agency" means a county-wide organization with a primary purpose to provide services to victims of domestic violence, and which provides services that conform to the core domestic violence services profile as defined by the Division of Child Protection and Permanency in the Department of Children and Families and is under contract with the division for the express purpose of providing the services.
 
	"Domestic or sexual violence" means stalking, any sexually violent offense, as defined in section 3 of P.L.1998, c.71 (C.30:4-27.26), or domestic violence as defined in section 3 of P.L.1991, c.261 (C.2C:25-19) and section 1 of P.L.2003, c.41 (C.17:29B-16).
 
	"Domestic partner" means a domestic partner as defined in section 3 of P.L.2003, c.246 (C.26:8A-3).
 
	"Employee" means an individual engaged in service to an employer in the business of the employer for compensation. "Employee" does not include an employee performing service in the construction industry that is under contract pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement, or a per diem health care employee, or a public employee who is provided with sick leave with full pay pursuant to any other law, rule, or regulation of this State.
 
	"Employer" means any person, firm, business, educational institution, nonprofit agency, corporation, limited liability company or other entity that employs employees in the State, including a temporary help service firm.  In the case of a temporary help service firm placing an employee with client firms, earned sick leave shall accrue on the basis of the total time worked on assignment with the temporary help service firm, not separately for each client firm to which the employee is assigned.  "Employer" does not include a public employer that is required to provide its employees with sick leave with full pay pursuant to any other law, rule or regulation of this State.
 
	"Family member" means a child, grandchild, sibling, spouse, domestic partner, civil union partner, parent, or grandparent of an employee, or a spouse, domestic partner, or civil union partner of a parent or grandparent of the employee, or a sibling of a spouse, domestic partner, or civil union partner of the employee, or any other individual related by blood to the employee or whose close association with the employee is the equivalent of a family relationship.
 
	"Health care professional" means any person licensed under federal, State, or local law, or the laws of a foreign nation, to provide health care services, or any other person who has been authorized to provide health care by a licensed health care professional, including but not limited to doctors, nurses and emergency room personnel.
 
	"Parent" means a biological, adoptive, or foster parent, stepparent, or legal guardian of an employee or of the employee's spouse, domestic partner, or civil union partner, or a person who stood in loco parentis of the employee or the employee's spouse, domestic partner, or civil union partner when the employee, spouse or partner was a minor child.
 
	"Per diem health care employee" means any: 
 
	(1)	health care professional licensed in the State of New Jersey employed by a health care facility licensed by the New Jersey Department of Health; 
 
	(2)	any individual that is in the process of applying to the New Jersey Division of Consumer Affairs for a license to provide health care services who is employed by a health care facility licensed by the New Jersey Department of Health; or 
 
	(3)	any first aid, rescue or ambulance squad member employed by a hospital system.
 
	An employee listed in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of this definition shall be considered a per diem health care employee if that employee:
 
	(1)	works on an as-needed basis to supplement a health care employee, or to replace or substitute for a temporarily absent health care employee;
 
	(2)	works only when the employee indicates that the employee is available to work, and has no obligation to work when the employee does not indicate availability; and
 
	(3)	either:
 
	(a)	has the opportunity for full time or part time employment in their scope of practice under that healthcare provider which offers paid time off benefits greater in length than provided under this act under the terms of employment; or
 
	(b)	has waived earned sick leave benefits as provided under this act under terms of employment for alternative benefits or consideration.
 
	"Per diem health care employee" shall not include any individual who is certified as a homemaker-home health aide.
 
	"Retaliatory personnel action" means denial of any right guaranteed under this act and any threat, discharge, including a constructive discharge, suspension, demotion, unfavorable reassignment, refusal to promote, disciplinary action, sanction, reduction of work hours, reporting or threatening to report the actual or suspected immigrant status of an employee or the employee's family, or any other adverse action against an employee.
 
	"Sibling" means a biological, foster, or adopted sibling of an employee.
 
	"Spouse" means a husband or wife.
 
	L.2018, c.10, s.1.

34:11D-2  Provision of earned sick leave by employer.
 	2. a. Each employer shall provide earned sick leave to each employee working for the employer in the State. For every 30 hours worked, the employee shall accrue one hour of earned sick leave, except that an employer may provide an employee with the full complement of earned sick leave for a benefit year, as required under this section, on the first day of each benefit year in accordance with subsection c. or subsection d. of section 3 of this act.  The employer shall not be required to permit the employee to accrue or use in any benefit year, or carry forward from one benefit year to the next, more than 40 hours of earned sick leave.  Unless the employee has accrued earned sick leave prior to the effective date of this act, the earned sick leave shall begin to accrue on the effective date of this act for any employee who is hired and commences employment before the effective date of this act and the employee shall be eligible to use the earned sick leave beginning on the 120th calendar day after the employee commences employment, and if the employment commences after the effective date of this act, the earned sick leave shall begin to accrue upon the date that employment commences and the employee shall be eligible to use the earned sick leave beginning on the 120th calendar day after the employee commences employment, unless the employer agrees to an earlier date.  The employee may subsequently use earned sick leave as soon as it is accrued.
 
	b.	An employer shall be in compliance with this section if the employer offers paid time off, which is fully paid and shall include, but is not limited to personal days, vacation days, and sick days, and may be used for the purposes of section 3 of this act in the manner provided by this act, and is accrued at a rate equal to or greater than the rate described in this section.
 
	c.	The employer shall pay the employee for earned sick leave at the same rate of pay with the same benefits as the employee normally earns, except that the pay rate shall not be less than the minimum wage required for the employee pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a4).
 
	d.	Upon the mutual consent of the employee and employer, an employee may voluntarily choose to work additional hours or shifts during the same or following pay period, in lieu of hours or shifts missed, but shall not be required to work additional hours or shifts or use accrued earned sick leave.  An employer may not require, as a condition of an employee's using earned sick leave, that the employee search for or find a replacement worker to cover the hours during which the employee is using earned sick leave.
 
	e.	If an employee is transferred to a separate division, entity, or location, but remains employed by the same employer, then the employee shall be entitled to all earned sick leave accrued at the prior division, entity, or location, and shall be entitled to use the accrued earned sick leave as provided in this act.  If an employee is terminated, laid off, furloughed, or otherwise separated from employment with the employer, any unused accrued earned sick leave shall be reinstated upon the re-hiring or reinstatement of the employee to that employment, within six months of termination, being laid off or furloughed, or separation, and prior employment with the employer shall be counted towards meeting the eligibility requirements set forth in this section.  When a different employer succeeds or takes the place of an existing employer, all employees of the original employer who remain employed by the successor employer are entitled to all of the earned sick leave they accrued when employed by the original employer, and are entitled to use the earned sick leave previously accrued immediately.
 
	f.	An employer may choose the increments in which its employees may use earned sick leave, provided that the largest increment of earned sick leave that an employee may be required to use for each shift for which earned sick leave is used shall be the number of hours the employee was scheduled to work during that shift.
 
	L.2018, c.10, s.2.

34:11D-3  Permitted usage of earned sick leave.
 	3. a. An employer shall permit an employee to use the earned sick leave accrued pursuant to this act for any of the following:
 
	(1)	time needed for diagnosis, care, or treatment of, or recovery from, an employee's mental or physical illness, injury or other adverse health condition, or for preventive medical care for the employee;
 
	(2)	time needed for the employee to aid or care for a family member of the employee during diagnosis, care, or treatment of, or recovery from, the family member's mental or physical illness, injury or other adverse health condition, or during preventive medical care for the family member;
 
	(3)	absence necessary due to circumstances resulting from the employee, or a family member of the employee, being a victim of domestic or sexual violence, if the leave is to allow the employee to obtain for the employee or the family member: medical attention needed to recover from physical or psychological injury or disability caused by domestic or sexual violence; services from a designated domestic violence agency or other victim services organization; psychological or other counseling; relocation; or legal services, including obtaining a restraining order or preparing for, or participating in, any civil or criminal legal proceeding related to the domestic or sexual violence;
 
	(4)	time during which the employee is not able to work because of:
 
	(a)	a closure of the employee's workplace, or the school or place of care of a child of the employee by order of a public official or because of a state of emergency declared by the Governor, due to an epidemic or other public health emergency; 
 
	(b)	the declaration of a state of emergency by the Governor, or the issuance by a  health care provider or the Commissioner of Health or other public health authority of a determination that the presence in the community of the employee, or a member of the employee's family in need of care by the employee, would jeopardize the health of others; 
 
	(c)	during a state of emergency declared by the Governor, or upon the recommendation, direction, or order of a healthcare provider or the Commissioner of Health or other authorized public official, the employee undergoes isolation or quarantine, or cares for a family member in quarantine, as a result of suspected exposure to a communicable disease and a finding by the provider or authority that the presence in the community of the employee or family member would jeopardize the health of others; or
 
	(5)	time needed by the employee in connection with a child of the employee to attend a school-related conference, meeting, function or other event requested or required by a school administrator, teacher, or other professional staff member responsible for the child's education, or to attend a meeting regarding care provided to the child in connection with the child's health conditions or disability.
 
	b.	If an employee's need to use earned sick leave is foreseeable, an employer may require advance notice, not to exceed seven calendar days prior to the date the leave is to begin, of the intention to use the leave and its expected duration, and shall make a reasonable effort to schedule the use of earned sick leave in a manner that does not unduly disrupt the operations of the employer. If the reason for the leave is not foreseeable, an employer may require an employee to give notice of the intention as soon as practicable, if the employer has notified the employee of this requirement.  Employers may prohibit employees from using foreseeable earned sick leave on certain dates, and require reasonable documentation if sick leave that is not foreseeable is used during those dates.  For earned sick leave of three or more consecutive days, an employer may require reasonable documentation that the leave is being taken for the purpose permitted under subsection a. of this section. If the leave is permitted under paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection a. of this section, documentation signed by a health care professional who is treating the employee or the family member of the employee indicating the need for the leave and, if possible, number of days of leave, shall be considered reasonable documentation.  If the leave is permitted under paragraph (3) of subsection a. of this section because of domestic or sexual violence, any of the following shall be considered reasonable documentation of the domestic or sexual violence: medical documentation; a law enforcement agency record or report; a court order; documentation that the perpetrator of the domestic or sexual violence has been convicted of a domestic or sexual violence offense; certification from a certified Domestic Violence Specialist or a representative of a designated domestic violence agency or other victim services organization; or other documentation or certification provided by a social worker, counselor, member of the clergy, shelter worker, health care professional, attorney, or other professional who has assisted the employee or family member in dealing with the domestic or sexual violence.  If the leave is permitted under paragraph (4) of subsection a. of this section, a copy of the order of the public official or the determination by the health authority shall be considered reasonable documentation. 
 
	c.	Nothing in this act shall be deemed to require an employer to provide earned sick leave for an employee's leave for purposes other than those identified in this section, or prohibit the employer from taking disciplinary action against an employee who uses earned sick leave for purposes other than those identified in this section. An employer may provide an offer to an employee for a payment of unused earned sick leave in the final month of the employer's benefit year.  The employee shall choose, no later than 10 calendar days from the date of the employer's offer, whether to accept a payment or decline a payment.  If the employee agrees to receive a payment, the employee shall choose a payment for the full amount of unused earned sick leave or for 50 percent of the amount of unused earned sick leave. The payment amount shall be based on the same rate of pay that the employee earns at the time of the payment.  If the employee declines a payment for unused earned sick leave, or agrees to a payment for 50 percent of the amount of unused sick leave, the employee shall be entitled to carry forward any unused or unpaid earned sick leave to the proceeding benefit year as provided pursuant to subsection a. of section 2 of this act.  If the employee agrees to a payment for the full amount of unused earned sick leave, the employee shall not be entitled to carry forward any earned sick leave to the proceeding benefit year pursuant to subsection a. of section 2 of this act.
 
	d.	If an employer foregoes the accrual process for earned sick leave hours pursuant to subsection a. of section 2 of this act and provides an employee with the full complement of earned sick leave for a benefit year on the first day of each benefit year, then the employer shall either provide to the employee a payment for the full amount of unused earned sick leave in the final month of the employer's benefit year or carry forward any unused sick leave to the next benefit year.  The employer may pay the employee the full amount of unused earned sick leave in the final month of a benefit year pursuant to this subsection only if the employer forgoes, with respect to that employee, the accrual process for earned sick leave during the next benefit year.  Unless an employer policy or collective bargaining agreement provides for the payment of accrued earned sick leave upon termination, resignation, retirement or other separation from employment, an employee shall not be entitled under this section to payment of unused earned sick leave upon the separation from employment. 
 
	e.	Any information an employer possesses regarding the health of an employee or any family member of the employee or domestic or sexual violence affecting an employee or employee's family member shall be treated as confidential and not disclosed except to the affected employee or with the written permission of the affected employee.
 
	L.2018, c.10, s.3; amended 2020, c.17, s.1.

34:11D-4  Retaliation, discrimination prohibited.
  	4. a. No employer shall take retaliatory personnel action or discriminate against an employee because the employee requests or uses earned sick leave either in accordance with this act or the employer's own earned sick leave policy, as the case may be, or files a complaint with the commissioner alleging the employer's violation of any provision of this act, or informs any other person of their rights under this act.  No employer shall count earned sick leave taken under this act as an absence that may result in the employee being subject to discipline, discharge, demotion, suspension, a loss or reduction of pay, or any other adverse action.
 
	b.	There shall be a rebuttable presumption of an unlawful retaliatory personnel action under this section whenever an employer takes adverse action against an employee within 90 days of when that employee: files a complaint with the department or a court alleging a violation of any provision of this section; informs any person about an employer's alleged violation of this section; cooperates with the department or other persons in the investigation or prosecution of any alleged violation of this section; opposes any policy, practice, or act that is unlawful under this section; or informs any person of his or her rights under this section.
 
	c.	Protections of this section shall apply to any person who mistakenly but in good faith alleges violations of this act.
 
	d.	Any violator of the provisions of this section shall be subject to relevant penalties and remedies provided by the "New Jersey State Wage and Hour Law," P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a et seq.), including the penalties and remedies provided by section 25 of that act (C.34:11-56a24), and relevant penalties and remedies provided by section 10 of P.L.1999, c.90 (C.2C:40A-2), for discharge or other discrimination.
 
	L.2018, c.10, s.4.

34:11D-5  Violations; remedies, penalties, other measures.
 	5.	Any failure of an employer to make available or pay earned sick leave as required by this act, or any other violation of this act, shall be regarded as a failure to meet the wage payment requirements of the "New Jersey State Wage and Hour Law," P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a et seq.), or other violation of that act, as the case may be, and remedies, penalties, and other measures provided by that act, R.S.34:11-58, and section 10 of P.L.1999, c.90 (C.2C:40A-2) for failure to pay wages or other violations of that act shall be applicable, including, but not limited to, penalties provided pursuant to sections 23 and 25 of that act (C.34:11-56a22 and 34:11-56a24), and civil actions by employees pursuant to section 26 of that act (C.34:11-56a25), except that an award to an employee in a civil act shall include, in addition to the amount provided pursuant to section 26 of that act (C.34:11-56a25), any actual damages suffered by the employee as the result of the violation plus an equal amount of liquidated damages.
 
	L.2018, c.10, s.5.

34:11D-6  Retention of records, access.
  	6.	Employers shall retain records documenting hours worked by employees and earned sick leave taken by employees, for a period of five years, and shall, upon demand, allow the department access to those records to monitor compliance with the requirements of this act.  If an employee makes a claim that the employer has failed to provide earned sick leave required by this act and the employer has not maintained or retained adequate records documenting hours worked by the employee and earned sick leave taken by the employee or does not allow the department access to the records, it shall be presumed that the employer has failed to provide the earned sick leave, absent clear and convincing evidence otherwise.  In addition, the penalties provided by the "New Jersey State Wage and Hour Law," P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a et seq.) for violations of the requirements of that act regarding the maintaining and disclosure of records shall apply to violations of the requirements of this section.
 
	L.2018, c.10, s.6.

34:11D-7  Notification to employees.
 	7. a. Employers shall provide notification, in a form issued by the commissioner, to employees of their rights under this act, including the amount of earned sick leave to which they are entitled and the terms of its use, and remedies provided by this act to employees if an employer fails to provide the required benefits or retaliates against employees exercising their rights under this act.  Each covered employer shall conspicuously post the notification in a place or places accessible to all employees in each of the employer's workplaces.  The employer shall also provide each employee employed by the employer with a written copy of the notification: not later than 30 days after the form of the notification is issued; at the time of the employee's hiring, if the employee is hired after the issuance; and at any time, when first requested by the employee. The commissioner shall make the notifications available in English, in Spanish, and any other language that the commissioner determines is the first language of a significant number of workers in the State and the employer shall use the notification in English, Spanish or any other language for which the commissioner has provided notifications and which is the first language of a majority of the employer's workforce.
 
	b.	The commissioner shall advise any employee who files a complaint pursuant to this section and is covered by a collective bargaining agreement, that if the agreement provides for earned sick leave, the employee may have a right to pursue a grievance under the terms of the agreement.
 
	L.2018, c.10, s.7.

34:11D-8  Provisions preemptive; construction of act.
  	8. a. The governing body of a county or municipality shall not, after the effective date of this act, adopt any ordinance, resolution, law, rule, or regulation regarding earned sick leave.  The provisions of this act shall preempt any ordinance, resolution, law, rule, or regulation regarding earned sick leave adopted by the governing body of a county or municipality.
 
	b.	No provision of this act, or any regulations promulgated to implement or enforce this act, shall be construed as:
 
	(1)	requiring an employer to reduce, or justifying an employer in reducing, rights or benefits provided by the employer pursuant to an employer policy or collective bargaining agreement which are more favorable to employees than those required by this act or which provide rights or benefits to employees not covered by this act;
 
	(2)	preventing or prohibiting the employer from agreeing, through a collective bargaining agreement or employer policy, to provide rights or benefits which are more favorable to employees than those required by this act or to provide rights or benefits to employees not covered by this act; 
 
	(3)	prohibiting an employer from establishing a policy whereby an employee may donate unused accrued earned sick leave to another employee or other employees; or
 
	(4)	superseding any law providing collective bargaining rights for employees, or in any way reducing, diminishing, or adversely affecting those collective bargaining rights, or in any way reducing, diminishing, or affecting the obligations of employers under those laws.
 
	Employees or employee representatives may waive the rights or benefits provided under this act during the negotiation of a collective bargaining agreement.
 
	c.	With respect to employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement in effect at the time of the effective date of this act, no provision of this act shall apply until the stated expiration of the collective bargaining agreement.
 
	L.2018, c.10, s.8.

34:11D-9  Severability.
 	9.	The provisions of this act shall be deemed to be severable and if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or other part of this act is declared to be unconstitutional, or the applicability thereof to any person is held invalid, the remainder of this act shall not thereby be deemed to be unconstitutional or invalid.
 
	L.2018, c.10, s.9.

34:11D-10  Development of multilingual outreach program.
 	10.	The commissioner shall develop and implement a multilingual outreach program to inform employees, parents, and persons under the care of health care providers about the availability of earned paid sick leave pursuant to this act.  The program shall include the distribution of written materials in English, Spanish and any language that is the primary language of 10 percent or more of the registered voters in the State to all child care and elder care providers, domestic violence shelters, schools, hospitals, community health centers and other healthcare providers.  The commissioner shall, during each calendar year, allocate not less than $500,000 to the program, which shall be regarded as a cost of administration of temporary disability and family temporary disability benefits and be charged to the administration account of the State disability benefit fund, except that the allocation made pursuant to this subsection shall not result in the total amount credited to administrative costs exceeding the maximum amount permitted pursuant to subsection (a) of section 22 of P.L.1948, c.110 (C.43:21-46).
 
	L.2018, c.10, s.10.

34:11D-11  Rules, regulations.
 	11.	The commissioner shall adopt rules and regulations pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) to effectuate the purposes of this act.
 
	L.2018, c.10, s.11.

34:11D-12  Employer prohibited from terminating, penalizing employee during times of emergency.
	1.	An employer shall not, during the Public Health Emergency and State of Emergency declared by the Governor in Executive Order 103 of 2020 concerning the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic, terminate or otherwise penalize an employee if the employee requests or takes time off from work based on the written or electronically transmitted recommendation of a medical professional licensed in New Jersey that the employee take that time off for a specified period of time because the employee has, or is likely to have, an infectious disease, as defined in section 2 of P.L.2005, c.222 (C.26:13-2), which may infect others at the employee's workplace. The employer shall not, following that specified period of time, refuse to reinstate the employee to employment in the position held when the leave commenced with no reduction in seniority, status, employment benefits, pay or other terms and conditions of employment.
 
	L.2020, c.9, s.1.

34:11D-13  Violations, penalties.
  	2.	If an employer violates the provisions of section 1 of this act, the employee affected by the violation may file a written complaint with the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development or initiate an action in a court of competent jurisdiction, to seek reinstatement to employment.  If the employer is found by a preponderance of the evidence to be in violation, the court or the commissioner shall order the reinstatement the employee to the position previously held with no reduction in seniority, status, employment benefits, pay, and other terms and conditions of employment and fine the employer $2,500 for each violation of section 1 of this act. 
 
	L.2020, c.9, s.2.

34:11E-1  Short title.
	1.	This act shall be known as the "New Jersey First Responders Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Protection Act.”
 
L.2025, c.272, s.1.

34:11E-2  Definitions.
	2.	As used in P.L.2025, c.272 (C.34:11E-1 et al.):
 
	"Employee" means a first responder holding a position of paid employment with an employer.
 
	"Employer" means a public entity that employs paid first responders.
 
	“First responder” means a law enforcement officer; paid firefighter; paid member of a duly incorporated first aid, emergency, ambulance, or rescue squad association; paid emergency medical technician; paid paramedic; or paid 9-1-1 first responder dispatcher.
 
	“Law enforcement officer” means a person employed as a permanent full-time member of any federal, State, county, or municipal law enforcement agency, department, or division of those governments who is statutorily empowered to act for the detection, investigation, arrest, conviction, detention, or rehabilitation of persons violating the criminal laws of this State or of the United States and statutorily required to successfully complete a training course approved by the Police Training Commission pursuant to P.L.1961, c.56 (C.52:17B-66 et seq.), or certified by the commission as being substantially equivalent to an approved course.
 
	“Mental health professional” means a person who maintains a clinical practice and has been approved by an employer and employee and is a professional licensed by the Alcohol and Drug Counselor Committee, the State Board of Creative Arts and Activities Therapies, the State Board of Marriage and Family Therapy Examiners, the State Board of Medical Examiners, the Professional Counselor Examiners Committee, the Certified Psychoanalysts Advisory Committee, the State Board of Psychological Examiners, the State Board of Social Work Examiners, the New Jersey Board of Nursing, or any other entity created hereafter under Title 45 to license or otherwise regulate a mental health profession.
 
	 “Public entity” means the State, any county, municipality, district, public authority, public agency, and any other political subdivision or public body in the State.
 
L.2025, c.272, s.2.

34:11E-3  Protections against discrimination, retaliation related to leave, qualifying diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder.
	3. a. An employer shall not discharge, harass, or otherwise discriminate or retaliate or threaten to discharge, harass, or otherwise discriminate or retaliate against an employee with respect to the compensation, terms, conditions, duties, or privileges of employment on the basis that the employee took or requested any leave related to a qualifying diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder.  Following a period of leave related to a qualifying diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder, an employer shall reinstate an employee whose fitness to return to work has been documented by a mental health professional to the position and duties held by the employee prior to the leave.
 
	b.	A diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder is qualified under subsection a. of this section if:
 
	(1)	the diagnosis is memorialized in an order of a judge of the Division of Workers' Compensation concerning the employer and employee and the traumatic injury or exposure which makes up the basis for the claim, upon motion or after a plenary trial or by stipulation of the employer and employee; or
 
	(2) the diagnosis is the result of an examination of the employee by a mental health professional who reports the diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder and determines that it arose:
 
	(a) as a result of the employee experiencing or witnessing a traumatic event during and within the scope of the performance of regular or assigned duties of the employee; or
 
	(b) due to vicarious trauma experienced by the employee as a result of the performance of regular or assigned duties of the employee. 
 
L.2025, c.272, s.3.

34:11E-4  Division of Workers’ Compensation action, relief, upon violation of protections, post-traumatic stress disorder.
	4. a. An employee or former employee may institute an action in the Division of Workers' Compensation for relief upon a violation of any of the provisions of section 3 of P.L.2025, c.272 (C.34:11E-3).  All remedies available in section 1 of P.L.2008, c.93 (C.34:15-28.2) shall be available to a prevailing plaintiff and may be ordered by a judge of compensation upon a violation of any of the provisions of section 3 of P.L.2025, c.272 (C.34:11E-3). The court may also order any or all of the following relief: 
 
	(1)	an assessment of a civil fine of $5,000 for the first violation of any of the provisions of section 3 of P.L.2025, c.272 (C.34:11E-3) and $10,000 for each subsequent violation; 
 
	(2)	an injunction to restrain the continued violation of any of the provisions of section 3 of P.L.2025, c.272 (C.34:11E-3); 
 
	(3)	reinstatement of the employee to the same position or to a position equivalent to that which the employee held prior to unlawful discharge or retaliatory action; 
 
	(4)	reinstatement of full fringe benefits and seniority rights; 
 
	(5)	compensation for any lost wages, benefits, and other remuneration; or
 
	(6)	payment of reasonable costs and attorney's fees. 
 
	b.	An action brought under this section shall commence within one year of the date of the alleged violation. 
 
	c.	A private cause of action provided for in this section shall be the sole remedy for a violation of P.L.2025, c.272 (C.34:11E-1 et al.) and shall be limited to the remedies provided in section 1 of P.L.1966, c.157 (C.34:15-39.1).
 
L.2025, c.272, s.4.

34:12-1.  Combinations to persuade others as to employment not unlawful
    It shall not be unlawful for any two or more persons to unite, combine or bind themselves by oath, covenant, agreement, alliance or otherwise, to persuade, advise or encourage, by peaceable means, any person or persons to enter into any combination for or against leaving or entering into the employment of any person.

34:12-2.  Employer shall not require renouncement of membership in society or brotherhood as condition of employment
    No corporation doing business in this state shall, directly or indirectly, require, as a condition of employment of labor in any branch of its service, that any applicants for employment shall, either individually or collectively, be required to sign any paper, document, or writing of any description, by which an obligation is made or implied of renouncing existing membership in an organization, society or brotherhood, or by which a promise is given of not joining such organization at any future time.

34:12-3.  Employer shall not require employees to renounce membership in or  refrain from joining society or brotherhood
    No corporation doing business in this state shall require directly or indirectly that any individuals shall either individually or collectively, in any manner promise to renounce existing membership in a lodge, brotherhood, or labor organization of any kind, or promise to refrain from joining any such lodge, brotherhood, or organization at any future time.

34:12-4.  Penalty
    Any violation of either section 34:12-2 or section 34:12-3 of this title shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or three months' imprisonment, or both, as the court may direct.

34:12-5.  Contracts against membership in labor unions or employers' organizations void
    Every contract, agreement, promise or undertaking whether written or oral, express or implied between an employer and employee or prospective employee whereby either party promises or agrees not to join, become or remain a member of any organization or combination of employers or employees, or to withdraw from an employment relation in the event that he join, become or remain a member of any such organization or combination is declared to be contrary to public policy and wholly void and shall not provide or afford any basis for legal or equitable relief in any court.

34:13-1.  Appointment of arbitrators
    Whenever any grievance or dispute of any nature shall arise between any employer, joint stock association, company or corporation engaged in manufacturing, hereinafter in this chapter termed  "employer" , and his, their or its employees, it shall be lawful by the mutual consent of the parties to submit the same in writing to a board of arbitrators for hearing and settlement.  The board shall be composed of five persons.  A majority of the employees, at a meeting duly held for that purpose, shall have the power to designate two arbitrators;  the employer shall have the power to designate two arbitrators;  and the four arbitrators so designated shall designate a fifth person as arbitrator, who shall be the chairman of the board.

34:13-2.  Oath of arbitrators
    Each arbitrator shall, before he proceeds to the business of the arbitration, take and subscribe an oath, to be taken and subscribed before any officer authorized to administer the same, faithfully and impartially to hear and examine the grievance in dispute or question, and to discharge his duties as such arbitrator according to the best of his skill and understanding.

34:13-3.  Board to select secretary and to give notice of time and place of  hearing
    When the board is ready for the transaction of business, it shall select one  of its number to act as secretary, whose duty it shall be, when ordered by the  board, to give at least two days' notice in writing to the parties to the  dispute of the time and place of hearing the same, which notice may be served  personally on the parties or by fixing the same to the principal outer door or  gate of the establishment of the employer.  Where for any reason, service  cannot be so made the notice may be served as the board shall direct.

34:13-4.  Subpoenas for production of books;  attendance of witnesses; penalty
    It shall be lawful for the clerk of any court of record within the county wherein such board of arbitrators may be, to issue subpoenas for the production  of books and papers and for the attendance of witnesses before the board.  If  any such witness, when so subpoenaed, shall not appear in accordance with the  command of such writ, or, if appearing, shall refuse to be sworn and give  evidence, he shall be liable to the same fines and penalties as he would be had  such default or refusal been committed in a court of record in this State.

     Amended by L.1953, c. 33, p. 592, s. 45.

34:13-5.  Proceedings before board
    Witnesses shall be examined on oath or affirmation which oath or affirmation  the chairman of the board is empowered to administer.  A majority of the board  may provide for the examination and investigation of books, documents and  accounts pertaining to the matters in dispute and belonging to either party.   The board may unanimously direct that instead of producing books, papers and  accounts before the board, an accountant agreed upon by the entire board may be  appointed to examine such books, papers and accounts, and such accountant shall  be sworn well and truly to examine such books, documents and accounts as may be  presented to him, and to report the result of his examination in writing.   Before the examination, the information desired and required by the board  shall be plainly stated in writing and presented to the accountant, which  statement shall be signed by the board. Attorneys at law or other agents of  either party to the dispute shall not be permitted to appear or take part in  any of the proceedings of the board, but the same shall be, as far as possible, voluntary.

34:13-6.  Rules
    The board may make and enforce rules for its government and the transaction  of business before it and fix its sessions and adjournments, and shall hear and  examine such proof as may be given relative to the matter in dispute.

34:13-7.  Decision of board;  time, requisites and effect
    After the matter in dispute has been fully heard, the board, or a majority thereof, shall, within five days, render a decision thereon, which decision shall be reduced to writing, signed by the arbitrators agreeing thereto, and shall set forth such details as will clearly show the points considered by the board and the nature of the decision.  The decision shall be a final settlement  of the matters referred to the board, and shall be binding and conclusive  between the parties.  It shall be executed in three parts, one copy of which  shall be given to each of the parties to the dispute, and the remaining copy  shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the county, there to remain of  record.

34:13-8.  Power of board to cease on decision and report;  other differences  may be submitted
    When the board has reached a decision and filed its report, its power shall  cease, unless there may be in existence at the same time other similar grievances or disputes between the same classes of persons mentioned in section  34:13-1 of this title, and in such case such persons may submit their differences to the board, which shall have power to act and arbitrate and decide upon them as fully as if the board was originally created for the settlement of such other difference or differences.

34:13-9.  Board to receive no compensation;  expenses
    The members of the board shall not receive any compensation for their services, but the expenses of the board may be met and paid by voluntary subscriptions, which the board is hereby authorized to receive for that purpose.

34:13A-1.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as  "New Jersey Employer-Employee Relations Act."

     L.1941, c. 100, p. 228, s. 1.  Amended by L.1968, c. 303, s. 2, eff. July 1, 1968.

34:13A-2.  Declaration of policy
    It is hereby declared as the public policy of this State that the best interests of the people of the State are served by the prevention or prompt settlement of labor disputes, both in the private and public sectors;  that strikes, lockouts, work stoppages and other forms of employer and employee strife, regardless where the merits of the controversy lie, are forces productive ultimately of economic and public waste;  that the interests and rights of the consumers and the people of the State, while not direct parties thereto, should always be considered, respected and protected;  and that the voluntary mediation of such public and private employer-employee disputes under  the guidance and supervision of a governmental agency will tend to promote  permanent, public and private employer-employee peace and the health, welfare,  comfort and safety of the people of the State.  To carry out such policy, the  necessity for the enactment of the provisions of this act is hereby declared as  a matter of legislative determination.

     L.1941, c. 100, p. 228, s. 2.  Amended by L.1968, c. 303, s. 3, eff. July 1, 1968.

34:13A-3  Definitions.
	3.	When used in this act:
 
	The term "board" shall mean New Jersey State Board of Mediation.
 
	The term "commission" shall mean New Jersey Public Employment Relations Commission.
 
	“Cannabis employee” means an employee who is an employee of a cannabis employer and who is not subject to the provisions of the National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. s.151 et seq.).
 
	“Cannabis employer” means any private employer who is provided a permit, license, or other authorization to operate as a medical cannabis cultivator, medical cannabis manufacturer, medical cannabis dispensary, clinical registrant, cannabis cultivator, cannabis manufacturer, cannabis wholesaler, cannabis distributor, cannabis retailer, or cannabis delivery service, and who employs workers not subject to the provisions of the National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. s.151 et seq.).
 
	“Director” means the Director of the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement.
 
	“Division” means the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement.
 
	“Electronic voting system” means an internet voting system and a telephone voting system and does not mean machines used for casting votes at a polling site or an electronic tabulation system where votes are cast non-electronically but counted electronically, such as a punch card or optical scanning system.
 
	The term "employer" includes an employer and any person acting, directly or indirectly, on behalf of or in the interest of an employer with the employer's knowledge or ratification, but a labor organization, or any officer or agent thereof, shall be considered an employer only with respect to individuals employed by such organization.  This term shall include "public employers" and shall mean the State of New Jersey, or the several counties and municipalities thereof, or any other political subdivision of the State, or a school district, or any special district, or any authority, commission, or board, or any branch or agency of the public service.  The term shall also include the Delaware River Port Authority, established pursuant to R.S.32:3-1 et seq.
 
	The term "employee" shall include any employee, and shall not be limited to the employees of a particular employer unless this act explicitly states otherwise, and shall include any individual whose work has ceased as a consequence of or in connection with any current labor dispute or because of any unfair labor practice and who has not obtained any other regular and substantially equivalent employment.  This term, however, shall not include any individual taking the place of any employee whose work has ceased as aforesaid, nor shall it include any individual employed by his parent or spouse, or in the domestic service of any person in the home of the employer, or individuals employed by any company owning or operating a railroad or railway express subject to the provisions of the Railway Labor Act (45 U.S.C. s.151 et seq.).  This term shall also not include any individual covered by the National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. s. 151 et seq.).  The term “employee” shall include any public employee, i.e., any person holding a position, by appointment or contract, or employment in the service of a public employer, including the Delaware River Port Authority, except elected officials, members of boards and commissions, managerial executives, and confidential employees.  The exclusion of members of boards and commissions from the definition of "employee" contained within this subsection shall not apply to members of the Board of Review established pursuant to section 19 of P.L.1948, c.446 (C.34:1A-19) and subsection (d) of R.S. 43:21-10.
 
	“Internet voting system” means an internet-based voting system that allows a participant to cast a ballot remotely using a personal computer or other mobile electronic device that is connected to the internet.
 
	“Labor dispute” means and includes any controversy concerning terms, tenure, or conditions of employment, or concerning the association or representation of persons in negotiating, fixing, maintaining, changing, or seeking to arrange terms or conditions of employment, regardless of whether the disputants stand in the proximate relation of employer and employee.
 
	“Labor organization” means any organization of any kind, or any agency or employee representation committee or plan, in which employees participate, and which exists, in whole or in part, for the purpose of dealing with employers concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours of employment, or conditions of work for employees.
 
	“Majority support petition” means the filing of a petition with the New Jersey State Board of Mediation or Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement that provides proof of support from a majority of the cannabis employees sought to be represented through authorization cards or petition signatures.  Over 50 percent of the proposed bargaining unit shall constitute a majority of the cannabis employees.  If the cannabis employees or union demonstrates majority support in this way, the New Jersey State Board of Mediation shall certify the union as the exclusive bargaining representative for the workforce.
 
	“Person” means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, legal representatives, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, or any other legal entity, employer, or labor organization having an interest in the outcome of a proceeding under P.L.1941, c.100 (C.34:13A-1 et seq.).
 
	The term "representative" is not limited to individuals but shall include labor organizations, and individual representatives need not themselves be employed by, and the labor organization serving as a representative need not be limited in membership to the employees of, the employer whose employees are represented.  This term shall include any organization, agency or person authorized or designated by a public employer, public employee, group of public employees, or public employee association to act on its behalf and represent it or them.
 
	“Remotely” means, when used with respect to voting in a representation election, a vote cast at a site chosen by a participant voting in a representation election.
 
	“Telephone voting system” means a voting system in which participants may cast a vote remotely using a telephone.
 
	"Managerial executives" of a public employer, in the case of the State of New Jersey, means persons who formulate management policies and practices, but shall not mean persons who are charged with the responsibility of directing the effectuation of such management policies and practices, except that, in the case of the Executive Branch of the State of New Jersey, "managerial executive" shall include only personnel at or above the level of assistant commissioner.
 
	In the case of any public employer other than the State of New Jersey, "managerial executives" of a public employer means persons who formulate management policies and practices, and persons who are charged with the responsibility of directing the effectuation of such management policies and practices, except that in any school district this term shall include only the superintendent or other chief administrator, and the assistant superintendent of the district.
 
	"Confidential employees" of a public employer means employees whose functional responsibilities or knowledge in connection with the issues involved in the collective negotiations process would make their membership in any appropriate negotiating unit incompatible with their official duties.
 
	"Confidential employees" of the State of New Jersey means employees who have direct involvement in representing the State in the collective negotiations process making their membership in any appropriate negotiating unit incompatible with their official duties.
 
	L.1941, c.100, s.3; amended 1941, c.299; 1968, c.303, s.4; 1974, c.123, s.2; 2009, c.210, s.4; 2009, c.314, s.1; 2024, c.77, s.1; 2025, c.244, s.1.

34:13A-4.  State Board of Mediation;  establishment;  membership
    There is hereby established in the Department of Labor and Industry a board  to be known as the New Jersey State Board of Mediation.  The membership of such  board shall consist of seven persons to be appointed by the Governor, by and  with the advice and consent of the Senate.  Of such members, two shall be  representative of employees, two shall be representative of employers and three  shall be representative of the public.  Of the members first appointed, one  shall be appointed for a term of 1 year;  two for a term of 2 years and two for  a term of 3 years.  Of the two additional members provided for by this  amendment, the original appointees shall hold office for 2 years.  Their successors shall be appointed for terms of 3 years.  The chairman of the board shall be a member who shall have been designated a representative of the public  and who shall be named as chairman by the Governor:  the chairman so named shall serve as chairman during his term as a member of the board.  A vacancy occurring in the membership of the board for any cause, other than expiration  of term, shall be filled by the Governor and the person so appointed shall hold  office for the unexpired term of the member whose office has become vacant.

    Of the members whose terms have not expired, the Governor shall designate each as a representative of either employees or employers or the public, which designation shall be filed with the Secretary of State, and all appointments hereafter made shall include a designation indicating that such appointee is to  be a representative of employees, employers or the public, as the case may be.

    For the purpose of complying with the provisions of Article V, Section IV, paragraph 1 of the New Jersey Constitution, the New Jersey State Board of Mediation is hereby allocated within the Department of Labor and Industry and assigned for administrative purposes to the Assistant Commissioner of Labor for  Labor Relations and Work Place Standards, but notwithstanding said allocation  and assignment, the board shall be independent of any supervision or control by  the department or by any board or officer thereof.

     L.1941, c. 100, p. 229, s. 4.  Amended by L.1945, c. 32, p. 88, s. 1; L.1973,  c. 326, s. 1, eff. Dec. 18, 1973.

34:13A-5.  Objective
    It shall be the objective of the board hereby established to take such steps  as will most effectively and expeditiously carry out the policy declared in  section two of this act and the powers and duties conferred and imposed upon  the board by this act or by law shall at all times be performed and discharged  with the accomplishment of such objective as the ultimate goal.

     L.1941, c. 100, p. 230, s. 5.

34:13A-5.1  Establishment of Division of Public Employment Relations and Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement.
	5.	There is hereby established a Division of Public Employment Relations and a Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement.
 
	(a)	The Division of Public Employment Relations shall be concerned exclusively with matters of public employment related to determining negotiating units, elections, certifications and settlement of public employee representative and public employer disputes and grievance procedures.  For the purpose of complying with the provisions of Article V, Section IV, paragraph 1 of the New Jersey Constitution, the Division of Public Employment Relations is hereby allocated within the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, and located in the city of Trenton, but notwithstanding said allocation, the office shall be independent of any supervision or control by the department or by any board or officer thereof.
 
	(b)	The Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement shall assist the New Jersey State Board of Mediation in the resolution of disputes in private employment.  The New Jersey State Board of Mediation, its objectives, and the powers and duties granted by this act and the act of which this act is amendatory and supplementary shall be concerned exclusively with matters of private employment and shall  have offices in the city of Newark and anywhere in the State as deemed appropriate and necessary to fulfill its duties under P.L.1941, c.100 (C.34:13A-1 et seq.).  Additionally, the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement shall have offices throughout the State as deemed appropriate to fulfill its roles and responsibilities set forth under P.L.1941, c.100 (C.34:13A-1 et seq.).
 
	(c)	In the case of a private employer not regulated by the National Labor Relations Board pursuant to the National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. s.151 et seq.), the New Jersey State Board of Mediation or the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement pursuant to P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-5.1a et al.) shall designate a representative for a unit of employees of the private employer for the purposes of collective bargaining when:
 
	(1)  In any case in which the board determines that only one employee organization is seeking to be the majority representative, that organization demonstrates that a majority of employees in the unit have shown their preference to have that organization be their representative by signing authorization cards indicating that preference; 
 
	(2)	The employees in the unit have selected a representative by an election that conforms with the procedures outlined in section 159 of the National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. s.159); or
 
	(3)  With respect to cannabis employees, as specified in P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-5.1a et al.).
 
	For the purposes of paragraph (1) of this subsection, an authorization card indicating preference shall not be valid unless it is printed in a language understood by the employee who signs it.
 
	Any employer who refuses to provide information requested by the New Jersey State Board of Mediation or the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement or otherwise acts to prevent the board or division from carrying out its responsibilities pursuant to this subsection (c) shall have violated this subsection and shall be liable to a fine of not more than $1,000, to be recovered under the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.) in the name of the board and to be used by the board for costs of implementing this subsection.  In addition, an employee organization seeking to represent the employees of the employer may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain an injunction to restrain any continuation of the violation, to reimburse the employee organization or any affected employee for any damages caused by the violation plus reasonable costs and attorney's fees of the action.
 
	The provisions of this subsection (c) shall not apply to religious or parochial schools or their employees or to any private nonprofit organization exempt from federal taxation under section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. s. 501).
 
	(d)	In the case of a private employer regulated by the National Labor Relations Board pursuant to the National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. s. 151 et seq.), the New Jersey State Board of Mediation shall, based on the mutual agreement of the private employer and an organization seeking to represent employees of the employer, designate a representative for a unit of employees of the private employer for the purposes of collective bargaining when:
 
	(1)	In any case in which the board determines that only one employee organization is seeking to be the majority representative, that organization demonstrates, in a manner mutually agreed upon by the representative and the employer, that a majority of employees in the unit have shown their preference to have that organization be their representative by signing authorization cards indicating that preference; or
 
	(2)	the employees in the unit have selected the representative by an election that conforms with the procedures outlined in section 159 of the National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. s.159).
 
	(e)	For the purposes of subsections (c) and (d) of this section, "employee unit" means an appropriate group of employees for the purposes of collective bargaining as determined, if necessary, by the New Jersey State Board of Mediation.

	L.1968,c.303,s.5; amended 1973, c.326, s.2; 2005, c.161, s.1; 2025, c.244, s.2.

34:13A-5.1a  Scope of responsibilities and authority.
	3.	Scope of responsibilities and authority, Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement
 
	The Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement, in addition to the powers and duties granted by P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-5.1a et al.), shall handle all matters with regard to cannabis employees’ right to organize, form unions, and bargain collectively in the State of New Jersey.  The Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement shall make policy and establish rules and regulations concerning employer-employee relations in private employment relating to dispute settlement, grievance procedures, and administration, including enforcement of statutory provisions concerning representative elections and related matters, and to implement fully all the provisions of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-5.1a et al.) for the employees listed above.
 
L.2025, c.244, s.3.

34:13A-5.1b  Powers and duties.
	4.	Powers and duties, Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement
 
	a.	Upon its own motion, in an existing, imminent, or threatened labor dispute in  cannabis employment, the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement may, or upon the request of either party to the dispute shall, take such steps as it may deem expedient to effect a voluntary, amicable, and expeditious adjustment and settlement of the differences and issues between employer and employees which have precipitated or culminated in, or threaten to precipitate or culminate in, the labor dispute. 
 
	b.	Whenever negotiations between an employer and an exclusive representative concerning the terms and conditions of employment reach an impasse, the division shall, upon the request of either party, take such steps as it may deem expedient to effect a voluntary resolution of the impasse.  In the event of a failure to resolve the impasse by conciliation and mediation, the board and the division are empowered to recommend or invoke fact-finding with recommendation for settlement, the cost of which shall be borne by the New Jersey State Board of Mediation.
 
	c.	In the employment of  cannabis employees, the division shall take the following steps to avoid or terminate labor disputes: (1) to arrange for, hold, adjourn, or reconvene a conference or conferences between the disputants or one or more of their representatives or any of them; (2) to invite the disputants or their representatives or any of them to attend a conference and submit, either orally or in writing, the grievances of and differences between the disputants; (3) to discuss the grievances and differences with the disputants and their representatives; and (4) to assist in negotiating and drafting agreements for the adjustment in settlement of the grievances and differences and for the termination or avoidance, as the case may be, of the existing or threatened labor dispute.
 
	d.	The Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement is hereby empowered to resolve questions concerning representation of cannabis employees by conducting a secret ballot election or utilizing any other appropriate and suitable method designed to ascertain the free choice of the employees.  The division shall decide in each instance which unit of employees is appropriate for collective negotiation.  All of the powers and duties conferred or imposed upon the division that are necessary for the administration of this subsection, and not inconsistent with it, are to that extent hereby made applicable.  Should formal hearings be required, in the opinion of the division, to determine the appropriate unit, it shall have the power to issue subpoenas as described below, and shall determine the rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing or hearings.
 
	e.	For the purposes of this section, the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement shall have the authority and power to hold hearings, subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance, administer oaths, take the testimony or deposition of any person under oath, and in connection therewith, to issue subpoenas duces tecum, and to require the production and examination of any books or papers relating to any matter described above.
 
L.2025, c.244, s.4.

34:13A-5.1c  Investigatory Powers.
	5. Investigatory Powers, Division of Private Settlement Dispute
 
	a.	The Director of the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement, or the director’s designee, shall at all reasonable times have access to, for the purpose of examination, and the right to copy, any evidence of any person being investigated or proceeded against that relates to any matter under investigation or in question.  The director, or the director’s designee, shall have the right of free access to all places of labor.  The director, or the director’s designee, shall upon application of any party to the proceedings, issue to the party subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses or the production of any evidence in the proceeding or investigation requested in the application.  Within five days after the service of a subpoena on any person requiring the production of any evidence in that person’s possession or under that person’s control, the person may petition the New Jersey State Board of Mediation to revoke, and the division shall revoke, that subpoena if in the New Jersey State Board of Mediation’s opinion the evidence whose production is required does not relate to any matter under investigation, or any matter in question in the proceedings, or if in its opinion the subpoena does not describe with sufficient particularity the evidence whose production is required.  The division may administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses, and receive evidence.  The attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence may be required from any place in the State at any designated place of hearing.
 
	b.	In case of refusal to obey a subpoena issued to any person, any superior court in any jurisdiction of which the inquiry is carried on, or within the jurisdiction of which the person allegedly guilty of refusal to obey is found or resides or transacts business, shall, upon application by the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement, have jurisdiction to issue to that person an order requiring the person to appear before the division, there to produce evidence if so ordered, or there to give testimony touching the matter under investigation or in question.  Any failure to obey an order of the court may be punished by the court as constituting contempt.
 
	c.	Any party shall have the right to appear at any hearing in person, by counsel, or by other representative.
 
	d.	Any person who shall willfully resist, prevent, impede, or interfere with any member of the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement or any of its agents or agencies in the performance of duties pursuant to P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-5.1a et al.) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $5,000.
 
L.2025, c.244, s.5.

34:13A-5.2.  Public Employment Relations Commission 
     There is hereby established in the Division of Public Employment Relations a commission to be known as the New Jersey Public Employment Relations Commission.  This commission, in addition to the powers and duties granted by this act, shall have in the public employment area the same powers and duties granted to the labor mediation board in sections 7 and 10 of P.L. 1941, c. 100, and in sections 2 and 3 of P.L. 1945, c. 32.  This commission shall make policy and establish rules and regulations concerning employer-employee relations in public employment relating to dispute settlement, grievance procedures and administration including enforcement of statutory provisions concerning representative elections and related matters and to implement fully all the provisions of this act.  The commission shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the Governor, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.  Of such members, two shall be representative of public employers, two shall be representative of public employee organizations and three shall be representative of the public including the appointee who is designated as chairman.  Of the first appointees, two shall be appointed for two years, two for a term of three years and three, including the chairman, for a term of four years.  Their successors shall be appointed for terms of three years each, and until their successors are appointed and qualified, except that any person chosen to fill a vacancy shall be appointed only for the unexpired term of the member whose office has become vacant. 

    The members of the commission, other than the chairman, shall be compensated at the rate of $250.00 for each six hour day spent in attendance at meetings and consultations and shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses in connection with the discharge of their duties except that no commission member who receives a salary or other form of compensation as a representative of any employer or employee group, organization or association, shall be compensated by the commission for any deliberations directly involving members of said employer or employee group, organization or association.  Compensation for more, or less than, six hours per day, shall be prorated in proportion to the time involved. 

    The chairman of the commission shall be its chief executive officer and administrator, shall devote his full time to the performance of his duties as chairman of the Public Employment Relations Commission and shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by law. 

    L. 1968, c. 303, s. 6; amended 1974,c.123,s.3; 1987,c.456. 

34:13A-5.3  Employee organizations; right to form or join; collective negotiations; grievance procedures.
	7.	Except as hereinafter provided, public employees shall have, and shall be protected in the exercise of, the right, freely and without fear of penalty or reprisal, to form, join and assist any employee organization or to refrain from any such activity; provided, however, that this right shall not extend to elected officials, members of boards and commissions, managerial executives, or confidential employees, except in a school district the term managerial executive shall mean the superintendent of schools or his equivalent, nor, except where established practice, prior agreement or special circumstances dictate the contrary, shall any supervisor having the power to hire, discharge, discipline, or to effectively recommend the same, have the right to be represented in collective negotiations by an employee organization that admits nonsupervisory personnel to membership, and the fact that any organization has such supervisory employees as members shall not deny the right of that organization to represent the appropriate unit in collective negotiations; and provided further, that, except where established practice, prior agreement, or special circumstances dictate the contrary, no policeman shall have the right to join an employee organization that admits employees other than policemen to membership.  The negotiating unit shall be defined with due regard for the community of interest among the employees concerned, but the commission shall not intervene in matters of recognition and unit definition except in the event of a dispute.

	Representatives designated or selected by public employees for the purposes of collective negotiation by the majority of the employees in a unit appropriate for such purposes, by the majority of the employees voting in an election conducted by the commission as authorized by this act or, at the option of the representative in a case in which the commission finds that only one representative is seeking to be the majority representative, by a majority of the employees in the unit signing authorization cards indicating their preference for that representative, shall be the exclusive representatives for collective negotiation concerning the terms and conditions of employment of the employees in such unit.  An authorization card indicating preference shall not be valid unless it is printed in a language understood by the employees who signs it.

	Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any official from meeting with an employee organization for the purpose of hearing the views and requests of its members in such unit so long as (a) the majority representative is informed of the meeting; (b) any changes or modifications in terms and conditions of employment are made only through negotiation with the majority representative; and (c) a minority organization shall not present or process grievances.  Nothing herein shall be construed to deny to any individual employee his rights under Civil Service laws or regulations.  When no majority representative has been selected as the bargaining agent for the unit of which an individual employee is a part, he may present his own grievance either personally or through an appropriate representative or an organization of which he is a member and have such grievance adjusted.

	A majority representative of public employees in an appropriate unit shall be entitled to act for and to negotiate agreements covering all employees in the unit and shall be responsible for representing the interest of all such employees without discrimination and without regard to employee organization membership.  Proposed new rules or modifications of existing rules governing working conditions shall be negotiated with the majority representative before they are established. In addition, the majority representative and designated representatives of the public employer shall meet at reasonable times and negotiate in good faith with respect to grievances, disciplinary disputes, and other terms and conditions of employment.  Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting negotiation of the standards or criteria for employee performance.

	When an agreement is reached on the terms and conditions of employment, it shall be embodied in writing and signed by the authorized representatives of the public employer and the majority representative.

	Public employers shall negotiate written policies setting forth grievance and disciplinary review procedures by means of which their employees or representatives of employees may appeal the interpretation, application or violation of policies, agreements, and administrative decisions, including disciplinary determinations, affecting them, provided that such grievance and disciplinary review procedures shall be included in any agreement entered into between the public employer and the representative organization.  Such grievance and disciplinary review procedures may provide for binding arbitration as a means for resolving disputes.  Except as otherwise provided herein, the procedures agreed to by the parties may not replace or be inconsistent with any alternate statutory appeal procedure nor may they provide for binding arbitration of disputes involving the discipline of employees with statutory protection under tenure or civil service laws, except that such procedures may provide for binding arbitration of disputes involving the minor discipline of any public employees protected under the provisions of section 7 of P.L.1968, c.303 (C.34:13A-5.3), other than public employees subject to discipline pursuant to R.S.53:1-10.  Grievance and disciplinary review procedures established by agreement between the public employer and the representative organization shall be utilized for any dispute covered by the terms of such agreement.  For the purposes of this section, minor discipline shall mean a suspension or fine of less than five days unless the employee has been suspended or fined an aggregate of 15 or more days or received more than three suspensions or fines of five days or less in one calendar year.

	Where the State of New Jersey and the majority representative have agreed to a disciplinary review procedure that provides for binding arbitration of disputes involving the major discipline of any public employee protected under the provisions of this section, other than public employees subject to discipline pursuant to R.S.53:1-10, the grievance and disciplinary review procedures established by agreement between the State of New Jersey and the majority representative shall be utilized for any dispute covered by the terms of such agreement. For the purposes of this section, major discipline shall mean a removal, disciplinary demotion, suspension or fine of more than five days, or less where the aggregate number of days suspended or fined in any one calendar year is 15 or more days or unless the employee received more than three suspensions or fines of five days or less in one calendar year.

	In interpreting the meaning and extent of a provision of a collective negotiation agreement providing for grievance arbitration, a court or agency shall be bound by a presumption in favor of arbitration.  Doubts as to the scope of an arbitration clause shall be resolved in favor of requiring arbitration.

	L.1968,c.303,s.7; amended 1974, c.123, s.4; 1982, c.103, s.1; 1996, c.115, s.4; 2003, c.119, s.2; 2005, c.161, s.2; 2005, c.380.

34:13A-5.4  Prohibitions relative to public employers, employee organizations, their representatives, agents.
	1. a. Public employers, their representatives or agents are prohibited from:
 
	(1)	Interfering with, restraining or coercing employees in the exercise of the rights guaranteed to them by this act.
 
	(2)	Dominating or interfering with the formation, existence or administration of any employee organization.
 
	(3)	Discriminating in regard to hire or tenure of employment or any term or condition of employment to encourage or discourage employees in the exercise of the rights guaranteed to them by this act.
 
	(4)	Discharging or otherwise discriminating against any employee because he has signed or filed an affidavit, petition or complaint or given any information or testimony under this act.
 
	(5)	Refusing to negotiate in good faith with a majority representative of employees in an appropriate unit concerning terms and conditions of employment of employees in that unit, or refusing to process grievances presented by the majority representative.
 
	(6)	Refusing to reduce a negotiated agreement to writing and to sign such agreement.
 
	(7)	Violating any of the rules and regulations established by the commission.
 
	b.	Employee organizations, their representatives or agents are prohibited from:
 
	(1)	Interfering with, restraining or coercing employees in the exercise of the rights guaranteed to them by this act.
 
	(2)	Interfering with, restraining or coercing a public employer in the selection of his representative for the purposes of negotiations or the adjustment of grievances.
 
	(3)	 Refusing to negotiate in good faith with a public employer, if they are the majority representative of employees in an appropriate unit concerning terms and conditions of employment of employees in that unit.
 
	(4)	Refusing to reduce a negotiated agreement to writing and to sign such agreement.
 
	(5)	Violating any of the rules and regulations established by the commission.
 
	c.	The commission shall have exclusive power as hereinafter provided to prevent anyone from engaging in any unfair practice listed in subsections a. and b. above.  Whenever it is charged that anyone has engaged or is engaging in any such unfair practice, the commission, or any designated agent thereof, shall have authority to issue and cause to be served upon such party a complaint stating the specific unfair practice charged and including a notice of hearing containing the date and place of hearing before the commission or any designated agent thereof; provided that no complaint shall issue based upon any unfair practice occurring more than six months prior to the filing of the charge unless the person aggrieved thereby was prevented from filing such charge in which event the six-month period shall be computed from the day he was no longer so prevented.
 
	In any such proceeding, the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) shall be applicable.  Evidence shall be taken at the hearing and filed with the commission.  If, upon all the evidence taken, the commission shall determine that any party charged has engaged or is engaging in any such unfair practice, the commission shall state its findings of fact and conclusions of law and issue and cause to be served on such party an order requiring such party to cease and desist from such unfair practice, and to take such reasonable affirmative action as will effectuate the policies of this act.  All cases in which a complaint and notice of hearing on a charge is actually issued by the commission, shall be prosecuted before the commission or its agent, or both, by the representative of the employee organization or party filing the charge or his authorized representative.
 
	d.	The commission shall at all times have the power and duty, upon the request of any public employer or majority representative, to make a determination as to whether a matter in dispute is within the scope of collective negotiations.  The commission shall serve the parties with its findings of fact and conclusions of law.  Any determination made by the commission pursuant to this subsection may be appealed to the Appellate Division of the Superior Court.
 
	e.	The commission shall adopt such rules as may be required to regulate the conduct of representation elections, and to regulate the time of commencement of negotiations and of institution of impasse procedures so that there will be full opportunity for negotiations and the resolution of impasses prior to required budget submission dates.
 
	f.	The commission or any interested party shall have the power to apply to the Superior Court, Law Division, for an appropriate order enforcing any order of the commission issued under subsection c. or d. hereof, and its findings of fact, if based upon substantial evidence on the record as a whole, shall not, in such action, be set aside or modified; any order for remedial or affirmative action, if reasonably designed to effectuate the purposes of this act, shall be affirmed and enforced in such proceeding.
 
	g.	The Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs may notify the commission that a municipality deemed a "municipality in need of stabilization and recovery" pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2016, c.4 (C.52:27BBBB-4) shall not be subject to the commission's authority to prevent an unfair practice pursuant to subsection a. of this section.  Upon such notice, neither the commission, nor any designee, shall have the authority to issue or cause to be served upon such municipality in need of stabilization and recovery any complaint alleging an unfair practice under subsection a. of this section or to hold any hearings with respect thereto.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit the scope of any general or specific powers of the Local Finance Board or the Director set forth in P.L.2016, c.4 (C.52:27BBBB-1 et al.).
 
	The provisions of this subsection shall no longer be applicable on and after the first day of the sixth year next following the determination by the Commissioner of Community Affairs that the municipality shall be deemed "a municipality in need of stabilization and recovery" pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2016, c.4 (C.52:27BBBB-4); however, actions taken pursuant to this subsection prior to the effective date of P.L.2021, c.124 (C.52:27BBBB-4 et al.) shall be final and shall not be subject to reconsideration.

	L.1974, c.123, s.1; amended 1979, c.477, s.1; 2016, c.4, s.7; 2021, c.124, s.4; 2021, c.411, s.10.

34:13A-5.5  Representation fee in lieu of dues
	2. a. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the majority representative and the public employer of public employees in an appropriate unit shall, where requested by the majority representative, negotiate concerning the subject of requiring the payment by all nonmember employees in the unit to the majority representative of a representation fee in lieu of dues for services rendered by the majority representative.  Where agreement is reached it shall be embodied in writing and signed by the authorized representatives of the public employer and the majority representative. If no agreement is reached, the majority representative may petition the commission to conduct an investigation.  If the commission determines during the investigation that a majority of the employees in the negotiations unit are voluntary dues paying members of the majority representative and that the majority representative maintains a demand and return system as required by subsection c. of this section and section 3 of P.L.1979, c.477 (C.34:13A-5.6), the commission shall order the public employer to institute a payroll deduction of the representation fee in lieu of dues from the wages or salaries of the employees in the negotiationsunit who are not members of the majority representative.

	b.	The representation fee in lieu of dues shall be in an amount equivalent to the regular membership dues, initiation fees and assessments charged by the majority representative to its own members less the cost of benefits financed  through the dues, fees and assessments and available to or benefitting only its members, but in no event shall such fee exceed 85% of the regular membership dues, fees and assessments.

	c.	Any public employee who pays a representation fee in lieu of dues shall have the right to demand and receive from the majority representative, under proceedings established and maintained in accordance with section 3 of P.L.1979, c.477 (C.34:13A-5.6), a return of any part of that fee paid by him which represents the employee's additional pro rata share of expenditures by the majority representative that is either in aid of activities or causes of a partisan political or ideological nature only incidentally related to the terms and conditions of employment or applied toward the cost of any other benefits available only to members of the majority representative.  The pro rata share subject to refund shall not reflect, however, the costs of support of lobbying activities designed to foster policy goals in collective negotiations and contract administration or to secure for the employees represented advantages in wages, hours, and other conditions of employment in addition to those secured through collective negotiations with the public employer.

	L.1979,c.477,s.2; amended 2002, c.46, s.1.

34:13A-5.6  Representation fee in lieu of dues by payroll deduction
	3.	Where a negotiated agreement is reached, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1979, c.477 (C.34:13A-5.5), or where the public employer has been ordered by the commission to institute a payroll deduction of the representation fee in lieu of dues, a majority representative of public employees in an appropriate unit shall be  entitled to a representation fee in lieu of dues by payroll deduction from the wages or salaries of the employees in such unit who are not members of a majority representative; provided, however, that membership in the majority representative is available to all employees in the unit on an equal basis and that the representation fee in lieu of dues shall be available only to a majority representative that has established and maintained a demand and return system which provides pro rata returns as described in subsection c. of section 2 of P.L.1979, c.477 (C.34:13A-5.5).  The demand and return system shall include a provision by which persons who pay a representation fee in lieu of dues may obtain review of the amount returned through full and fair proceedings placing the burden of proof on the majority representative.  Such proceedings shall provide for an appeal to a board consisting of three members to be appointed by the Governor, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, who shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for actual expenses reasonably incurred in the performance of their official duties.  Of such members, one shall be representative of public employers, one shall be representative of public employee organizations and one, as chairman, who shall represent the interest of the public as a strictly impartial member not having had more than a casual association or relationship with any public employers, public employer organizations or public employee organizations in the 10 years prior to appointment.  Of the first appointees, one shall be appointed for one year, one for a term of two years and the chairman, for a term of three years.  Their successors shall be appointed for  terms of two years each and until their successors are appointed and qualified, except that any person chosen to fill a vacancy shall be appointed only for the unexpired term of the member whose office has become vacant. Nothing herein shall be deemed to require any employee to become a member of the majority representative.

	L.1979,c.477,s.3; amended 2002, c.46, s.2.

34:13A-5.7.  Discrimination between nonmembers and members on basis of payment of fee;  unfair practice
    Any action engaged in by a public employer, its representatives or agents, or by an employee organization, its representatives or agents, which discriminates between nonmembers who pay the said representation fee and members with regard to the payment of such fee other than as allowed under this  act, shall be treated as an unfair practice within the meaning of subsection  1(a) or subsection 1(b) of this act.

     L.1979, c. 477, s. 4, eff. July 1, 1980.

34:13A-5.8.  Payment to majority representative
    Payment of the representation fee in lieu of dues shall be made to the majority representative during the term of the collective negotiation agreement  affecting such nonmember employees and during the period, if any, between  successive agreements so providing, on or after, but in no case sooner than the  thirtieth day following the beginning of an employee's employment in a position  included in the appropriate negotiations unit, and the tenth day following  reentry into the appropriate unit for employees who previously served in a  position included in the appropriate unit who continued in the employ of the  public employer in an excluded position and individuals being reemployed in  such unit from a reemployment list.  For the purposes of this section,  individuals employed on a 10-month basis or who are reappointed from year to  year shall be considered to be in continuous employment.

     L.1979, c. 477, s. 5, eff. July 1, 1980.

34:13A-5.9.  Rules and regulations
    The commission may promulgate rules or regulations to effectuate the purposes of this act.

     L.1979, c. 477, s. 6, eff. July 1, 1980.

34:13A-5.10  Findings, declarations relative to collective negotiations units for Executive Branch employees.
 
	1. a. The Legislature finds and declares that, for more than three decades, there have been broad-based collective negotiations units for the employees in the Executive Branch of State government.  This existing unit structure has contributed to the stability of labor relations between the public employees and the Executive Branch and has served to avoid disruption of services to the public.  To foster continued harmonious labor relations between State employees and the Executive Branch, the existing structure for collective negotiations units must be codified.
 
	In addition, the Legislature finds and declares that the structure should be expanded to permit collective negotiations for managers and deputy attorneys general who are not covered by the ten units for civilian employees of the Executive Branch.
 
	b. (1) There shall be only twelve collective negotiations units for civilian employees of the Executive Branch of State government.  The units shall be as follows: administrative and clerical; professional; primary level supervisory; high level supervisory; operations, maintenance and services; crafts; inspection and security; health care and rehabilitation services; State colleges and universities; State colleges and universities adjuncts ;deputy attorneys general; and State government managers.
 
	(2)	An existing or newly established title that is not assigned managerial, executive or confidential duties, as defined in subsections (f) and (g) of section 3 of P.L.1941, c.100 (C.34:13A-3), may be placed in one of the twelve collective negotiations units for civilian employees by the Governor's Office of Employee Relations.  Such placements may be challenged through a unit clarification procedure pursuant to the rules of the New Jersey Public Employment Relations Commission.
 
	L.2005, c.142, s.1; amended 2009, c.314, s.2.

34:13A-5.11  Short title.
 	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Workplace Democracy Enhancement Act."
 
	L.2018, c.15, s.1.

34:13A-5.12  Findings, declarations relative to public employment relations.
  	2.	The Legislature finds and declares that collective negotiations promote labor stability in the public sector and enhance the delivery and avoid the disruption of public services.  The Legislature further declares that it is in the public interest to ensure that any employee organization that has been designated as the exclusive representatives of employees in a collective negotiations unit is able to effectively carry out its statutory duties by having access to and being able to communicate with the employees it represents.
 
	L.2018, c.15, s.2.

34:13A-5.13  Access to members of negotiations units.
  	3. a. Public employers shall provide to exclusive representative employee organizations access to members of the negotiations units.
 
	b.	Access includes, but is not limited to, the following:
 
	(1)	the right to meet with individual employees on the premises of the public employer during the work day to investigate and discuss grievances, workplace-related complaints, and other workplace issues;
 
	(2)	the right to conduct worksite meetings during lunch and other non-work breaks, and before and after the workday, on the employer's premises to discuss workplace issues, collective negotiations, the administration of collective negotiations agreements, other matters related to the duties of an exclusive representative employee organization, and internal union matters involving the governance or business of the exclusive representative employee organization; and
 
	(3)	the right to meet with newly hired employees, without charge to the pay or leave time of the employees, for a minimum of 30 and a maximum of 120 minutes, within 30 calendar days from the date of hire, during new employee orientations, or if the employer does not conduct new employee orientations, at individual or group meetings.
 
	c.	Within 10 calendar days from the date of hire of negotiations unit employees, public employers shall provide the following contact information to an exclusive representative employee organization in an Excel file format or other format agreed to by the exclusive representative employee organization: name, job title, worksite location, home address, work telephone numbers, and any home and personal cellular telephone numbers on file with the public employer, date of hire, and work email address and any personal email address on file with the public employer.  Every 120 calendar days beginning on January 1 following the effective date of this act, public employers shall provide exclusive representative employee organizations, in an Excel file or similar format agreed to by the employee organization, the following information for all negotiations unit employees: name, job title, worksite location, home address, work, home and personal cellular telephone numbers, date of hire, and work email address and personal email address on file with the public employer.
 
	d.	The home addresses, phone numbers, email addresses, dates of birth, and negotiation units and groupings of employees, and the emails or other communications between employee organizations and their members, prospective members, and non-members, are not government records and are exempt from any disclosure requirements of P.L.1963, c.73 (C.47:1A-1 et seq.).
 
	e.	Exclusive representative employee organizations shall have the right to use the email systems of public employers to communicate with negotiations unit members regarding collective negotiations, the administration of collective negotiations agreements, the investigation of grievances, other workplace-related complaints and issues, and internal union matters involving the governance or business of the union.
 
	f.	Exclusive representative employee organizations shall have the right to use government buildings and other facilities that are owned or leased by government entities to conduct meetings with their unit members regarding collective negotiations, the administration of collective negotiations agreements, the investigation of grievances, other workplace-related complaints and issues, and internal union matters involving the governance or business of the union, provided such use does not interfere with governmental operations.  Meetings conducted in government buildings pursuant to this section shall not be for the purpose of supporting or opposing any candidate for partisan political office, or for the purpose of distributing literature or information regarding partisan elections.  An exclusive representative employee organization conducting a meeting in a government building or other government facility pursuant to this section may be charged for maintenance, security and other costs related to the use of the government building or facility that would not otherwise be incurred by the government entity.
 
	g.	Upon the request of an exclusive representative employee organization, a public employer shall negotiate in good faith over contractual provisions to memorialize the parties' agreement to implement the provisions of subsections a. through f. of this section.  Negotiations shall commence within 10 calendar days from the date of a request by the employee organization, even if a collective negotiations agreement is in effect on the effective date of this act.  Agreements between a public employer and an exclusive representative employee organization implementing subsections a. through f. of this section shall be incorporated into the parties' collective negotiations agreement and shall be enforceable through the parties' grievance procedure, which shall include binding arbitration.  The requirements set forth in subsections a. through f. of this section establish the minimum requirements for access to and communication with negotiations unit employees by an exclusive representative employee organization.
 
	h.	If the parties are unable to reach agreement within 30 calendar days from the commencement of negotiations regarding access to and communications with negotiations unit members, the exclusive employee organization or the public employer may file a petition with the Public Employment Relations Commission to resolve the negotiations dispute.  Upon receipt of a petition, the commission shall appoint an arbitrator, who shall issue a binding award resolving the parties' negotiations disputes consistent with subsections a. through f. of this section.  The commission shall establish a panel of arbitrators to resolve negotiations pursuant to this section and shall promulgate rules to implement this section.
 
	i.	For the purposes of this section, "exclusive representative employee organization" means an employee organization which has been designated as the exclusive representatives of employees in a collective negotiations unit.
 
	L.2018, c.15, s.3.

34:13A-5.14  Certain actions of public employer relative to negotiations unit members prohibited.
  	4. a. A public employer shall not encourage negotiations unit members to resign or relinquish membership in an exclusive representative employee organization and shall not encourage negotiations unit members to revoke authorization of the deduction of fees to an exclusive representative employee organization.
 
	b.	A public employer shall not encourage or discourage an employee from joining, forming or assisting an employee organization.
 
	c.	A public employer that violates any provision of subsection a. or b. of this section shall be regarded as having engaged in an unfair practice in violation of subsection a. of section 1 of P.L.1974, c.123 (C.34:13A-5.4), and, upon a finding that the violation has occurred, the Public Employment Relations Commission, in addition to implementing any other remedies authorized by that section, shall order the public employer to make whole the exclusive representative employee organization for any losses suffered by the organization as a result of the public employer's unlawful conduct and any other remedial relief deemed appropriate.
 
	L.2018, c.15, s.4.

34:13A-5.15  Inclusion in negotiations unit.
	5.	a.  All regular full-time and part-time employees of the public employer who perform negotiations unit work shall be included in the negotiations unit represented by the exclusive representative employee organization.
 
	b.	Negotiations unit work means work that is performed by any employees who are included in a negotiations unit represented by an exclusive representative employee organization without regard to job title, job classification or number of hours worked, except that employees who are confidential employees or managerial executives, as those terms are defined by section 1 of P.L.1941, c.100 (C.34:13A-3), or elected officials, members of boards and commissions, or casual employees, may be excluded from the negotiations unit.  Casual employees are employees who work an average of fewer than four hours per week over a period of 90 calendar days.
 
	c.	Every 120 calendar days beginning on January 1 following the effective date of P.L.2021, c.411 (C.34:13A-56 et al.), public employers shall provide to an exclusive representative employee organization in an Excel file format or other format agreed to by the exclusive representative employee organization, the following information for all employees not represented by any exclusive representative employee organization: name, job title, worksite location, work email and work phone number.  Within 30 days of a request by an exclusive representative employee organization, a public employer shall provide a job description for each non-represented employee, including the names and job titles of all employees supervised by the employer subject to the request.
 
	d.	Employees who are performing negotiations unit work and who are not included in a negotiations unit because they did not meet the threshold of hours or percent of time worked as set forth in a certification of representative, recognition clause or other provision in a collective negotiations agreement, shall be included in the negotiations unit by operation of this act, within 90 calendar days from the effective date of this act.
 
	e.	The Public Employment Relations Commission shall promulgate rules to implement this section, including rules to resolve disputes over the inclusion of employees performing negotiations unit work in the appropriate negotiations unit.  The rules promulgated by the commission shall provide for the resolution of disputes that arise under this section, within 60 calendar days from the submission of the dispute to the commission by either the exclusive representative employee organization or the public employer.
 
	L.2018, c.15, s.5; amended 2021, c.411, s.11.

34:13A-6.  Powers and duties
    (a) Upon its own motion, in an existing, imminent or threatened labor dispute in private employment, the board, through the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement, may, and, upon the request of the parties or either party to the dispute, must take such steps as it may deem expedient to effect a voluntary, amicable and expeditious adjustment and settlement of the differences and issues between employer and employees which have precipitated or culminated in or threaten to precipitate or culminate in such labor dispute.

    (b) Whenever negotiations between a public employer and an exclusive representative concerning the terms and conditions of employment shall reach an  impasse, the commission, through the Division of Public Employment Relations  shall, upon the request of either party, take such steps as it may deem  expedient to effect a voluntary resolution of the impasse.  In the event of a  failure to resolve the impasse by mediation the Division of Public Employment  Relations is empowered to recommend or invoke factfinding with recommendation  for settlement, the cost of which shall be borne by the commission.

    (c) The board in private employment, through the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement, and the commission in public employment, through  the Division of Public Employment Relations, shall take the following steps to  avoid or terminate labor disputes:  (1) to arrange for, hold, adjourn or  reconvene a conference or conferences between the disputants or one or more of  their representatives or any of them;  (2) to invite the disputants or their  representatives or any of them to attend such conference and submit, either  orally or in writing, the grievances of and differences between the disputants;   (3) to discuss such grievances and differences with the disputants and their  representatives;  and (4) to assist in negotiating and drafting agreements for  the adjustment in settlement of such grievances and differences and for the  termination or avoidance, as the case may be, of the existing or threatened  labor dispute.

    (d) The commission, through the Division of Public Employment Relations, is  hereby empowered to resolve questions concerning representation of public employees by conducting a secret ballot election or utilizing any other appropriate and suitable method designed to ascertain the free choice of the employees.  The division shall decide in each instance which unit of employees is appropriate for collective negotiation, provided that, except where dictated  by established practice, prior agreement, or special circumstances, no unit  shall be appropriate which includes (1) both supervisors and nonsupervisors,  (2) both professional and nonprofessional employees unless a majority of such  professional employees vote for inclusion in such unit or, (3) both craft and  noncraft employees unless a majority of such craft employees vote for inclusion  in such unit.  All of the powers and duties conferred or imposed upon the  division that are necessary for the administration of this subdivision, and not  inconsistent with it, are to that extent hereby made applicable.  Should formal  hearings be required, in the opinion of said division to determine the  appropriate unit, it shall have the power to issue subpenas as described below,  and shall determine the rules and regulations for the conduct of such hearing or hearings.

    (e) For the purposes of this section the Division of Public Employment Relations shall have the authority and power to hold hearings, subpena witnesses, compel their attendance, administer oaths, take the testimony or deposition of any person under oath, and in connection therewith, to issue subpenas duces tecum, and to require the production and examination of any governmental or other books or papers relating to any matter described above.

    (f) In carrying out any of its work under this act, the board may designate  one of its members, or an officer of the board to act in its behalf and may  delegate to such designee one or more of its duties hereunder and, for such  purpose, such designee shall have all the powers hereby conferred upon the  board in connection with the discharge of the duty or duties so delegated.  In  carrying out any of its work under this act, the commission may designate one  of its members or an officer of the commission to act on its behalf and may  delegate to such designee one or more of its duties hereunder and, for such  purpose, such designee shall have all of the powers hereby conferred upon the  commission in connection with the discharge of the duty or duties so  delegated.

    (g) The board and commission may also appoint and designate other persons or  groups of persons to act for and on its behalf and may delegate to such persons  or groups of persons any and all of the powers conferred upon it by this act so  far as it is reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act.  Such  persons shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for any  necessary expenses.

    (h) The personnel of the Division of Public Employment Relations shall include only individuals familiar with the field of public employee-management relations.  The commission's determination that a person is familiar in this field shall not be reviewable by any other body.

     L.1941, c. 100, p. 230, s. 6.  Amended by L.1968, c. 303, s. 8, eff. July 1, 1968;  L.1974, c. 123, s. 5.

34:13A-6.1.  Priority of reorganization plan of department of labor and industry
    To the extent that the reorganization plan of the Department of Labor and Industry which was submitted to the Legislature on May 11, 1972 (effective July  10, 1972) is inconsistent with, changes or alters the powers of either the New  Jersey Public Employment Relations Commission in the Division of Public  Employment Relations or the Board of Mediation in the Division of Private  Employment Dispute Settlement as they existed prior to the effective date of  said reorganization, such reorganization plan shall be to such extent superseded and inoperative.

     L.1973, c. 326, s. 3, eff. Dec. 18, 1973.

34:13A-7.  Arbitration
    Whenever a controversy shall arise between an employer and his employees which is not settled either in conference between representatives of the parties or through mediation in the manner provided by this act, such controversy may, by agreement of the parties, be submitted to arbitration, one person to be selected by the employer, one person to be selected by the employees, and a third selected by the representatives of the employer and employees, and in the event of any such appointment or selection not being made  upon the request of the parties in the controversy, the department may select  the third person to arbitrate the matter submitted;  provided, however, that  the failure or refusal of either party to submit a controversy to arbitration  shall not be construed as a violation of the policy or purpose of this act, or  of any provision thereof, nor shall failure or refusal to arbitrate constitute  a basis for any action at law or suit in equity.

     L.1941, c. 100, p. 231, s. 7.

34:13A-8.  Strikes
    Nothing in this act shall be construed to interfere with, impede or diminish  in any way the right of private employees to strike or engage in other lawful  concerted activities.

     L.1941, c. 100, p. 231, s. 8.  Amended by L.1968, c. 303, s. 9, eff. July 1, 1968.

34:13A-8.1.  Effect of act upon prior agreements or upon pension statutes
    Nothing in this act shall be construed to annul or modify, or to preclude the continuation of any agreement during its current term heretofore entered into between any public employer and any employee organization nor shall any provision hereof annul or modify any pension statute or statutes of this State.

     L.1968, c. 303, s. 10, eff. July 1, 1968.  Amended by L.1974, c. 123, s. 6.

34:13A-8.2.  Filed contracts in public employment
    The commission shall collect and maintain a current file of filed contracts  in public employment.  Public employers shall file with the commission a copy  of any contracts it has negotiated with public employee representatives  following the consummation of negotiations.

     L.1968, c. 303, s. 11.

34:13A-8.3.  Development and maintenance of programs
    The commission in conjunction with the Institute of Management and Labor of  Rutgers, The State University, shall develop and maintain a program for the  guidance of public employees and public employers in employee-management relations, to provide technical advice to public employees and public employers  on employee-management programs, to assist in the development of programs for  training employee and management personnel in the principles and procedures of  consultation, negotiation and the settlement of disputes in the public service,  and for the training of employee and management officials in the discharge of  their employee-management relations responsibilities in the public interest.

     L.1968, c. 303, s. 12, eff. July 1, 1968.  Amended by L.1974, c. 123, s. 7.

34:13A-9.  Personnel;  compensation
    (1) For the performance of its work, under this act, the board may request and shall avail itself of and utilize the service of any officer or employee of  the Department of Labor and Industry who shall render such assistance as the  board may require without additional compensation.  The board may, within the  amount available therefor by appropriation, appoint a secretary and such other  assistants and employees as it may require for the consummation of its work,  prescribe their duties and fix their compensation.  (2) Each member of the  board shall be entitled to be reimbursed for his traveling and other expenses  actually and necessarily incurred by him in the performance of his duties, and,  in addition, shall receive a per diem allowance of $50.00 for each day, or part  thereof, spent in the rendition of service to or for the board under this act;   provided, however, that no member shall in any case receive per diem  compensation as such member in an amount in excess of $5,000.00 for any 1  fiscal year.

     L.1941, c. 100, p. 231, s. 9.  Amended by L.1945, c. 32, p. 89, s. 2; L.1967,  c. 110, s. 1, eff. June 15, 1967.

34:13A-10.  Disqualifications
    No member or officer of the board having any financial or other interest in  a trade, business, industry or occupation in which a labor dispute exists or is  threatened and of which the board has taken cognizance, shall be qualified to  participate in any way in the acts or efforts of the board in connection with  the settlement or avoidance thereof.

     L.1941, c. 100, p. 232, s. 10.

34:13A-10.1.  Board members;  participation;  membership or employment in other agencies
    No member of the board shall take any part, directly or indirectly, in any proceeding involving any relation between employees and employers before any board, bureau, commission, officer or court, unless such member in such proceeding takes the part of the same group whether employees, employers, or the public, as he represents on the Board of Mediation.

    No member of the board shall be a member or employee of any other public board, body, commission, bureau or agency which deals with employer and employee relations, whether Federal, State or local, except that he may be a member of any such board, body, commission, bureau or agency if his membership thereon is as a representative of the same group, whether employees, employers or the public, as it is on the Board of Mediation.

     L.1945, c. 32, p. 90, s. 3.

34:13A-11.  Rules
    The board shall have power to adopt, alter, amend or repeal such rules in connection with the voluntary mediation of labor disputes in private employment  and the commission shall have the same powers in public employment,  as may be  necessary for the proper administration and enforcement of the provisions of  this act.

     L.1941, c. 100, p. 232, s. 11.  Amended by L.1968, c. 303, s. 13, eff. July 1,  1968.

34:13A-12.  Construction
    Nothing contained in this act shall be construed as interfering with, impeding or diminishing in any way any right guaranteed by law or by the Constitution of the State or of the United States.

     L.1941, c. 100, p. 232, s. 12.

34:13A-13.  Separability of provisions
    If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this act, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, shall for any reason be adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this act, and the application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, or part thereof, directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and  to the person or circumstances involved.  It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that this act would have been adopted had such invalid provisions not been included herein.

     L.1941, c. 100, p. 232, s. 13.

34:13A-14.  Findings, declarations relative to compulsory arbitration procedure
	1.	The Legislature finds and declares:

	a. 	Recognizing the unique and essential duties which law enforcement officers and firefighters perform for the benefit and protection of the people of this State, cognizant of the life threatening dangers these public servants regularly confront in the daily pursuit of their public mission, and fully conscious of the fact that these public employees, by legal and moral precept, do not enjoy the right to strike, it is the public policy of this State that it is requisite to the high morale of such employees, the efficient operation of such departments, and to the general well-being and benefit of the citizens of this State to afford an alternate, expeditious, effective and binding procedure for the resolution of disputes; and

	b. 	It also is the public policy of this State to ensure that the procedure so established fairly and adequately recognizes and gives all due consideration to the interests and welfare of the taxpaying public; and

	c. 	Further, it is the public policy of this State to prescribe the scope of the authority delegated for the purposes of this reform act; to provide that the authority so delegated be statutorily limited, reasonable, and infused with stringent safeguards, while at the same time affording arbitrators the decision making authority necessary to protect the public good; and to mandate that in exercising the authority delegated under this reform act, arbitrators fully recognize and consider the public interest and the impact that their decisions have on the public welfare, and fairly and reasonably perform their statutory responsibilities to the end that labor peace between the public employer and its employees will be stabilized and promoted, and that the general public interest and welfare shall be preserved; and, therefore,

	d. 	To that end the provisions of this reform act, providing for compulsory arbitration, shall be liberally construed.

	L.1977,c.85,s.1; amended 1995,c.425,s.2.

34:13A-14a.  Short title
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Police and Fire Public Interest Arbitration Reform Act."

	L.1995,c.425,s.1.

34:13A-15  Definitions.
	2.	"Public fire department" means any department of a municipality, county, fire district, or the State or any agency thereof having employees engaged in firefighting provided that such firefighting employees are included in a negotiating unit exclusively comprised of firefighting employees.
 
	"Public police department" means any police department or organization of a municipality, county or park, or the State, or any agency thereof having employees engaged in performing police services including but not necessarily limited to units composed of State troopers, police officers, detectives and investigators of counties, county parks and park commissions, grades of sheriff's officers and investigators; State motor vehicle officers, inspectors and investigators of the Alcoholic Beverage Commission, conservation police officers in the Division of Fish and Wildlife in the Department of Environmental Protection, State park police officers, marine patrolmen; correction officers, keepers, cottage officers, interstate escort officers, juvenile officers in the Department of Corrections and patrolmen of the Human Services and Corrections Departments; patrolmen of Capitol police and patrolmen of the Palisades Interstate Park Commission.
 
	L.1977, c.85, s.2; amended 2019, c.407, s.16.
                                                                                                                                   

34:13A-16  Negotiations between public fire, police department and exclusive representative; unfair practice charge; negotiation; factfinding; arbitration.
 	3. a. (1) Negotiations between a public fire or police department and an exclusive representative concerning the terms and conditions of employment shall begin at least 120 days prior to the day on which their collective negotiation agreement is to expire.  The parties shall meet at least three times during that 120-day period.  The first of those three meetings shall take place no later than the 90th day prior to the day on which their collective negotiation agreement is to expire.  By mutual consent, the parties may agree to extend the period during which the second and third meetings are required to take place beyond the day on which their collective negotiation agreement is to expire.  A violation of this paragraph shall constitute an unfair practice and the violator shall be subject to the penalties prescribed by the commission pursuant to rule and regulation.
	Prior to the expiration of their collective negotiation agreement, either party may file an unfair practice charge with the commission alleging that the other party is refusing to negotiate in good faith.  The charge shall be filed in the manner, form and time specified by the commission in rule and regulation.  If the charge is sustained, the commission shall order that the respondent be assessed for all legal and administrative costs associated with the filing and resolution of the charge; if the charge is dismissed, the commission shall order that the charging party be assessed for all legal and administrative costs associated with the filing and resolution of the charge.  The filing and resolution of the unfair practice charge shall not delay or impair the impasse resolution process.
	(2) Whenever those negotiations concerning the terms and conditions of employment shall reach an impasse, the commission, through the Division of Public Employment Relations shall, upon the request of either party, or upon its own motion take such steps, including the assignment of a mediator, as it may deem expedient to effect a voluntary resolution of the impasse.
	b. (1) In the event of a failure to resolve the impasse by mediation, the Division of Public Employment Relations, at the request of either party, shall invoke factfinding with recommendation for settlement of all issues in dispute unless the parties reach a voluntary settlement prior to the issuance of the factfinder's report and recommended terms of settlement. Factfinding shall be limited to those issues that are within the required scope of negotiations unless the parties to the factfinding agree to factfinding on permissive subjects of negotiation.
	(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (2) of subsection a. of this section or paragraph (1) of this subsection, either party may petition the commission for arbitration on or after the date on which their collective negotiation agreement expires.  The petition shall be filed in a manner and form prescribed by the commission.  The party filing the petition shall notify the other party of its action. The notice shall be given in a manner and form prescribed by the commission.
	Any mediation or factfinding invoked pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection a. of this section or paragraph (1) of subsection b. of this section shall terminate immediately upon the filing of a petition for arbitration.
	(3) Upon the filing of a petition for arbitration pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection, an arbitrator selected pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection e. of this section shall conduct an initial meeting as a mediation session to effect a voluntary resolution of the impasse.
	c.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2010, c.105)
	d.	The resolution of issues in dispute shall be binding arbitration under which the award on the unsettled issues is determined by conventional arbitration.  The arbitrator shall determine whether the total net annual economic changes for each year of the agreement are reasonable under the nine statutory criteria set forth in subsection g. of this section and shall adhere to the limitations set forth in section 2 of P.L.2010, c.105 (C.34:13A-16.7).  The non-petitioning party, within five days of receipt of the petition, shall separately notify the commission in writing of all issues in dispute. The filing of the written response shall not delay, in any manner, the interest arbitration process.
	e. (1) The commission shall take measures to assure the impartial selection of an arbitrator or arbitrators from its special panel of arbitrators.  On the first business day following receipt of an interest arbitration petition, the commission shall, independent of and without any participation by either of the parties, randomly select an arbitrator from its special panel of arbitrators.  The selection by the commission shall be final and shall not be subject to review or appeal.
	(2) Applicants for initial appointment to the commission's special panel of arbitrators shall be chosen based on their professional qualifications, knowledge, and experience, in accordance with the criteria and rules adopted by the commission.  Such rules shall include relevant knowledge of local government operations and budgeting.  Appointment to the commission's special panel of arbitrators shall be for a three-year term, with reappointment contingent upon a screening process similar to that used for determining initial appointments.  Arbitrators currently serving on the panel shall demonstrate to the commission their professional qualification, knowledge and experience, in accordance with the criteria and rules adopted by the commission, within one year of the effective date of this act.  Any arbitrator who does not satisfactorily demonstrate such to the commission within the specified time shall be disqualified.
	(3) Arbitrators serving on the commission's special panel shall be guided by and subject to the objectives and principles set forth in the "Code of Professional Responsibility for Arbitrators of Labor-Management Disputes" of the National Academy of Arbitrators, the American Arbitration Association, and the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service.
	(4) Arbitrators shall be required to complete annual training offered by the State Ethics Commission.  Any arbitrator failing to satisfactorily complete the annual training shall be immediately removed from the special panel.
	The commission may suspend, remove, or otherwise discipline an arbitrator for a violation of P.L.1977, c.85 (C.34:13A-14 et seq.), section 4 of P.L.1995, c.425 (C.34:13A-16.1) or for good cause.  An arbitrator who fails to render an award within the time requirements set forth in this section shall be fined $ 1,000 for each day that the award is late.	
	f. (1) At a time prescribed by the commission, the parties shall submit to the arbitrator their final offers on each economic and non-economic issue in dispute.  The offers submitted pursuant to this section shall be used by the arbitrator for the purposes of determining an award pursuant to subsection d. of this section.
	(2) In the event of a dispute, the commission shall have the power to decide which issues are economic issues.  Economic issues include those items which have a direct relation to employee income including wages, salaries, hours in relation to earnings, and other forms of compensation such as paid vacation, paid holidays, health and medical insurance, and other economic benefits to employees.
	(3) Throughout formal arbitration proceedings the chosen arbitrator may mediate or assist the parties in reaching a mutually agreeable settlement.
	All parties to arbitration shall present, at the formal hearing before the issuance of the award, written estimates of the financial impact of their last offer on the taxpayers of the local unit to the arbitrator with the submission of their last offer.
	(4) Arbitration shall be limited to those subjects that are within the required scope of collective negotiations, except that the parties may agree to submit to arbitration one or more permissive subjects of negotiation.
	(5) The decision of an arbitrator or panel of arbitrators shall include an opinion and an award, and shall be rendered within 90 calendar days of the commission's assignment of that arbitrator.
	Each arbitrator's decision shall be accompanied by a written report explaining how each of the statutory criteria played into the arbitrator's determination of the final award.  The report shall certify that the arbitrator took the statutory limitations imposed on the local levy cap into account in making the award.	
	Any arbitrator violating the provisions of this paragraph may be subject to the commission's powers under paragraph (3) of subsection e. of this section. The decision shall be final and binding upon the parties and shall be irreversible, except:
	(a) Within 14 calendar days of receiving an award, an aggrieved party may file notice of an appeal of an award to the commission on the grounds that the arbitrator failed to apply the criteria specified in subsection g. of this section or violated the standards set forth in N.J.S.2A:24-8 or N.J.S.2A:24-9.  The appeal shall be filed in a form and manner prescribed by the commission.  In deciding an appeal, the commission, pursuant to rule and regulation and upon petition, may afford the parties the opportunity to present oral arguments.  The commission may affirm, modify, correct or vacate the award or may, at its discretion, remand the award to the same arbitrator or to another arbitrator, selected by lot, for reconsideration.  The commission's decision shall be rendered no later than 60 calendar days after the filing of the appeal with the commission.
	Arbitration appeal decisions shall be accompanied by a written report explaining how each of the statutory criteria played into their determination of the final award.  The report shall certify that in deciding the appeal, the commission took the local levy cap into account in making the award.
	An aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the commission to the Appellate Division of the Superior Court.
	(b) An arbitrator's award shall be implemented immediately.
	(6) The parties shall share equally the costs of arbitration subject to a fee schedule approved by the commission.  The fee schedule shall provide that the cost of services provided by the arbitrator shall not exceed $ 1,000 per day.  The total cost of services of an arbitrator shall not exceed $ 10,000. If the parties cancel an arbitration proceeding without good cause, the arbitrator may impose a fee of not more than $ 500. The parties shall share equally in paying that fee if the request to cancel or adjourn is a joint request.  Otherwise, the party causing such cancellation shall be responsible for payment of the entire fee.
	g.	The arbitrator shall decide the dispute based on a reasonable determination of the issues, giving due weight to those factors listed below that are judged relevant for the resolution of the specific dispute.  In the award, the arbitrator or panel of arbitrators shall indicate which of the factors are deemed relevant, satisfactorily explain why the others are not relevant, and provide an analysis of the evidence on each relevant factor; provided, however, that in every interest arbitration proceeding, the parties shall introduce evidence regarding the factor set forth in paragraph (6) of this subsection and the arbitrator shall analyze and consider the factor set forth in paragraph (6) of this subsection in any award:
	(1) The interests and welfare of the public.  Among the items the arbitrator or panel of arbitrators shall assess when considering this factor are the limitations imposed upon the employer by P.L.1976, c.68 (C.40A:4-45.1 et seq.).
	(2) Comparison of the wages, salaries, hours, and conditions of employment of the employees involved in the arbitration proceedings with the wages, hours, and conditions of employment of other employees performing the same or similar services and with other employees generally:
	(a) In private employment in general; provided, however, each party shall have the right to submit additional evidence for the arbitrator's consideration.
	(b) In public employment in general; provided, however, each party shall have the right to submit additional evidence for the arbitrator's consideration.
	(c) In public employment in the same or similar comparable jurisdictions, as determined in accordance with section 5 of P.L.1995, c.425 (C.34:13A-16.2); provided, however, that each party shall have the right to submit additional evidence concerning the comparability of jurisdictions for the arbitrator's consideration.
	(3) The overall compensation presently received by the employees, inclusive of direct wages, salary, vacations, holidays, excused leaves, insurance and pensions, medical and hospitalization benefits, and all other economic benefits received.
	(4) Stipulations of the parties.
	(5) The lawful authority of the employer. Among the items the arbitrator or panel of arbitrators shall assess when considering this factor are the limitations imposed upon the employer by P.L.1976, c.68 (C.40A:4-45.1 et seq.).
	(6) The financial impact on the governing unit, its residents, the limitations imposed upon the local unit's property tax levy pursuant to section 10 of P.L.2007, c.62 (C.40A:4-45.45), and taxpayers.  When considering this factor in a dispute in which the public employer is a county or a municipality, the arbitrator or panel of arbitrators shall take into account, to the extent that evidence is introduced, how the award will affect the municipal or county purposes element, as the case may be, of the local property tax; a comparison of the percentage of the municipal purposes element or, in the case of a county, the county purposes element, required to fund the employees' contract in the preceding local budget year with that required under the award for the current local budget year; the impact of the award for each income sector of the property taxpayers of the local unit; the impact of the award on the ability of the governing body to (a) maintain existing local programs and services, (b) expand existing local programs and services for which public moneys have been designated by the governing body in a proposed local budget, or (c) initiate any new programs and services for which public moneys have been designated by the governing body in a proposed local budget.
	(7) The cost of living.
	(8) The continuity and stability of employment including seniority rights and such other factors not confined to the foregoing which are ordinarily or traditionally considered in the determination of wages, hours, and conditions of employment through collective negotiations and collective bargaining between the parties in the public service and in private employment.
	(9) Statutory restrictions imposed on the employer.  Among the items the arbitrator or panel of arbitrators shall assess when considering this factor are the limitations imposed upon the employer by section 10 of P.L.2007, c.62 (C.40A:4-45.45).
	h.	A mediator, factfinder, or arbitrator while functioning in a mediatory capacity shall not be required to disclose any files, records, reports, documents, or other papers classified as confidential received or prepared by him or to testify with regard to mediation, conducted by him under this act on behalf of any party to any cause pending in any type of proceeding under this act.  Nothing contained herein shall exempt such an individual from disclosing information relating to the commission of a crime.
	i.	The Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs may notify the commission, through the Division of Public Employment Relations, that a municipality deemed a "municipality in need of stabilization and recovery" pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2016, c.4 (C.52:27BBBB-4) will not participate in any impasse procedures authorized by this section.  Upon such notice, any pending impasse procedures authorized by this section shall immediately cease, and any pending petition for arbitration shall be vacated.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit the scope of any general or specific powers of the Local Finance Board or the director set forth in P.L.2016, c.4 (C.52:27BBBB-1 et al.).
	The provisions of this subsection shall no longer be applicable on and after the first day of the sixth year next following the determination by the Commissioner of Community Affairs that the municipality shall be deemed "a municipality in need of stabilization and recovery" pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2016, c.4 (C.52:27BBBB-4); however, actions taken pursuant to this subsection prior to the effective date of P.L.2021, c.124 (C.52:27BBBB-4 et al.) shall be final and shall not be subject to reconsideration.
	j.	The Local Finance Board may provide that any arbitration award, including but not limited to an interest arbitration award, involving a municipality deemed a "municipality in need of stabilization and recovery" pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2016, c.4 (C.52:27BBBB-4) shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs, including those on a collective negotiations agreement where the matter has been submitted to an arbitrator pursuant to law, and no such award shall be binding without the approval of the director.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit the scope of any general or specific powers of the Local Finance Board or the director set forth in P.L.2016, c.4 (C.52:27BBBB-4).
	The provisions of this subsection shall no longer be applicable on and after the first day of the sixth year next following the determination by the Commissioner of Community Affairs that the municipality shall be deemed "a municipality in need of stabilization and recovery" pursuant to section 4 of P.L.2016, c.4 (C.52:27BBBB-4); however, actions taken pursuant to this subsection prior to the effective date of P.L.2021, c.124 (C.52:27BBBB-4 et al.) shall be final and shall not be subject to reconsideration.

	L.1977, c.85, s.3; amended 1995, c.425, s.3; 1997, c.183; 2007, c.62, s.14; 2010, c.105, s.1; 2014, c.11, s.1; 2016, c.4, s.6; 2021, c.124, s.5.


34:13A-16.1.  Annual continuing education program for arbitrators
	4.	The commission shall establish an annual continuing education program for the arbitrators appointed to its special panel of arbitrators.  The program shall include sessions or seminars on topics and issues of relevance and importance to arbitrators serving on the commission's special panel of arbitrators, such as public employer budgeting and finance, public management and administration, employment trends and labor costs in the public sector, pertinent court decisions, employment issues relating to law enforcement officers and firefighters, and such other topics as the commission shall deem appropriate and necessary.  In preparing the curriculum for the annual education program required under this section, the commission shall solicit suggestions from employees' representatives and public employers concerning the topics and issues each of those parties deem relevant and important.

	Every arbitrator shall be required to participate in the commission's continuing education program.  If a mediator or an arbitrator in any year fails to participate, the commission may remove that person from its special panel of arbitrators.  If an arbitrator fails to participate in the continuing education program for two consecutive years, the commission shall immediately remove that individual from the special panel.

	L.1995,c.425,s.4.

34:13A-16.2.  Guidelines for determining comparability of jurisdictions
	5. a. The commission shall promulgate guidelines for determining the comparability of jurisdictions for the purposes of paragraph (2) of subsection g. of section 3 of P.L.1977, c.85 (C.34:13A-16).
 
	b.	The commission shall review the guidelines promulgated under this section at least once every four years and may modify or amend them as is deemed necessary; provided, however, that the commission shall review and modify those guidelines in each year in which a federal decennial census is received by the Governor.

	L.1995,c.425,s.5; amended 2021, c.369, s.2.

34:13A-16.3.  Fee schedule; commission's costs
	6.	The commission may establish a fee schedule to cover the costs of effectuating the provisions of P.L.1977, c.85 (C.34:13A-14 et seq.), as amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the fees so assessed shall not exceed the commission's actual cost of effectuating those provisions.

	L.1995,c.425,s.6.

34:13A-16.4.  Biennial reports
	7.	The commission shall submit biennial reports to the Governor and the Legislature on the effects of this amendatory and supplementary act on the negotiations and settlements between local governmental units and their public police departments and public fire departments and to include with that report any recommendations it may have for changes in the law.  The reports required under this section shall be submitted in January of even numbered years.

	L.1995,c.425,s.7.

34:13A-16.5.  Rules, regulations
	8.	The commission, in accordance with the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), shall promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this act.

	L.1995,c.425,s.8.

34:13A-16.6.  Survey of private sector wage increases
	9.	Beginning on the July 1 next following the enactment of P.L.1995, c.425 (C.34:13A-14a et al.) and each July 1 thereafter, the New Jersey Public Employment Relations Commission shall perform, or cause to be performed, a survey of private sector wage increases for use by all interested parties in public sector wage negotiations.  The survey shall include information on a Statewide and countywide basis.  The survey shall be completed by September 1 next following enactment and by September 1 of each year thereafter.  The survey shall be a public document and the commission shall make it available to all interested parties at a cost not exceeding the actual cost of producing the survey.

	L.1995,c.425,s.9.

34:13A-16.7  Definitions relative to police and fire arbitration; limitation on awards.
 
	2. a. As used in this section: 

	"Base salary" means the salary provided pursuant to a salary guide or table and any amount provided pursuant to a salary increment, including any amount provided for longevity or length of service.  It also shall include any other item agreed to by the parties, or any other item that was included in the base salary as understood by the parties in the prior contract.  Base salary shall not include non-salary economic issues, pension and health and medical insurance costs.  
 
	"Non-salary economic issues" means any economic issue that is not included in the definition of base salary.
 
	b.	An arbitrator shall not render any award pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1977, c.85 (C.34:13A-16) which, in the first year of the collective negotiation agreement awarded by the arbitrator, increases base salary items by more than 2.0 percent of the aggregate amount expended by the public employer on base salary items for the members of the affected employee organization in the twelve months immediately preceding the expiration of the collective negotiation agreement subject to arbitration.  In each subsequent year of the agreement awarded by the arbitrator, base salary items shall not be increased by more than 2.0 percent of the aggregate amount expended by the public employer on base salary items for the members of the affected employee organization in the immediately preceding year of the agreement awarded by the arbitrator. 
 
	The parties may agree, or the arbitrator may decide, to distribute the aggregate monetary value of the award over the term of the collective negotiation agreement in unequal annual percentage increases, which shall not be greater than the compounded value of a 2.0 percent increase per year over the corresponding length of the collective negotiation agreement.  An award of an arbitrator shall not include base salary items and non-salary economic issues which were not included in the prior collective negotiations agreement.
 
	L.2010, c.105, s.2; amended 2014, c.11, s.2.

34:13A-16.8  Police and Fire Public Interest Arbitration Impact Task Force.
 
 	3. a. There is established a task force, to be known as the Police and Fire Public Interest Arbitration Impact Task Force.
 
	b.	The task force shall be comprised of eight members as follows:
 
	(1)	four to be appointed by the Governor; 
 
	(2)	two to be appointed by the Senate President; and
 
	(3)	two to be appointed by the Speaker of the General Assembly. 
 
	c.	All appointments shall be made within 30 days of the effective date of P.L.2010, c.105 (C.34:13A-16.7 et al.).  Vacancies in the membership shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments.  The members of the task force shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed, within the limits of funds made available to the task force, for necessary travel expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.  
 
	d. (1) The task force shall organize as soon as is practicable upon the appointment of a majority of its members and shall select a chairperson from among the appointees of the Governor and a vice chairperson from among the appointees of the Legislature.  The Chair of the Public Employment Relations Commission shall serve as non-voting executive director of the task force.  
 
	(2)	The task force shall meet within 60 days of the effective date of P.L.2010, c.105 (C.34:13A-16.7 et al.) and shall meet thereafter at the call of its chair.  In furtherance of its evaluation, the task force may hold public meetings or hearings within the State on any matter or matters related to the provisions of this act, and call to its assistance and avail itself of the services of the Public Employment Relations Commission and the employees of any State department, board, task force or agency which the task force determines possesses relevant data, analytical and professional expertise or other resources which may assist the task force in discharging its duties under this act. Each department, board, commission or agency of this State is hereby directed, to the extent not inconsistent with law, to cooperate fully with the task force and to furnish such information and assistance as is necessary to accomplish the purposes of this act. In addition, in order to facilitate the work of the task force, the Public Employment Relations Commission shall post on its website all collective negotiations agreements and interest arbitration awards entered or awarded after the date of enactment, including a summary of contract or arbitration award terms in a standard format developed by the Public Employment Relations Commission to facilitate comparisons.  All collective negotiations agreements shall be submitted to the Public Employment Relations Commission within 15 days of contract execution.  
 
	e. (1) It shall be the duty of the task force to study the effect and impact of the arbitration award cap upon local property taxes; collective bargaining agreements; arbitration awards; municipal services; municipal expenditures; municipal public safety services, particularly changes in crime rates and response times to emergency situations; police and fire recruitment, hiring and retention; the professional profile of police and fire departments, particularly with regard to age, experience, and staffing levels; and such other matters as the members deem appropriate and necessary to evaluate the effects and impact of the arbitration award cap.  
 
	(2)	Specifically, the task force shall study total compensation rates, including factors subject to the arbitration award cap and factors exempt from the arbitration award cap, of police and fire personnel throughout the State and make recommendations thereon.  The task force also shall study the interest arbitration process and make recommendations concerning its continued use in connection with police and fire labor contracts disputes.  The task force shall make findings as to the relative growth in total compensation cost attributable to factors subject to the arbitration award cap and to factors exempt from the arbitration award cap, for both collective bargaining agreements and arbitration awards.  
 
	f.	The task force shall annually report its findings, along with any recommendations it may have, to the Governor and, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), to the Legislature.  The task force's final report due on or before December 31, 2017 shall include, in addition to any other findings and recommendations, a specific recommendation for any amendments to the arbitration award cap. Upon the filing of its final report on or before December 31, 2017, the task force shall expire. 
 
	L.2010, c.105, s.3; amended 2014, c.11, s.3.

34:13A-16.9  Effective date.
 
 	4.	This act shall take effect January 1, 2011; provided however, section 2 of P.L.2010, c.105 (C.34:13A-16.7) shall apply only to collective negotiations between a public employer and the exclusive representative of a public police department or public fire department that relate to negotiated agreements expiring on that effective date or any date thereafter until or on December 31, 2017, whereupon, after December 31, 2017, the provisions of section 2 of P.L.2010, c.105 (C.34:13A-16.7) shall become inoperative for all parties except those whose collective negotiations agreements expired prior to or on December 31, 2017 but for whom a final settlement has not been reached. 
 
	L.2010, c.105, s.4; amended 2014, c.11, s.4.

34:13A-17.  Powers of arbitrator
    The arbitrator may administer oaths, require the attendance of witnesses, and the production of such books, papers, contracts, agreements and documents as he may deem material to a just determination of the issues in dispute, and for such purpose may issue subpenas.  If any person refuses to obey a subpena, or refuses to be sworn or to testify, or if any witness, party or attorney is guilty of any contempt while in attendance at any hearing, the arbitrator may, or the Attorney General if requested shall, invoke the aid of the Superior Court within the county in which the hearing is being held, which court shall issue an appropriate order.  Any failure to obey the order may be punished by the court as contempt.

     L.1977, c. 85, s. 4, eff. May 10, 1977.

34:13A-18.  Limitations on finding, opinion, order of arbitrator
	5.	The arbitrator shall not issue any finding, opinion or order regarding the issue of whether or not a public employer shall remain as a participant in the New Jersey State Health Benefits Program or any governmental retirement system or pension fund, or statutory retirement or pension plan; nor, in the case of a participating public employer, shall the arbitrator issue any finding, opinion or order regarding any aspect of the rights, duties, obligations in or associated with the New Jersey State Health Benefits Program or any governmental retirement system or pension fund, or statutory retirement or pension plan; nor shall the arbitrator issue any finding, opinion or order reducing, eliminating or otherwise modifying retiree benefits which exist as a result of a negotiated agreement, ordinance or resolution because of the enactment of legislation providing such benefits for those who do not already receive them.

	L.1977,c.85,s.5; amended 1997, c.330, s.4.

34:13A-19.  Decision;  enforcement;  venue;  effective date of award; amendment or modification
    The decision of the arbitrator may be enforced at the instance of either party in the Superior Court with venue laid in the county in which the dispute arose.  The commencement of a new public employer fiscal year after the initiation of arbitration procedures under this act, but before the arbitration  decision, or its enforcement, shall not be deemed to render a dispute moot, or  to otherwise impair the jurisdiction or authority of the arbitrator or his  decision.  Increases in rates of compensation awarded by the arbitrator shall  take effect on the date of implementation prescribed in the award.  The  parties, by stipulation, may at any time amend or modify an award of  arbitration.

     L.1977, c. 85, s. 6, eff. May 10, 1977.

34:13A-21.  Change in conditions during pendency of proceedings; prohibition without consent
    During the pendency of proceedings before the arbitrator, existing wages, hours and other conditions of employment shall not be changed by action of either party without the consent of the other, any change in or of the public employer or employee representative notwithstanding;  but a party may so consent without prejudice to his rights or position under this supplementary act.

     L.1977, c. 85, s. 8, eff. May 10, 1977.

34:13A-22  Definitions.
 	1.	As used in this act:

	"Commission" means the New Jersey Public Employment Relations Commission.
 
	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Education.
 
	"Discipline" includes all forms of discipline, except tenure charges filed pursuant to the provisions of subsubarticle 2 of subarticle B of Article 2 of chapter 6 of Subtitle 3 of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes, N.J.S.18A:6-10 et seq., or the withholding of increments pursuant to N.J.S.18A:29-14.  
 
	"Employees" means employees of an employer as defined by this act.
 
	"Employer" means any local or regional school district, educational services commission, jointure commission, county special services school district, or board or commission under the authority of the commissioner or the State Board of Education, and with respect to section 8 of P.L.1989, c.269 (C.34:13A-29), any county college under the authority of the Secretary of Higher Education.
 
	"Extracurricular activities" include those activities or assignments not specified as part of the teaching and duty assignments scheduled in the regular work day, work week, or work year.
 
	"Minor discipline" includes, but is not limited to, various forms of fines and suspensions, but does not include tenure charges filed pursuant to the provisions of subsubarticle 2 of subarticle B of Article 2 of chapter 6 of Subtitle 3 of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes, N.J.S.18A:6-10 et seq., or the withholding of increments pursuant to N.J.S.18A:29-14, letters of reprimand, or suspensions with pay pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1971, c.435 (C.18A:6-8.3) and N.J.S.18A:25-6.  
 
	"Regular work day, work week, or work year" means that period of time that all members of the bargaining unit are required to be present and at work.
 
	"Teaching staff member" means a member of the professional staff of any employer holding office, position or employment of such character that the qualifications, for the office, position or employment, require him to hold a valid and effective standard, provisional or emergency certificate, appropriate to that office, position or employment, issued by the State Board of Examiners.  "Teaching staff member" includes a school nurse.
 
	L.1989, c.269, s.1; amended 2020, c.66, s.2.

34:13A-23.   Assignment to extracurricular activities; subject to collective negotiations  
     All aspects of assignment to, retention in, dismissal from, and any terms and conditions of employment concerning extracurricular activities shall be deemed mandatory subjects for collective negotiations between an employer and the majority representative of the employees in a collective bargaining unit, except that the establishment of qualifications for such positions shall not constitute a mandatory subject for negotiations.  If the negotiated selection procedures fail to produce a qualified candidate from within the district the employer may employ from outside the district any qualified person who holds an appropriate New Jersey teaching certificate.  If the employer is unable to employ a qualified person from outside of the district, the employer may assign a qualified teaching staff member from within the district.  

    L.1989, c.269, s.2.  

34:13A-24.   Imposition of minor discipline  
     a.   Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, and if negotiated with the majority representative of the employees in the appropriate collective bargaining unit, an employer shall have the authority to impose minor discipline on employees.  Nothing contained herein shall limit the authority of the employer to impose, in the absence of a negotiated agreement regarding minor discipline, any disciplinary sanction which is authorized and not prohibited by law.  

    b.   The scope of such negotiations shall include a schedule setting forth the acts and omissions for which minor discipline may be imposed, and also the penalty to be imposed for any act or omission warranting imposition of minor discipline.  

    c.   Fines and suspensions for minor discipline shall not constitute a reduction in compensation pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.18A:6-10.

  

    L.1989, c.269, s.3.  

34:13A-25.   Transfer of employees  
     Transfers of employees by employers between work sites shall not be mandatorily negotiable except that no employer shall transfer an employee for disciplinary reasons.

  

    L.1989, c.269, s.4.  

34:13A-26.   Withholding increment for disciplinary reasons  
     Disputes involving the withholding of an employee's increment by an employer for predominately disciplinary reasons shall be subject to the grievance procedures established pursuant to law and shall be subject to the provisions of section 8 of this act.  

    L.1989, c.269, s.5.  

34:13A-27.   Resolution of disputes  
     a.   If there is a dispute as to whether a transfer of an employee between work sites or withholding of an increment of a teaching staff member is disciplinary, the commission shall determine whether the basis for the transfer or withholding is predominately disciplinary.  

    b.   If the commission determines that the basis for a transfer is predominately disciplinary, the commission shall have the authority to take reasonable action to effectuate the purposes of this act.

  

    c.   If the commission determines that the basis for an increment withholding is predominately disciplinary, the dispute shall be resolved through the grievance procedures established pursuant to law and shall be subject to the provisions of section 8 of this act.  

    d.   If a dispute involving the reason for the withholding of a teaching staff member's increment is submitted to the commission pursuant to subsection a. of this section, and the commission determines that the reason for the increment withholding relates predominately to the evaluation of a teaching staff member's teaching performance, the teaching staff member may file a petition of appeal pursuant to N.J.S.18A:6-9 and N.J.S.18A:29-14, and the petition shall be deemed to be timely if filed within 90 days of notice of the commission's decision, or of the final judicial decision in any appeal from the decision of the commission, whichever date is later.  

    L.1989, c.269, s.6.  

34:13A-28.   Additional rights  
     Nothing in this act shall be deemed to restrict or limit any right established or provided by section 7 of P.L.1968, c.303 (C.34:13A-5.3); this act shall be construed as providing additional rights in addition to and supplementing the rights provided by that section.  

    L.1989, c.269, s.7.  

34:13A-29  Grievance procedures; binding arbitration.
 	8. a. The grievance procedures that employers covered by this act are required to negotiate pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1968, c.303 (C.34:13A-5.3) shall be deemed to require binding arbitration as the terminal step with respect to disputes concerning imposition of reprimands and discipline as that term is defined in this act.
 
	b.	In any grievance procedure negotiated pursuant to this act, the burden of proof shall be on the employer covered by this act seeking to impose discipline as that term is defined in this act.
 
	c.	In addition to any rights provided pursuant to subsection a. of this section, an employee who is not a teaching staff member as defined by section 1 of P.L.1989, c.269 (C.34:13A-22) shall have the right to submit to binding arbitration any dispute regarding whether there is just cause for a disciplinary action, including, but not limited to, reprimands, withholding of increments, termination or non-renewal of an employment contract, expiration or lapse of an employment contract or term, or lack of continuation of employment, irrespective of the reason for the employer's action or failure to act, and irrespective of any contractual or negotiated provision or lack thereof.  In the arbitration, the burden of proof shall be on the employer.
 
	The provisions of this subsection c. shall also apply to county college employees other than faculty members or members of the professional staff.
 
	d.	Nothing in this section shall be regarded as affecting the right of any teaching staff member or majority representative to submit to binding arbitration any dispute involving or relating to a teaching staff member.
 
	L.1989, c.269, s.8; amended 2020, c.66, s.1.

34:13A-30  Employment with public employee labor organizations, certain; prohibited.
	1.	During the period in which an individual, pursuant to section 504 of Pub.L.86-257 (29 U.S.C.s.504), is prohibited from serving: as a consultant or adviser to any labor organization; as an officer, director, trustee, member of any executive board or similar governing body, business agent, manager, organizer, employee or representative in any capacity of any labor organization; as a labor relations consultant or adviser to a person engaged in an industry or activity affecting commerce, or as an officer, director, agent or employee of any group or association of employers dealing with any labor organization, or in a position having specific collective bargaining authority or direct responsibility in the area of labor-management relations in any corporation or association engaged in an industry or activity affecting commerce; in a position which permits the individual to receive a share of the proceeds from providing goods or services to any labor organization, or as an officer, executive or administrative employee of any entity, the activities of which are in whole or substantial part devoted to providing goods or services to any labor organization; or in any capacity involving decision-making authority over, or custody or control of, the moneys, funds, assets or property of a labor organization, the individual shall also be prohibited from serving:

	(a)	As a consultant or adviser to any organization representing public employees;

	(b)	As an officer, director, trustee, member of any governing body, business agent, manager, organizer, employee or representative in any capacity of any organization representing public employees;

	(c)	As a labor relations consultant or adviser to any public employer, or as an officer, director, agent or employee of any group or association of public employers, or in a position in which the individual has collective bargaining authority or responsibility in the area of labor-management relations for a public employer;

	(d)	In a position which permits the individual to receive a share of the proceeds from providing goods or services to any organization representing public employees, or as an officer, executive or administrative employee of any entity the activities of which are in whole or substantial part devoted to providing goods or services to any organization representing public employees; or

	(e)	In any capacity involving decision-making authority over, or custody or control of, the moneys, funds, assets or property of an organization representing public employees.

	For the purposes of this section, "labor organization" means a labor organization as defined in section 3 of Pub.L.86-257 (29 U.S.C. s.402).

	L.1999,c.3,s.1.

34:13A-31 has been reallocated to 34:11A-14

	34:13A-31  Short title.

	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "School Employees Contract Resolution and Equity Act."

	L.2003,c.126,s.1.

34:13A-32  Definitions relative to school employee collective negotiations.

	2.	For the purposes of this act:

	"Employer" or "public employer" means any local or regional school district, charter school and its board of trustees, vocational school district, educational services commission, jointure commission, county  special services school district, community college, county college, or board or commission under the authority of the Commissioner of Education, the State Board of Education, or the New Jersey Commission on Higher Education.

	"Majority representative" means the majority representative of the employees in a collective bargaining unit which is recognized or certified as the majority representative as the result of recognition or certification procedures under the "New Jersey Employer-Employee Relations Act," P.L.1941, c.100 (C.34:13A-1 et seq.), or is voluntarily recognized by the employer.

	"Commission" means the New Jersey Public Employment Relations Commission.

	L.2003,c.126,s.2.

34:13A-33  Terms, conditions of employment under expired agreements.

	3.	Notwithstanding the expiration of a collective negotiations agreement, an impasse in negotiations, an exhaustion of the commission's impasse procedures, or the utilization or completion of the procedures required by this act, and notwithstanding any law or regulation to the contrary, no public employer, its representatives, or its agents shall unilaterally impose, modify, amend, delete or alter any terms and conditions of employment as set forth in the expired or expiring collective negotiations agreement, or unilaterally impose, modify, amend, delete, or alter any other negotiable terms and conditions of employment, without specific agreement of the majority representative.

	L.2003,c.126,s.3.

34:13A-34  Participation in mandatory fact finding; report; appointment of super conciliator.

	4.  a.  In any case in which collective negotiations between an employer and a majority representative have failed to result in the parties reaching agreement on the terms of a negotiated agreement and the commission's mediation procedures have been exhausted with no final agreement having been reached, the parties shall be required to participate in mandatory fact finding, which shall be conducted by a fact finder under the jurisdiction of the commission, subject to procedures established by the commission pursuant to regulation.  The fact finder shall be appointed no later than 30 days after the last meeting between the parties and the mediator in connection with the mediation pursuant to this act.

	b.  Following completion of such fact finding, the fact finder's report shall be made available to the parties immediately after its issuance, and to the public 10 days thereafter.

	c.  If the employer and the majority representative do not reach a voluntary negotiated agreement within 20 days after the issuance of the fact finder's report, the commission shall appoint a super conciliator to assist the parties, based upon procedures and subject to qualifications established by the commission pursuant to regulation.

	L.2003,c.126,s.4.

34:13A-35  Investigatory proceedings.

	5.	The super conciliator shall promptly schedule investigatory proceedings.  The purpose of the proceedings shall be to:

	a.  Investigate and acquire all relevant information regarding the dispute between the parties;

	b.  Discuss with the parties their differences, and utilize means and mechanisms, including but not limited to requiring 24-hour per day negotiations, until a voluntary settlement is reached, and provide recommendations to resolve the parties' differences;

	c.  Modify or amend the fact finder's report for reconsideration by the parties in a further effort to achieve a voluntary settlement by the parties; and

	d.  Institute any other non-binding procedures deemed appropriate by the super conciliator.

	L.2003,c.126,s.5.

34:13A-36  Final report.

	6.	If the actions taken by the super conciliator fail to resolve the dispute, the super conciliator shall issue a final report, which shall be provided to the parties promptly and made available to the public within 10 days thereafter.

	L.2003,c.126,s.6.

34:13A-37  Confidentiality; exceptions.

	7.	The mediator, fact finder, or super conciliator, while functioning in a mediatory capacity, shall not be required to disclose any files, records, reports, documents, or other papers classified as confidential which are received or prepared by him or to testify with regard to mediation conducted by him under this act.  Nothing contained herein shall exempt an individual from disclosing information relating to the commission of a crime.

	L.2003,c.126,s.7.

34:13A-38  Report to Governor, Legislature.

	8.	Five years after the effective date of this act, the commission shall submit a report to the Governor and to the Legislature on the effects of this act on the negotiations and settlement between school employees and their employers with any recommendations it may have for any changes in the law.

	L.2003,c.126,s.8.

34:13A-39  Rules, regulations.

	9.	The commission, in accordance with the provisions of the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) shall promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this act.

	L.2003,c.126,s.9.

34:13A-40  Definitions relative to employee assistance programs for certain public employees.
	1.	For the purposes of this act:
 
	"Civil union" means a civil union as defined in section 2 of P.L.2006, c.103 (C.37:1-29).
 
	"Employee assistance program" means a program in which a public employer provides or contracts with a service provider to provide assistance to the employer's employees and their dependents to resolve problems which may affect employee work performance, irrespective of whether the problems originate on the job, including, but not limited to, marital and family problems, emotional problems, substance use disorder, compulsive gambling, financial problems, and medical problems.
 
	"Dependent" means an employee's spouse, civil union partner, or domestic partner, an unmarried child of the employee who is less than 31 years of age and lives with the employee in a regular parent-child relationship, or an unmarried child of the employee who is not less than 31 years of age and is not capable of self support.  "Child of the employee" includes any child, stepchild, legally adopted child, or foster child of the employee, or of a domestic partner or civil union partner of the employee, who is reported for coverage and dependent upon the employee for support and maintenance.
 
	"Domestic partner" means a domestic partner as defined in section 3 of P.L.2003, c.246 (C.26:8A-3).
 
	"Employee" means an employee of a public employer.
 
	"Public employer" means the State of New Jersey, or the counties and municipalities thereof, or any other political subdivision of the State, or a school district, or any special district, or any authority, including a bi-state authority, or any commission, or board, or any branch or agency of the public service.
 
	L.2011, c.69, s.1; amended 2023, c.177, s.115.

34:13A-41  Employee assistance programs; licensure, establishment.
 
	2.	Employee assistance programs may provide advice, counseling, treatment, referral and other assistance, except that nothing in this act shall be construed to authorize a person to provide any service in connection with an employee assistance program without holding the license required by law to provide the service.  An employee assistance program may be established through a negotiated agreement between the majority representative of the employees in an appropriate bargaining unit and a public employer, or established by a public employer through the adoption of a policy which conforms to the requirements of this act.
 
	L.2011, c.69, s.2.

34:13A-42  Prohibited actions by public employer.
  
	3.	No public employer shall take any action against an employee of the employer, including termination, because the employee or a dependent of the employee has obtained counseling, referrals or other services from an employee assistance program or has obtained treatment or other services from any program to which the employee assistance program refers the employee or dependent, unless the employee was referred by the employer to the employee assistance program due to issues related to job performance and fails to make a good faith effort to comply with the recommendations made by the employee assistance program.  The provisions of this section shall not be construed as preventing the public employer from taking any action which the employer is otherwise authorized to take for workplace misconduct of the employee or poor work performance, even if the misconduct or poor performance is related to a problem for which the employee is obtaining services provided by an employee assistance program or other program to which the employee assistance program refers the employee.
 
	L.2011, c.69, s.3.

34:13A-43  Confidentiality; waivers.
 
	4. a. Except as provided in subsection b. of this section, each request by an employee or dependent for assistance from, referral to, participation in, or referral by, an employee assistance program shall be confidential, and no public employer, service provider or other person shall divulge to any person that an employee or dependent has requested assistance from, been referred to, or participated in, an employee assistance program or any treatment program to which the employee assistance program refers the employee or dependent.  The requirement of confidentiality shall apply to all information related to an employee assistance program, including but not limited to any statements, materials, documents, evaluations, impressions, conclusions, findings, or acts taken in the course of, or in connection with, the program.  If, however, a public employer documents to the employee assistance program that the employee has accepted a referral by a public employer for assistance during normal working hours with sick leave or other paid leave, the public employer shall be entitled to know whether the employee has kept his appointment and the amount of time of the appointment.
 
	b.	The requirements for confidentiality provided for in subsection a. of this section may be waived only if:
 
	(1)	the employee or dependent to whom the information applies has requested and authorized a waiver; the waiver is in writing and specifies the information to be released and the persons to whom the information may be provided; and the information released is the information authorized for release by the employee or dependent and is released only to the persons designated by the employee or dependent, provided that a public employer may not require an employee to authorize a waiver pursuant to this subsection or take any action against an employee for not authorizing the waiver;
 
	(2)	the employee assistance program advisor reasonably believes that the employee is at substantial risk of imminent death or serious bodily injury to self or others; or
 
	(3)	 the advisor is reporting suspected child abuse or neglect.
 
	c.	The provisions of this act shall not be construed to affect other evidentiary privileges and recognized exceptions.
 
	L.2011, c.69, s.4.

34:13A-44  Definitions relative to collective bargaining agreements and subcontracting.
 	1.	As used in this act:

	"Employer" means any local or regional school district, educational services commission, jointure commission, county special services school district, county college, or board or commission under the authority of the Commissioner of Education or the State Board of Education.
 
	"Employee" means any employee, whether employed on a full or part-time basis, of an employer.
 
	"Subcontracting" means any action, practice, or effort by an employer which results in any services or work performed by any of its employees being performed or provided by any other person, vendor, corporation, partnership or entity.
 
	"Subcontracting agreement" means any agreement or arrangement entered into by an employer to implement subcontracting, but shall not include any contract entered into pursuant to the "Uniform Shared Services and Consolidation Act," P.L.2007, c.63 (C.40A:65-1 et al.), or any contract entered into to provide services to nonpublic schools through State or federal funds.
 
	L.2020, c.79, s.1.

34:13A-45  Subcontracting mandatory subjects of negotiations, exceptions.
  	2.	Except for actions of an employer expressly required or prohibited by the provisions of this act, all aspects or actions relating to or resulting from an employer's decision to subcontract including, but not limited to, whether or not severance pay is provided, shall be mandatory subjects of negotiations.
 
	L.2020, c.79, s.2.

34:13A-46  Employer entering into subcontract agreement, terms, conditions.
 	3.	No employer shall enter into a subcontracting agreement which affects the employment of any employees in a collective bargaining unit represented by a majority representative during the term that an existing collective bargaining agreement with the majority representative is in effect.  No employer shall enter into a subcontracting agreement for a period following the term of the current collective bargaining agreement unless the employer:
 
	a.	Provides written notice to the majority representative of employees in each collective bargaining unit which may be affected by the subcontracting agreement and to the New Jersey Public Employment Relations Commission, not less than 90 days before the employer requests bids, or solicits contractual proposals for the subcontracting agreement; and
 
	b.	Has offered the majority representative of the employees in each collective bargaining unit which may be affected by the subcontracting agreement the opportunity to meet and consult with the employer to discuss the decision to subcontract, and the opportunity to engage in negotiations over the impact of the subcontracting.  The employer's duty to negotiate with the majority representative of the employees in each collective bargaining unit shall not preclude the employer's right to subcontract should no successor agreement exist.
 
	L.2020, c.79, s.3.

34:13A-47  Rights of displaced employee.
  	4.	Each employee replaced or displaced as the result of a subcontracting agreement shall retain all previously acquired seniority during that period and shall have recall rights whenever the subcontracting terminates.
 
	L.2020, c.79, s.4.

34:13A-48  Violation, unfair practice; remedies.
 	5.	An employer who violates any provision of this act shall be deemed to have committed an unfair practice, and any employee or majority representative organization affected by the violation may file an unfair practice charge with the New Jersey Public Employment Relations Commission.  If the employee or organization prevails on the charge, the employee is entitled to a remedy including, but not limited to, reinstatement, back pay, back benefits, back emoluments, tenure and seniority credit, attorney's fees, and any other relief the commission deems appropriate to effectuate the purposes of this act.
 
	L.2020, c.79, s.5.

34:13A-49  Construction of act.
 	6.	Nothing in this act shall be construed as authorizing subcontracting which is not otherwise authorized by law.  Nothing in this act shall be construed as restricting or limiting any right established or provided for employees by section 7 of P.L.1968, c.303 (C.34:13A-5.3); the purpose of this act is to provide rights in addition to those provided in that section.
 
	L.2020, c.79, s.6.

34:13A-50  Definitions relative to collective bargaining.
	1.	As used in this act:
	"Employer" means a State college or university established pursuant to chapter 64 of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes or a public research university.
	"Employee" means any employee, whether employed on a full or part-time basis, of an employer.
	"Subcontracting" means any action, practice, or effort by an employer which results in any services or work performed by any of its employees being performed or provided by any other person, vendor, corporation, partnership or entity.
	"Subcontracting agreement" means any agreement or arrangement entered into by an employer to implement subcontracting.

	L.2021, c.104, s.1.

34:13A-51  Mandatory subjects of negotiations.
	2.	Except for actions of an employer expressly required or prohibited by the provisions of this act, all aspects or actions relating to or resulting from an employer's decision to subcontract including, but not limited to, whether or not severance pay is provided, shall be mandatory subjects of negotiations.

	L.2021, c.104, s.2.

34:13A-52  Subcontracting agreement conditions.
	3.	No employer shall enter into a subcontracting agreement which affects the employment of any employees in a collective bargaining unit represented by a majority representative during the term that an existing collective bargaining agreement with the majority representative is in effect.  No employer shall enter into a subcontracting agreement for a period following the term of the current collective bargaining agreement unless the employer:
	a.	Provides written notice to the majority representative of employees in each collective bargaining unit which may be affected by the subcontracting agreement and to the New Jersey Public Employment Relations Commission, not less than 90 days before the employer requests bids, or solicits contractual proposals for the subcontracting agreement; and
	b.	Has offered the majority representative of the employees in each collective bargaining unit which may be affected by the subcontracting agreement the opportunity to meet and consult with the employer to discuss the decision to subcontract, and the opportunity to engage in negotiations over the impact of the subcontracting.  The employer's duty to negotiate with the majority representative of the employees in each collective bargaining unit shall not preclude the employer's right to subcontract should no successor agreement exist.

	L.2021, c.104, s.3.

34:13A-53  Replaced, displaced employee; seniority retained.
	4.	Each employee replaced or displaced as the result of a subcontracting agreement shall retain all previously acquired seniority during that period and shall have recall rights whenever the subcontracting terminates.

	L.2021, c.104, s.4.

34:13A-54  Unfair practice charge.
	5.	An employer who violates any provision of this act shall be deemed to have committed an unfair practice, and any employee or majority representative organization affected by the violation may file an unfair practice charge with the New Jersey Public Employment Relations Commission.  If the employee or organization prevails on the charge, the employee is entitled to a remedy including, but not limited to, reinstatement, back pay, back benefits, back emoluments, tenure and seniority credit, attorney's fees, and any other relief the commission deems appropriate to effectuate the purposes of this act.

	L.2021, c.104, s.5.

34:13A-55  Purpose of act.
	6.	Nothing in this act shall be construed as authorizing subcontracting which is not otherwise authorized by law.  Nothing in this act shall be construed as restricting or limiting any right established or provided for employees by section 7 of P.L.1968, c.303 (C.34:13A-5.3); the purpose of this act is to provide rights in addition to those provided in that section.

	L.2021, c.104, s.6.

34:13A-56  Short title.
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Responsible Collective Negotiations Act."

	L.2021, c.411, s.1.

34:13A-57  Findings, declarations.
	2.	The Legislature finds and declares that the public interest is best served in the prompt settlement of labor disputes and in achieving cost effective and creative solutions to ensure the efficient delivery of public services and that policy is best achieved by entrusting democratically elected government officials with broad authority to negotiate over the terms of employment of their employees.

	L.2021, c.411, s.2.

34:13A-58  Definitions.
	3.	Notwithstanding any provisions of the "New Jersey Employer-Employee Relations Act," P.L.1941, c.100 (C.34:13A-1 et seq.), or any other law to the contrary, as used in sections 1 through 9 of P.L.2021, c.411 (C.34:13A-56 through C.34:13A-64):
 
	a.	The term "commission" means the New Jersey Public Employment Relations Commission.
 
	b.	The term "employer" means the State of New Jersey, or the several counties and municipalities thereof, or any other political subdivision of the State, or any special district, or any county college, or any authority, commission or board, or any branch or agency of the State, except that the term does not include any local or regional school district, or board or commission under the authority of the Commissioner of Education or the State Board of Education.
 
	c.	The term "employee" means an employee of an employer as defined by subparagraph b above, but does not include firefighting employees of public fire departments or employees engaged in performing police services for public police departments as those terms are defined by section 2 of P.L.1977, c.85 (C.34:13A-15), except that, for the purposes of sections 6 through 9 of P.L.2021, c.411 (C.34:13A-61 through C.34:13A-64), the term "employee" also includes firefighting employees of public fire departments or employees engaged in performing police services for public police departments as those terms are defined by section 2 of P.L.1977, c.85 (C.34:13A-15).
 
	d.	 The terms "employee organization" and "majority representative", unless otherwise specified, mean the "exclusive majority representative" either certified by the commission or recognized by the public employer.

	L.2021, c.411, s.3.

34:13A-59  Collective negotiations, resolution of disputes, employment terms, conditions.
	4.	Notwithstanding any provisions of the "New Jersey Employer-Employee Relations Act," P.L.1941, c.100 (C.34:13A-1 et seq.), or any other law to the contrary:
 
	a.	Permissive subjects for collective negotiation shall include all terms and conditions of employment that are not otherwise mandatorily negotiable and that intimately and directly affect employee work and welfare, unless otherwise preempted by State or federal statute, or unless a negotiated agreement would prevent government from carrying out its statutory mission.
 
	b.	Administrative regulations adopted after the effective date of P.L.2021, c.411 (C.34:13A-56 et al.) that set terms and conditions of employment or that grant public employers authority over terms and conditions of employment do not preempt collective negotiations and do not supersede the provisions of any negotiated agreement, except that terms and conditions of employment set by statutes and regulations shall not be diminished by a negotiated agreement.
 
	c.	Parties may submit disputes about whether a matter is within the scope of collective negotiations to the commission, pursuant to the authority vested in it by subsection d. of section 1 of P.L.1974, c.123 (C.34:13A-5.4).
 
	d.	Grievance procedures shall provide for binding arbitration as the means for resolving disputes over the application, interpretation or violation of the terms of a collective negotiations agreement entered into by the parties.
 
	e.	Where an employer and a majority representative agree to disciplinary review procedures that provide for binding arbitration of disputes involving employees who are covered by alternate statutory review procedures, other than public employees subject to discipline pursuant to R.S.53:1-10, the disciplinary review procedures established by agreement between an employer and a majority representative shall be utilized for any dispute covered by the terms of such agreement.
 
	f.	Notwithstanding the expiration of a collective negotiations agreement, an impasse in negotiations, an exhaustion of the commission's impasse procedures, or the utilization or completion of the procedures required by P.L.2021, c.411 (C.34:13A-56 et al.) to resolve disputes involving collective negotiations, and notwithstanding any law or regulation to the contrary, no public employer, its representatives, or its agents shall unilaterally impose, modify, amend, delete, or alter any mandatorily negotiable terms and conditions of employment as set forth in the expired or expiring collective negotiations agreement, or unilaterally impose, modify, amend, delete, or alter any other mandatorily negotiable terms and conditions of employment that are not set forth in a collective negotiations agreement, without the specific written agreement of the majority representative.  Following contract expiration, and notwithstanding any law or regulation to the contrary, absent express language in a collective negotiations agreement providing that a specific term of the agreement will not continue after the expiration of the collective negotiations agreement, all terms and conditions of the agreement, including, but not limited to, the payment of salary increments, shall remain in effect following the agreement's expiration until the parties reach agreement on a successor collective negotiations agreement.
 
	g.	Notwithstanding any provision of this section, the Legislature retains the right to exempt from collective negotiations subjects that would otherwise be mandatory subjects of negotiations.
 
	h.	Notwithstanding any provision of this section, the resolution of disputes concerning negotiations over terms and conditions of employment shall not be subject to compulsory interest arbitration as set forth in P.L.1995, c. 425 (C.34:13A-14a et seq.).
 
	i.	The parties to collective negotiations may not insist on negotiating over permissive subjects of negotiations.  A party's decision to not negotiate or to cease negotiating over a permissive subject of negotiations is not a violation of subsection a. or b. of section 1 of P.L.1974, c.123 (C.34:13A-5.4).
 
	j.	The commission shall promulgate regulations to enforce the provisions of this section.

	L.2021, c.411, s.4.

34:13A-60  Communications related to grievances, confidential disciplinary disputes.
	5.	The communications between a representative of a majority representative of employees and a unit member regarding the investigation and preparation for meetings and hearings of grievances and disciplinary disputes, shall be treated as confidential communications and shall not be subject to disclosure under the discovery rules of New Jersey administrative agencies, including, but not limited to, the Office of Administrative Law and the commission, or pursuant to section 17 of P.L.2003, c.95 (C.2A:23B-17), and other applicable State laws authorizing arbitrators, presiding at labor arbitrations, to issue subpoenas.  This section does not apply to the New Jersey Court Rules or to records that are required by statute, case law, or the New Jersey Court Rules to be made available to the public by entities provided for in Article VI of the New Jersey Constitution.

	L.2021, c.411, s.5.

34:13A-60.1  Excluded entities.
	13.  The provisions of sections 4 and 5 of P.L.2021, c.411 (C.34:13A-59 and C.34:13A-60), and of subsection c. of section 5 of P.L.2018, c.15 (C.34:13A-5.15) shall not apply to:
 
	a.	the several counties and municipalities;
 
	b.	authorities, commissions, boards or other instrumentalities of the several counties and municipalities;
 
	c.	State colleges and universities, including Kean University, Montclair State University, and Rowan University;
 
	d.	county colleges;
 
	e.	Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey; or
 
	 f.	the New Jersey Institute of Technology.

	L.2021, c.411, s.13.

34:13A-61  Cost of representation in case of employee who does not pay dues to majority representative.
	6.	Notwithstanding any provisions of the "New Jersey Employer-Employee Relations Act," P.L.1941, c.100 (C.34:13A-1 et seq.), or any other law to the contrary, if an employee who does not pay dues to a majority representative requests that the majority representative represent the employee in arbitration proceedings to enforce the terms of the collective negotiations agreement between the majority representative and the public employer, including arbitration proceedings involving the resolution of disciplinary disputes, the majority representative may charge an employee for the cost of representing the employee in the arbitration proceedings, and may decline to represent an employee in the arbitration unless the employee agrees to pay for the cost of the representation.

	L.2021, c.411, s.6.

34:13A-62  Collective negotiations agreement parties, authority, arbitration.
	7.	Only the parties to a collective negotiations agreement shall have the authority to invoke the arbitration procedures of the agreement and the public employer and the employee organization shall be the only parties to the arbitration proceeding invoked pursuant to the collective negotiations agreement.

	L.2021, c.411, s.7.

34:13A-63  Majority representative election, certification; electronic signature.
	8.	Authorization cards or showings of interest submitted to the commission for purposes of conducting an election to select a majority representative or certifying an employee organization as the exclusive majority representative based on a majority of employees in the unit signing authorization cards or a petition, may bear the electronic signature of the employee, as the term electronic signature is defined in section 2 of P.L.2001, c. 116 (C.12A:12-2), provided that the petitioner provides to the commission verification as to the authenticity of the electronic signature, such as an email from the employee signatory confirming the authenticity of their signature or such other verification deemed acceptable by the commission.  Facsimile transmissions and email will be accepted in lieu of originals for authorization cards and showings of interest in certification cases; however, all original filings and submissions shall be retained by the petitioner and the originals shall be produced upon request of the commission.

	L.2021, c.411, s.8.

34:13A-64  Violation, unfair practice charge; scheduling of hearings.
	9.	Complaints issued based on a violation of paragraph (3) of subsection (a) of section 1 of P.L.1974, c.123 (C.34:13A-5.4) shall be scheduled for hearing within 120 calendar days from date of complaint issuance, unless the parties agree to extend the time for complaint issuance.  Within 60 calendar days of the filing of an unfair practice charge alleging the violation, the commission shall decide whether or not to issue a complaint.  The commission shall promulgate rules to provide for discovery prior to the commencement of a hearing.

	L.2021, c.411, s.9.

34:13A-65  Rights of cannabis employees.
	6. Rights of Cannabis Employees
 
	a.	Cannabis employees shall have the right to self-organization, to form, join, or assist labor organizations, to bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing, and to engage in other concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection, and shall also have the right to refrain from those activities except to the extent that the right may be affected by an agreement requiring membership in a labor organization as a condition of employment as authorized in section 7 of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-66).
 
	b.	Cannabis employees shall have the right to engage in, or induce or encourage any individual employed by their employer to engage in, a strike or a refusal in the course of their employment to use, manufacture, process, transport, or otherwise handle or work on any goods, articles, materials, or commodities or to perform any services for another employer that is engaged in an ongoing labor dispute with their private employees.
 
	c.	Cannabis employees shall have the right to engage in, or induce or encourage any individual employed by their employer to engage in, a strike due to a finding of an unfair labor practice by the division as provided in section 7 of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-66). 
 
	d.	If the cannabis employer is to hire workers to complete the job duties of striking cannabis employees, the employer shall be obligated to employ the striking cannabis employees once the labor unrest has ceased.  Nothing in P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-5.1a et al.) shall give the employer the right to preeminently fire or cease employment of cannabis employees for engaging in protected activity covered under P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-5.1a et al.), including the right to strike. 
 
	e.	When the cannabis employer hires employees of the same or similar designation as covered by the bargaining unit, the newly hired employees shall be added to the collective bargaining unit of the labor organization and be covered by the collective bargaining agreement after a designated period decided by the labor organization and the employer.  This period may be instantaneous upon hiring or after a predetermined probationary period as specified in the collective bargaining agreement.
 
L.2025, c.244, s.6.

34:13A-66  Unfair labor practices, cannabis employers.
	7.  Unfair Labor Practices; Cannabis Employers 
 
	a.	It shall be an unfair labor practice for a cannabis employer to:
 
	(1) interfere with, restrain, or coerce cannabis employees in the exercise of the rights guaranteed in section 6 of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-65);
 
	(2) dominate or interfere with the formation or administration of any labor organization representing cannabis employees or contribute financial support against it;
 
	(3) discriminate in regard to the hiring or tenure of a cannabis employee or in any term or condition of employment to encourage or discourage membership in any labor organization;
 
	(4) to discharge or otherwise discriminate against a cannabis employee because they have filed charges or given testimony under this section;
 
	(5) take adverse action against a person within 90 days of the person's exercise of rights protected under P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-5.1a et al.).  An adverse action shall raise a rebuttable presumption that the action was in retaliation for the exercise of those rights;
 
	(6) refuse to bargain collectively with the representatives of its cannabis employees;
 
	(7) discharge or discipline a cannabis employee who engages in, or induces or encourages any individual employed by the employer to engage in, a strike or a refusal in the course of their employment to use, manufacture, process, transport, or otherwise handle or work on any goods, articles, materials, or commodities or to perform any services for another employer that is engaged in an ongoing labor dispute with their cannabis employees;
 
	(8) discharge or discipline a cannabis employee who declines to attend or participate in an employer-sponsored meeting or communication if the purpose of the meeting or communication is to dissuade employees from joining or forming a union, deliver anti-union messaging, or communicate information that the cannabis employer is not required by law to communicate and is not necessary for those employees to perform their job duties, but rather is regarding the political views of the cannabis employer;
 
	(9) to spy upon or keep under surveillance, whether directly or through agents or any other person, any activities of cannabis employees or their representatives in the exercise of the rights listed in this in section 6 of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-65);
 
	(10) to prepare, maintain, distribute, or circulate any blacklist of individuals for the purpose of preventing any of those individuals from obtaining or retaining employment because of the exercise by those individuals of any of the rights guaranteed in section 6 P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-65);
 
	(11) to refuse to discuss grievances with representatives of cannabis employees;
 
	(12) to utilize any State funding, appropriated for any purpose, to train personnel regarding methods to discourage union organization or to discourage an employee from participating in a union organizing drive; or
 
	(13) to lockout its cannabis employees through a refusal to permit cannabis employees to work as a result of a dispute with the cannabis employees or the labor organization representing them that affects wages, hours, and other terms and condition of employment.  This shall not prevent a cannabis employer from terminating the employment for good cause that does not involve the terminated cannabis employees’ exercising any rights guaranteed by section 6 of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-65).
 
	b.	It shall be an unfair labor practice for a labor organization or its agents to:
 
	(1) cause or attempt to cause an employer to discriminate against a cannabis employee in violation of section 6 of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-65) or to discriminate against a cannabis employee with respect to whom membership in the organization has been denied or terminated on some ground other than the failure to tender the periodic dues and the initiation fees uniformly required as a condition of acquiring or retaining membership; or
 
	(2) refuse to bargain collectively with a cannabis employer, provided it is the representative of the cannabis employees of that employer.
 
	c.	The expressing of any views, argument, or opinion, or the dissemination thereof, whether in written, printed, graphic, or visual form, shall not constitute or be evidence of an unfair labor practice under any of the provisions of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-5.1a et al.), if the expression contains no threat of reprisal or force or promise of benefit.
 
	d.	For the purposes of this section, it shall be an unfair labor practice to not bargain in good faith in furtherance of the mutual obligation of the employer and the labor organization to produce and sign a collective bargaining agreement with respect to the wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment to govern the cannabis employees represented by the labor organization and the employer. 
 
	e.	The board and the division retain explicit authority to promulgate the necessary administrative regulations to effectuate this section.
 
L.2025, c.244, s.7.

34:13A-67  Representatives and elections, cannabis employees. 
	8.  Representatives and Elections; Cannabis Employees
 
	a.	Representatives designated or selected for the purposes of collective bargaining by the majority of the cannabis employees in a unit appropriate for those purposes shall be the exclusive representatives of all the cannabis employees in that unit for the purposes of collective bargaining in respect to rates of pay, wages, hours of employment, or other conditions of employment, provided that any individual employee or a group of employees shall have the right at any time to present grievances to their employer and to have their grievances adjusted, without the intervention of the bargaining representative, as long as the adjustment is not inconsistent with the terms of a collective bargaining contract or agreement then in effect, provided further, that the bargaining representative has been given opportunity to be present at the adjustment.
 
	b.	The Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement shall decide in each case of contested unit membership whether, to assure to employees the fullest freedom in exercising the rights guaranteed by P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-5.1a et al.), the unit appropriate for the purposes of collective bargaining shall be the employer unit, craft unit, plant unit, or subdivision thereof.
 
	c.	A labor organization may become the exclusive representative for the covered employees of an appropriate bargaining unit for purposes of collective bargaining with respect to rates of pay, wages, hours of employment, or other conditions of employment by filing a Majority Support Petition with the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement alleging that a majority of the employees in the bargaining unit wish to be represented by that organization.  The petition shall describe the geographical area that constitutes the unit claimed to be appropriate and shall be accompanied by proof of majority support, through authorization cards, Majority Support Petitions, or other appropriate proof of majority support. 
 
	d.	A labor organization that wishes to represent a particular bargaining unit may be certified as that unit’s bargaining representative by submitting to the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement a Majority Support Petition.  The petition shall allege all of the following:
 
	(1) That the number of covered employees currently employed by the employer named in the Majority Support Petition, as determined from the employer’s payroll immediately preceding the filing of the Majority Support Petition, is not less than 50 percent of the bargaining unit for purposes of collective bargaining.
 
	(2) That no valid election has been conducted among the covered employees of the employer named in the Majority Support Petition within the 12 months immediately preceding the filing of the petition.
 
	(3) That the Majority Support Petition is not barred by an existing collective bargaining agreement.
 
	e.	The Majority Support Petition described in subsection d. of this section shall be supported by a proof of majority support, through authorization cards, petitions, or other appropriate proof of majority support of the currently employed employees, as determined from the employer’s payroll immediately preceding the filing of the Majority Support Petition.  The showing of support shall be submitted together with the Majority Support Petition.
 
	f.	A labor organization submitting a Majority Support Petition shall personally serve the petition on the employer on the same day that the petition is filed with the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement.  Within 48 hours after the petition is served, the cannabis employer shall file with the division, and personally serve upon the labor organization that filed the petition, its response to the petition.  As part of the response, the employer shall provide a complete and accurate list of the full names, current street addresses, telephone numbers, job classifications, and crew or department of all currently employed employees in the bargaining unit employed as of the payroll period immediately preceding the filing of the petition.  The employer shall organize the employees’ names and addresses and other information by crew or department and shall provide the list to the division and petitioning labor organization in hardcopy and electronic format.  The employee’s first name, middle name or initial, last name, address, city, state, ZIP Code, telephone number, classification, and crew or department shall be organized into separate columns.  Immediately upon receiving the employer response and employee list, the division shall provide the response and employee list by hardcopy and electronic copy to the labor organization that filed the Majority Support Petition.
 
	g.  (1) Upon receipt of a Majority Support Petition, the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement shall immediately commence an investigation regarding the validity of the petition and the proof of support submitted.  Within five days of receipt of the petition, the division shall make an administrative determination as to whether the requirements set forth in subsection d. of this section are met by the petition and whether the labor organization submitting the petition has provided proof of majority support.  In making this determination, the division shall compare the names on the proof of support submitted by the labor organization to the names on the list of currently employed employees provided by the employer.  The division shall ignore discrepancies between the employee’s name listed on the proof of support and the employee’s name on the employer’s list if the preponderance of the evidence, such as the employee’s address, the name of the employee’s foreman or forewoman, or evidence submitted by the labor organization or employee shows that the employee who signed the proof of support is the same person as the employee on the employer’s list.
 
	(2) The division shall return proof of majority support that it finds invalid to the labor organization that filed the Majority Support Petition, with an explanation as to why each proof of support was found to be invalid. 
 
	(3) If the division determines that the labor organization has submitted proof of majority support and met the requirements set forth in this section, it shall immediately certify the labor organization as the exclusive bargaining representative of the employees in the bargaining unit.  An employer’s duty to bargain with the labor organization commences immediately after the labor organization is certified.
 
	(4) If the division determines that the labor organization has not submitted the requisite proof of majority support, the division shall notify the labor organization of the deficiency and grant the labor organization 30 days from the date it is notified to submit additional support.
 
	h.	(1)  Within five days after the division certifies a labor organization through a majority support election, the cannabis employer or the labor organization may file with the division a petition objecting to the certification on one or more of the following grounds:
 
	(a)	Allegations in the Majority Support Petition were false.
 
	(b)	The division improperly determined the geographical scope of the bargaining unit.
 
	(c)	The majority support election was conducted improperly.
 
	(d)	Improper conduct affected the results of the majority support election.
 
	(2)	Upon receipt of a petition objecting to certification, the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement may administratively rule on the petitioner’s objections or may choose to conduct a hearing to rule on the petitioner’s objections.  If the division decides to conduct a hearing on the objections, it shall mail a notice of the time and place of the hearing to the petitioner and the labor organization whose certification is being challenged.  The division shall conduct the hearing within 14 days of the filing of an objection, unless an extension is agreed to by the labor organization.  If the division finds at the hearing that any of the allegations in the petition of the grounds set forth in paragraph (1) of this subsection are true, the division shall revoke the certification issued under subsection g. of this section.
 
	(3) The filing of a petition objecting to a majority support election certification shall not diminish the duty to bargain or delay the running of the 90-day period.
 
	i.	The Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement shall not permit the filing of any other election petition once a Majority Support Petition is filed until the division determines whether the labor organization filing the Majority Support Petition should be certified.
 
	j.	If a cannabis employer commits an unfair labor practice, as set forth in section 7 of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-66), including vote suppression during a labor organization’s Majority Support Petition campaign, and the employer’s unfair labor practice or misconduct would render slight the chances of a new majority support campaign reflecting the free and fair choice of the cannabis employees covered under section 7 of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-66), the labor organization shall be certified by the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement as the exclusive bargaining representative for the bargaining unit.  For purposes of a finding of an unfair labor practice or misconduct under this subsection, a misrepresentation of fact or law by a cannabis employer or a cannabis employer’s representative or agent is an unfair labor practice or misconduct whether or not a labor organization has had an opportunity to respond to or correct the misrepresentation.
 
	k.	If a cannabis employer disciplines, suspends, demotes, lays off, terminates, or otherwise takes adverse action against a cannabis employee during a labor organization’s Majority Support Petition campaign, there shall be a presumption that the adverse action was retaliatory.  The employer may rebut the presumption if they can provide clear and convincing evidence that the adverse action would have been taken in the absence of the Majority Support Petition campaign.
 
	l.	If the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement invalidates signatures towards the Majority Support Petition so that the Majority Support Petition alleging that a majority of the employees in the bargaining unit wish to be represented by that organization is no longer a majority, under 50 percent plus one of the proposed bargaining unit, the labor organization or the cannabis employees alleging the majority shall either correct the deficiency or proceed with an election.
 
	m.	If the number of cannabis employees does not rise to a majority of the proposed bargaining unit, the labor organization shall provide proof of 30 percent or more of the cannabis employees in the proposed bargaining unit to secure an election for representation. 
 
	n.	In the case of an election for representation by the labor organization, cannabis employees to be covered by the bargaining unit shall have the right to vote by electronic voting system, Internet voting system, telephone voting system, or remotely as provided in section 3 of P.L.1941, c.100 (C.34:13A-3).
 
	o.	In any election in which the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement determines, following a post-election hearing, that a cannabis employer has committed a violation of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-5.1a et al.) or otherwise interfered with a fair election, and the employer has not demonstrated that the violation or other interference is unlikely to have affected the outcome of the election, the division shall, without ordering a new election, set aside the election and certify the labor organization as the representative of the cannabis employees in such unit and issue an order requiring the employer to bargain with the labor organization.
 
	p.	If a cannabis employer disagrees with the coverage of cannabis employees in the bargaining unit as cannabis employees, the employer shall petition the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement.  The division shall seek a response from the labor organization or cannabis employees seeking certification.  The division shall issue a decision citing to previous National Labor Relations Board rulings on private employees as applied to the prospective bargaining unit.  An appeal of the decision shall be preserved pending the final decision on certification by the division.
 
L.2025, c.244, s.8.

34:13A-68  Collective bargaining procedures.
	9. Collective bargaining procedures; Cannabis Employees
 
	a.	To bargain collectively is the performance of the mutual obligation of the  cannabis employer and the representative of the  cannabis employees to meet at reasonable times and confer in good faith with respect to wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment, or the negotiation of an agreement or any question arising thereunder, and the execution of a written contract incorporating any agreement reached if requested by either party, but this obligation shall not compel either party to agree to a proposal or require the making of a concession, provided that, where there is in effect a collective bargaining contract covering employees in an industry affecting commerce, the duty to bargain collectively shall also mean that no party to the contract shall terminate or modify the contract, unless the party desiring the termination or modification:
 
	(1) serves a written notice upon the other party to the contract of the proposed termination or modification 60 days prior to the expiration date thereof, or in the event the contract contains no expiration date, 60 days prior to the time the termination or modification is proposed;
 
	(2) offers to meet and confer with the other party for the purpose of negotiating a new contract or a contract containing the proposed modifications;
 
	(3) notifies the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement within 30 days after such notice of the existence of a dispute; and
 
	(4) continues in full force and effect, without resorting to strike or lockout, all the terms and conditions of the existing contract for a period of 60 days after the notice is given or until the expiration date of the contract, whichever occurs later.
 
	b.	Whenever collective bargaining is for the purpose of establishing an initial collective bargaining agreement following certification or recognition of a labor organization, the following shall apply:
 
	(1) Not later than 10 days after receiving a written request for collective bargaining from an individual or labor organization that has been newly recognized or certified as a representative as defined in section 8 of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-67), or within a further period as the parties agree upon, the parties shall meet and commence to bargain collectively and shall make every reasonable effort to conclude and sign a collective bargaining agreement.
 
	(2) If after the expiration of the 90-day period beginning on the date on which bargaining is commenced, or an additional period as the parties may agree upon, the parties have failed to reach an agreement, either party may notify the Board of Mediation of the existence of a dispute and request conciliation or mediation or both.  Whenever such a request is received, it shall be the duty of the Board of Mediation promptly to put itself in communication with the parties and to use its best efforts, by mediation and conciliation, to bring them to agreement.
 
	(3) If after the expiration of the 30-day period beginning on the date on which the request for mediation is made, or an additional period as the parties may agree upon, the Board of Mediation is not able to bring the parties to agreement by conciliation or mediation, the Board of Mediation shall refer the dispute to an arbitration panel established in accordance with regulations as may be prescribed by the Board of Mediation, with one member selected by the labor organization, one member selected by the employer, and one neutral member mutually agreed to by the parties.  The labor organization and employer shall each select the members of the tripartite arbitration panel within 14 days of the Board of Mediation’s referral; if the labor organization or employer fail to do so, the Board of Mediation shall designate any members not selected by the labor organization or the employer.  An arbitration panel shall render a decision settling the dispute as soon as practicable and not later than within 120 days, absent extraordinary circumstances or by agreement or permission of the parties, and the decision shall be binding upon the parties for a period of two years, unless amended during a period by written consent of the parties.  The decision shall be based on:
 
	(a) the employer’s financial status and prospects;
 
	(b) the size and type of the employer’s operations and business;
 
	(c) the employees’ cost of living;
 
	(d) the employees’ ability to sustain themselves, their families, and their dependents on the wages and benefits they earn from the employer; and
 
	(e) the wages and benefits other employers in the same business provide their employees.
 
L.2025, c.244, s.9.

34:13A-69  Grounds for decertification of labor organization.
	10.  Decertification; Cannabis Employees
 
	  The Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement shall decertify a labor organization representing cannabis employees if either of the following occur:
 
	a.  The Division of Civil Rights Department finds that the labor organization engaged in discrimination on any basis listed in the “Law Against Discrimination,” P.L.1945, c.169 (C.10:5-1 et seq.).
 
	b.  The United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission finds, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. s.2000e-5, that the labor organization engaged in discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, sex, or any other arbitrary or invidious  classification in violation of Subchapter VI of Chapter 21 of Title 42 of the United States Code during the period of the labor organization’s present certification.
 
L.2025, c.244, s.10.

34:13A-70  Prevention of unfair labor practices and refusal to adhere to representative; election and bargaining procedures; judicial review and enforcement.
	11.  Prevention of Unfair Labor Practices and Refusal to Adhere to Representative, Election, and Bargaining Procedures; Judicial Review and Enforcement
 
	a.	The Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement is empowered, as provided in P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-5.1a et al.), to prevent any person from engaging in any unfair labor practice, as set forth in section 7 of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-66), refusal to adhere to representative and election procedures, as set forth in section 8 of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-67), or refusal to adhere to bargaining procedures, as set forth in section 9 of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-68).  The provisions of this section shall be limited to the enforcement of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-5.1a et al.).
 
	b.	Whenever it is charged that any person has engaged in or is engaging in an unfair labor practice, or refusal to adhere to representative, election, and bargaining procedures, the Director of the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement, or the director’s designees, shall have power to issue and cause to be served upon that person a complaint stating the charges in that respect, and containing a notice of hearing before the division, at a place therein fixed, not less than five days after the serving of the complaint.  Any complaint may be amended by the division in its discretion, at any time prior to the issuance of an order based thereon.  The person so complained against shall have the right to file an answer to the original or amended complaint and to appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint.  In the discretion of the division, any other person may be allowed to intervene in the proceeding and to present testimony.  The proceeding shall, so far as practicable, be conducted in accordance with the New Jersey Rules of Evidence.  All proceedings shall be appropriately reported.
 
	c.	The testimony taken by the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement shall be reduced to writing and filed with the division.  Thereafter, in its discretion, the division, upon notice, may take further testimony or hear argument.  If, upon the preponderance of the evidence and testimony taken, the division shall be of the opinion that any person named in the complaint has engaged in or is engaging in an unfair labor practice, the division shall state its findings of fact and shall issue and cause to be served on the person an order requiring the person to cease and desist from the unfair labor practice or refusal to adhere to representative, election, and bargaining procedures, to take affirmative action, including reinstatement of employees with backpay, and making employees whole, when the division deems that relief appropriate, for the loss of pay resulting from the employer’s refusal to bargain, and to provide such other relief as will effectuate the policies of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-5.1a et al.). Where an order directs reinstatement of an employee, the order may require the employer or labor organization that is responsible for the discrimination suffered by the employee to pay the employee backpack.  The order may further require the person to make reports from time to time showing the extent to which it has complied with the order.  If, upon the preponderance of the evidence and testimony taken, the division finds that the person named in the complaint has not engaged in or is not engaging in any unfair labor practice, the division shall state its findings of fact and shall issue an order dismissing the complaint.  No order of the division shall require the reinstatement of any individual as an employee who has been suspended or discharged, or the payment to the employee of any backpay, if the individual was suspended or discharged for cause.  In case the evidence is presented before the division, the division shall issue and cause to be served on the parties to the proceedings a proposed report, together with a recommended order, which shall be filed with the division, and, if no exceptions are filed within 20 days after service thereof upon the parties, or within a further period as the division may authorize, the recommended order shall become the order of the division and become effective as therein prescribed.  If exceptions have been filed and the division issues an order finding that the person named in the complaint has engaged in or is engaging in any unfair labor practice or refusal to adhere to representative, election, and bargaining procedures and directing payment of a monetary remedy, the division shall order further proceedings to determine the specific amount of the monetary remedy or, if the monetary remedy is continuing to accrue, the amount accrued as of the date of the division’s order. In these cases, the division’s order does not become final until the division has issued its determination of the specific amount of the monetary remedy.
 
	d.	The Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement may, upon finding reasonable cause to believe that any person has engaged in or is engaging in an unfair labor practice or refusal to adhere to representative, election, and bargaining procedures, petition the superior court in any county wherein the unfair labor practice or refusal to adhere to representative, election, and bargaining procedures in question is alleged to have occurred, or wherein the person resides or transacts business, for appropriate temporary relief or restraining order.  Upon the filing of the petition, the division shall cause notice thereof to be served upon the person, and thereupon the court shall have jurisdiction to grant to the division such temporary relief or restraining order as the court deems just and proper.
 
	e.  (1) In addition to any harm resulting directly from an adverse employment action or other allegedly unlawful action, the court shall consider the indirect effect upon protected rights of all employees of the employer in determining whether temporary relief or a restraining order is just and proper.
 
	(2) When the alleged unfair labor practice or refusal to adhere to representative, election, and bargaining procedures would interfere with the free choice of employees to choose or not choose an exclusive bargaining representative, appropriate temporary relief or a restraining order shall issue on a showing that reasonable cause exists to believe that the unfair labor practice or refusal to adhere to representative, election, and bargaining procedures has occurred.  The order shall remain in effect until an election has been held or for 30 days, whichever occurs first.  Thereafter, a preliminary injunction may issue if it is shown to be just and proper.
 
	f.	Whenever it is charged that any person has engaged in an unfair labor practice within the meaning of section 7 of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-66), refusal to adhere to representative and election procedures within the meaning of section 8 of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-67), or refusal to adhere to bargaining procedures within the meaning of section 9 of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-68), the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement is empowered and directed to hear and determine the dispute out of which the unfair labor practice or refusal to adhere to representative, election, and bargaining procedures has arisen, unless within 10 days after notice that the charge has been filed, the parties to the dispute submit to the division satisfactory evidence that they have adjusted, or agreed upon methods for the voluntary adjustment, of the dispute.  Upon compliance by the parties to the dispute with the decision of the division or upon the voluntary adjustment of the dispute, the charge shall be dismissed.
 
	g.  (1) Any person aggrieved by the final order of the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement granting or denying in whole or in part the relief sought may obtain a review of the order in the court of appeal having jurisdiction over the county wherein the unfair labor practice or refusal to adhere to representative, election, and bargaining procedures in question was alleged to have been engaged in, or wherein the person resides or transacts business, by filing in the court a written petition requesting that the order of the division be modified or set aside.  The petition shall be filed with the court within 30 days from the date of the issuance of the division’s order.  Upon the filing of the petition, the court shall cause notice to be served upon the division and thereupon shall have jurisdiction of the proceeding.  The division shall file in the court the record of the proceeding, certified by the division, within 10 days after the clerk’s notice unless the time is extended by the court for good cause shown.  The court shall have jurisdiction to grant to the division a temporary relief or restraining order it deems just and proper and in like manner to make and enter a decree enforcing, modifying and enforcing as so modified, or setting aside in whole or in part, the order of the division.  The findings of the division with respect to questions of fact if supported by substantial evidence on the record considered as a whole shall in like manner be conclusive.
 
	(2) An order directing an election shall not be stayed pending review, but the order may be reviewed as in accordance with this subsection.
 
	(3) If the time for review of the division’s order has lapsed, and the person has not voluntarily complied with the division’s order, the division may apply to the superior court in any county in which the unfair labor practice or refusal to adhere to representative, election, and bargaining procedures has occurred or wherein the person resides or transacts business for enforcement of its order.  If after hearing, the court determines that the order was issued pursuant to procedures established by the division and that the person refuses to comply with the order, the court shall enforce the order by writ of injunction or other proper process.  The court shall not review the merits of the order.
 
	h. (1) Any employer who commits an unfair labor practice or refusal to adhere to representative, election, and bargaining procedures, in addition to any remedy ordered by the division, shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $10,000 for each violation.
 
	(2) In cases involving violations of paragraphs (2) or (3) of subsection a. of section 7, or involving any violation of section 7 that results in the discharge of an employee or other serious economic harm to an employee, the division shall double the amount of the penalty to an amount not to exceed $20,000. 
 
	i.	In determining the amount of any civil penalty to be imposed under this section, the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement shall consider the following:
 
	(1) The gravity of the unfair labor practice or refusal to adhere to representative, election, and bargaining procedures.
 
	(2) The impact of the unfair labor practice or refusal to adhere to representative, election, and bargaining procedures on the charging party, on other persons seeking to exercise rights guaranteed by P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-5.1a et al.), and on the public interest.
 
	(3) The financial circumstances of the employer.
 
	j. 	If the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement determines, based on the particular facts and circumstances of a case, that imposing personal liability on a director or officer of an employer, a civil penalty pursuant to this section may also be assessed against a director or officer of the employer who directed or committed the violation, had established a policy that led to the violation, or had actual or constructive knowledge of, and the authority to prevent, the violation and failed to do so.
 
L.2025, c.244, s.11.

34:13A-71  Access to employees, employee information.
	12. a. If an employee organization seeking to be a majority representative of cannabis employees employed by a cannabis employer petitions the division to require the employer to provide a list of the current employees with contact information pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1968, c.303 (C.34:13A-5.1), the employer shall, along with providing the list and contact information, provide the employee organization access to the employees.  
 
	b.	A cannabis employer shall permit any employee organization which is a majority representative of employees of the employer:
 
	(1)	to access the employer’s premises to investigate and discuss with the employees grievances, workplace-related complaints, and other workplace issues;
 
	(2)	to conduct worksite meetings during non-work breaks, and before and after the workday, to discuss workplace issues, collective negotiations, the administration of collective negotiations agreements, other matters related to the governance, business, and duties of the employee organization; and
 
	(3)	to meet with a newly hired employee within five days after hire, without charge to the pay or leave time of the employee.
 
	c.	A cannabis employer shall provide the majority representative with timely notification of any new hiring by the employer or change in the contact information of current employees.
 
	d. 	A cannabis employer shall carry out payroll deductions of membership dues for the majority representative, and payroll deductions for representation fees from non-members, as agreed to in negotiations between the employer and the majority representative, or, if an agreement is not reached, as set by the division.
 
	e.	A cannabis employer shall not discourage an employee from joining, forming, or assisting an employee organization, or encourage employees to resign or relinquish membership in an employee organization, or revoke authorization of the deduction of dues or fees to an employee organization.
 
	f. 	A cannabis employer who violates any provision of this section shall be regarded as having engaged in an unfair practice in violation of section 7 of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-66), and, upon a finding that the violation has occurred, the division, in addition to implementing any other remedies authorized by that section, shall order the cannabis employer to make whole the employee organization for any losses suffered by the organization as a result of the violation.
 
L.2025, c.244, s.12.

34:13A-72  Publicity, advising the public.
	13.  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, an organization representing cannabis employees, and its members, representatives, and supporters, shall have the right to engage in publicity, including picketing, for the purpose of truthfully advising the public, including consumers, that products or the ingredients of products are produced by a cannabis employer with which the organization has a dispute, including publicity which has the effect of requesting the public to cease patronizing businesses which distribute or sell those products.  Nothing in P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-5.1a et al.) shall be construed so as to interfere with or impede or diminish in any way the right of employees of private employers to strike or engage in other concerted actions.
 
L.2025, c.244, s.13.

34:13A-73  Adoption of rules and regulations, New Jersey State Board of Mediation. 
	14.  The New Jersey State Board of Mediation, in consultation with the Division of Private Employment Dispute Settlement, may adopt rules and regulations pursuant to the “Administrative Procedure Act,” P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), to effectuate the purpose of P.L.2025, c.244 (C.34:13A-5.1a et al.).
 
L.2025, c.244, s.14.

34:13B-1.  Declaration of policy
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the State that heat, light, power,  sanitation, transportation, communication, and water are life essentials of the  people;  that the possibility of labor strike in utilities operating under  governmental franchise is a threat to the welfare and health of the people;   that utilities operating under such franchise are clothed with public  interest, and the State's regulation of the labor relations affecting such  public utilities is necessary in the public interest.

    It is further declared to be the policy of this State that after the taking  of possession of any public utility by the State pursuant to the provisions of  section thirteen hereof, such public utility shall become for purposes of  production and operation a State facility and the use and operation thereof by  the State in the public interest shall be considered a governmental function of  the State of New Jersey.

     L.1946, c. 38, p. 87, s. 1.  Amended by L.1947, c. 75, p. 447, s. 3.

34:13B-2.  Collective bargaining
    Employees shall have the right to organize and bargain collectively through  representatives of their own choosing.  The majority of any craft or class of  employees shall have the right to determine who shall be the representative of  the craft or class for the purposes of this act.  No public utility, its  officers or agents, shall deny or in any way question the right of its  employees to join, organize or assist in organizing the labor organization of  their choice, and it shall be unlawful for any public utility to interfere in  any way with the organization of its employees, or to use the funds of the  public utility in maintaining or assisting or contributing to any labor  organization, labor representative, or other agency of collective bargaining,  or in performing any work therefor, or to influence or coerce employees in an  effort to induce them to join or remain or not to join or remain members of any  labor organization;  provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful to  require as a condition of employment, membership in any labor organization, not  initiated, created or existing as a result of practices declared unlawful  hereby;  provided, that nothing in this act shall be construed to prohibit a  public utility from permitting an employee, individually, or local  representatives of employees from conferring with management during working  hours without loss of time, or to prohibit a public utility from furnishing  free transportation to its employees while engaged in the business of a labor  organization.  In the event of a controversy as to who are the representatives  of any given craft or class of employees of a utility for the purpose of  collective bargaining or of a controversy as to which employees of a utility  constitute or are members of a given craft or class and entitled to vote in an  election for the choice of representatives for purposes of collective  bargaining, the State Board of Mediation shall determine such question or  questions and certify its findings to the employees and to the utility.  Such  finding of the State Board of Mediation shall be conclusive.

     L.1946, c. 38, p. 87, s. 2.

34:13B-2.1  Construction contractors, employees, OSHA certification, payment of rate for trade, craft; required on public utility work.
 
	2.	Any construction contractor contracting with a public utility to engage in construction work on a public utility shall employ on the site only employees who have successfully completed any OSHA-certified safety training required for work to be performed on that site.
 
	Any employee employed by a construction contractor engaged in construction work on a public utility shall be paid the wage rate for their craft or trade as determined by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to the provisions of the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.).
 
	A construction contractor who is found by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development to be in violation of the provisions of this section shall be subject to the provisions of sections 11 and 12 of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.35 and 34:11-56.36) which apply to an employer for a violation of P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.).
 
	Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to any public utility affiliate not regulated under the provisions of Title 48 of the Revised Statutes.
 
	The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), adopt regulations to effectuate the provisions of this section.
 
	L.2007, c.343, s.2.
 
34:13B-3.  Additional powers to State Board of Mediation
    There is hereby included in the functions of the State Board of Mediation the following responsibility:

    (A) The determination of who are the representatives of any given craft or class of employees of a utility;  which employees of a utility constitute or are members of a given craft or class and entitled to vote in an election for choice of representatives of such craft or class for purposes of collective bargaining.  It shall be the duty of the State Board of Mediation to recognize as an appropriate bargaining unit, any craft, group, or class of employees of a  utility, the majority of whom desire to be represented as such class, craft or  group.

     L.1946, c. 38, p. 88, s. 3.

34:13B-4.  Contracts between a utility and its employees
    All labor agreements hereafter entered into between the management of a utility and its employees or any craft or class of employees shall be reduced to writing and continue for a period of not less than one year from the date of  the expiration of the previous agreement entered into between the management of  the utility and its employees or if there has been no such previous agreement  then for a period of not less than one year from the date of the actual  execution of the agreement.  Such agreement shall be presumed to continue in  force and effect from year to year after the date fixed for its original  termination unless either or both parties thereto inform the other, in writing,  of the specific changes desired to be made therein and shall also file a copy  of such demands with the State Board of Mediation, at least sixty days before  the original termination date or sixty days before the end of any yearly  renewal period.

     L.1946, c. 38, p. 89, s. 4.

34:13B-5.  Written notice of changes desired in existing labor contracts required
    In the case of all existing labor contracts, agreements or understandings which do not provide for at least a sixty-day notice of desired changes and which contracts, agreements or understandings terminate after seventy days following the effective date of this act, the parties thereto shall nevertheless inform, in writing, the other party or parties of any specific changes desired to be made in said contract, agreement or understanding and file a copy of such desired changes with the State Board of Mediation at least sixty days before the date fixed for the termination of said contract, agreement or understanding.  In the case of labor contracts, agreements or understandings terminating within seventy days after this act shall become effective, the parties thereto shall forthwith, or not later than ten days after the effective date of this act, inform the other party, in writing, of the specific changes desired to be made in said contract, agreement or understanding and promptly file a copy of such demands with the State Board of Mediation.

     L.1946, c. 38, p. 89, s. 5.

34:13B-6.  Expired labor contracts;  written notice of desired changes required
    Whenever at the time of the passage of this act a labor contract between a utility and its employees has existed and has expired, and where services are still being performed by the said employees under the terms of said expired contract, the said employees, through their duly elected representatives, if they desire to enter into a contract with the utility or if they desire to seek  changes in the terms of wages, hours or working conditions, or if the utility  shall desire in any way to effect the terms of wages, working conditions, et  cetera, under which employment is now being carried on then and in that case  the party desiring such changes shall within ten days after the effective date  of this act inform the other party in writing of the specific changes desired  to be made in said terms of employment either by contract, in writing, or  otherwise, and shall promptly file a copy of such demands with the State Board  of Mediation.

     L.1946, c. 38, p. 90, s. 6.

34:13B-7.  Change in terms of employment not the subject of contract; notice of changes desired
    Whenever, after the passage of this act, a situation exists in any utility whereby employees are rendering services under terms and conditions which were not at the time of the passage of this act and which have not heretofore been the subject of the contract, and said employees desire to effectuate a change in the terms of employment or a utility desires to effectuate a change in said terms of employment then and in that event, it shall be the duty of the party desiring such change, not less than sixty days prior to the desired effective date thereof, to inform the other party in writing of the specific changes so desired in the manner in which they are desired, either by written contract or otherwise and to file a copy of such terms with the State Board of Mediation.

     L.1946, c. 38, p. 90, s. 7.

34:13B-13.  Seizure
    Should either party in a labor dispute between a utility and its employees,  after having given sixty days' notice thereof, or failing to give such notice,  engage in any strike, work stoppage or lockout which, in the opinion of the  Governor, will result in the failure to continue the operation of the public  utility, and threatens the public interest, health and welfare, or in the event  that neither side has given notice to the other of an intention to seek a  change in working conditions, and there occurs a lockout, strike or work  stoppage, which, in the opinion of the Governor, threatens to impair the  operation of the utility so as to interfere with the public interest, health  and welfare, then and in that case he is authorized to take immediate  possession of the plant, equipment or facility for the use and operation by the  State of New Jersey in the public interest.  Such power and authority may be  exercised by the Governor through such department or agency of the government  as he may designate and may be exercised after his investigation and  proclamation that there is a threatened or actual interruption of the operation  of such public utility as the result of a labor dispute, a threatened or actual  strike, a lockout or other labor disturbance, and that the public interest,  health and welfare are jeopardized, and that the exercise of such authority is necessary to insure the operation of such public utility;  provided, that whenever such public utility, its plant, equipment or facility has been or is  hereafter so taken by reason of a strike, lockout, threatened strike, threatened lockout, work stoppage or slow-down, or other cause, such utility,  plant, equipment or facility shall be returned to the owners thereof as soon as  practicable after the settlement of said labor dispute.

     L.1946, c. 38, p. 93, s. 13.  Amended by L.1950, c. 14, p. 39, s. 1.

34:13B-14.  Rules and regulations
    The Governor is authorized to prescribe the necessary rules and regulations  to carry out the provisions of this act.

     L.1946, c. 38, p. 94, s. 14.

34:13B-15.  Labor not to be required without employee's consent
    Under no circumstances shall any employee be required to render, perform or  engage in any work, labor or service without his consent;  nor shall anything  in this act, or in any amendment thereof or supplement thereto, be construed to  make the quitting of his work, labor or services by an individual employee an  illegal or prohibited act;  nor shall any court issue any process to compel the  performance by an individual employee of such work, labor or service without  his consent.

     L.1946, c. 38, p. 94, s. 15.  Amended by L.1947, c. 75, p. 451, s. 9.

34:13B-16  Definitions.
 
	16. (a) The term "public utility" shall include autobusses; bridge companies; canal companies; electric light, heat and power companies; ferries and steamboats; gas companies; pipeline companies; railroads; sewer companies; steam and water power companies; street railways; telegraph and telephone companies; tunnel companies; water companies.
 
	(b)	The term "person" means any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association, or joint stock association; and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or personal representative thereof.
 
	(c)	The term "representative" means any person or persons, labor union, organization, or corporation designated either by a utility or group of utilities or by its or their employees to act or do for them.
 
	(d)	The term "collective bargaining" shall be understood to embody the philosophy of bargaining by employees through representatives of their own choosing, and shall include the right of representatives of employees' units to be consulted and to bargain upon the exceptional as well as the routine wages, hours, rules, and working conditions.
 
	(e)	The term "labor dispute" shall involve any controversy between employer and employees as to hours, wages, and working conditions.  The fact that employees have amicable relations with their employers shall not preclude the existence of a dispute among them concerning their representative for collective bargaining purposes.
 
	(f)	The term "employee" shall refer to anyone in the service of another, actually engaged in or connected with the operation of any public utility throughout the State.
 
	(g)	The term "construction work on a public utility" shall, in connection with the construction of any public utility in the State, mean construction, reconstruction, installation, demolition, restoration, and alteration of  facilities of the public utility.  The term "construction work on a public utility" shall not be construed to include operational work, including flaggers, snow plowing, vegetation management in and around utility rights of way, mark outs, janitorial services, landscaping, leak surveyors, meter work, and miscellaneous repairs.
 
	L.1946, c.38, s.16; amended 2007, c.343, s.1.

34:13B-17.  Severability
    If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this act, or of any supplement  thereto or amendment thereof, or the application thereof to any person or  circumstances, shall for any reason be adjudged by a court of competent  jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair, or  invalidate the remainder of this act, or such supplement thereto or amendment  thereof, and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, or part thereof, directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and to the person or circumstances involved. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that this act and such supplement thereto and amendment thereof would have been adopted had such invalid provision not been included therein.

     L.1946, c. 38, p. 95, s. 17.  Amended by L.1947, c. 75, p. 451, s. 10.

34:13B-18.  Sixty-day notice of intention to strike
    It shall be unlawful for any employee or representative of any craft, class  or group of employees of a public utility to institute, participate in or aid  in the conduct of a strike or work stoppage or for a public utility or any  officer, agent or representative thereof to institute, participate in or aid in  any lockout until sixty days shall have elapsed after written notice of  intention to institute, participate or aid in the conduct of a strike or work  stoppage or lockout has been served by the employee or representative intending  to institute, participate in or aid in a strike or work stoppage or the public  utility intending to institute, participate in or aid in a lockout upon the  State Board of Mediation and the other party to the dispute.  Said notice may  be served on or after but not before the termination of the collective  bargaining agreement between the parties and in cases where no such collective  bargaining agreement exists, may be served at or after but not before the  expiration of the notice of desired changes required to be served under the  provisions of the act which this act supplements.  During the aforementioned  sixty-day period it shall be the duty of all parties to continue their  endeavors in good faith to reach an agreement and said sixty-day period may be  extended by written agreement of the parties, filed with the State Board of  Mediation.

     L.1947, c. 47, p. 160, s. 2.

34:13B-19.  Strike after seizure
    After the Governor has taken or shall take possession of any plant, equipment or facility of any public utility for the use and operation by the State of New Jersey in the public interest, pursuant to the provisions of section thirteen of the act which this act supplements, and during the continuance of such possession, the relationship between the Government of the State of New Jersey and the persons employed at such public utility, except those who elect to quit such employment, shall be that of employer and employee;  and during the continuance of such possession it shall be unlawful for any person employed at such plant or facility to participate in or aid in any strike, concerted work stoppage or concerted refusal to work for the State as a means of enforcing demands of employees against the State or for any other  purpose contrary to the provisions of this act.

     L.1947, c. 47, p. 161, s. 3.  Amended by L.1947, c. 75, p. 447, s. 4.

34:13B-20.  Board of arbitration;  submission to Board
    Within ten days after the Governor has taken or shall take possession of any  plant, equipment or facility of any public utility pursuant to the provisions  of section thirteen of the act which this act supplements, or within ten days  after the effective date of this act, whichever is later, any and all disputes  then existing between the public utility and the employees shall be submitted  to a Board of Arbitration to be constituted within such ten-day period as  follows:  the management of such public utility and the representatives of such  employees shall each designate in writing one person to serve as a member of  such Board of Arbitration and file such designation with the State Board of  Mediation;  the two persons so designated shall choose three disinterested and  impartial persons and shall file such designations with the State Board of  Mediation, and the five thus appointed shall compose, and act as the Board of  Arbitration. Such board shall elect one of its members to serve as chairman  thereof.  In the event that the persons designated by the management and the representatives of the employees shall, within such ten-day period, fail to choose the three disinterested and impartial persons hereinabove referred to,  and file the designations of such persons with the State Board of Mediation,  then the Governor shall, upon being notified to that effect by the State Board  of Mediation, forthwith appoint such three disinterested and impartial persons  to serve as members of such Board of Arbitration and shall designate one of the  members of such board to serve as chairman thereof.

    In the event that either the management of the public utility involved or the representatives of the craft, class or group of employees shall fail or neglect to designate, as hereinabove provided, persons to represent them respectively upon such Board of Arbitration, within such ten-day period, then the Governor shall, upon being notified thereof by the State Board of Mediation, forthwith appoint five disinterested and impartial persons to constitute such Board of Arbitration and shall designate one of the members of such board to serve as chairman thereof.  All appointments hereinabove required  to be made shall be filed with the State Board of Mediation.

     L.1947, c. 47, p. 161, s. 4.  Amended by L.1947, c. 75, p. 447, s. 5.

34:13B-21.  Hearing;  powers of Board;  refusal to testify or produce evidence
    The Board of Arbitration shall promptly proceed to arbitrate the matters submitted to it.  It shall promptly hold hearings and shall have the power to administer oaths and compel by subpoena the attendance of witnesses and the furnishing and production by any person of such information, books, records, papers and documents as may be necessary to a determination of the issue or issues in dispute.  If a person subpoenaed to attend any hearing refuses or fails to appear or to be examined, or to answer any question or to produce any books, records, papers and documents when ordered so to do by the Board of Arbitration, such board may apply to the Superior Court to compel the person to  comply forthwith with the subpoena, direction or order of the board.  Both parties to the dispute shall be afforded an opportunity to be present at the hearing, both personally and by counsel, and to present such oral and documentary evidence as the Board of Arbitration shall deem relevant to the issue or issues in controversy.

     L.1947, c. 47, p. 162, s. 5.  Amended by L.1947, c. 75, p. 449, s. 6; L.1953,  c. 33, p. 592, s. 46.

34:13B-23.  Findings and award;  duration of order;  retroactive effect
    The findings, decision and order of the Board of Arbitration shall, unless modified or reversed on appeal, be conclusive and binding upon all of the parties to the dispute and such order of such board shall be complied with by the parties in accordance with the terms thereof.  The order of the Board of Arbitration shall remain in effect for a period of one year from the date thereof unless the board shall fix a lesser period therefor after having given due consideration to the duration of any prior contract between the public utility and the employees thereof, and any practice with respect to the duration of such contract existing in the same or similar industries.  The Board of Arbitration may, in its discretion, with respect to any labor dispute existing at the effective date of this act, provide that any award made by it shall be retroactive to the day of the return to work by the employees or, with  respect to any labor dispute occurring after the effective date of this act, to  the day of the taking of possession pursuant to the provisions of section  thirteen of the act which this act supplements, or to the day of the return to  work by the employees, or to the day of the termination of any contract between  the public utility and its employees.

    Within thirty days after the Board of Arbitration has filed with the Governor such findings, decision and order, any party to the dispute aggrieved thereby may secure judicial review thereof by appeal therefrom to the Appellate  Division of the Superior Court.  A copy of the notice of appeal shall be served  upon the chairman of the Board of Arbitration and upon the other party to the  dispute or its attorney.  In any such appeal the findings of the Board of  Arbitration upon the facts, if supported by any evidence, shall be conclusive.   The filing of such notice of appeal shall not supersede or stay the order of  the Board of Arbitration unless the Appellate Division shall so direct.

     L.1947, c. 47, p. 163, s. 7.  Amended by L.1947, c. 75, p. 449, s. 7; L.1953,  c. 33, p. 593, s. 47.

34:13B-24.  Lockout, strike or work stoppage;  penalty
    Any lockout, authorized or engaged in, by any public utility in violation of  any provision of this act, or any failure or refusal by a public utility to  abide by the terms of any decision or order made by any board of arbitration  constituted in accordance with the provisions of this act, or any strike or  concerted work stoppage, authorized or engaged in, or continued to be engaged  in by any labor union or representative of any craft, class or group of  employees of a public utility, or any concerted action on the part of a  substantial number of the members of any labor union resulting in an interruption of the operation of any public utility, in violation of any provision of this act or in connection with any refusal to abide by the terms of any decision or order made by any board of arbitration constituted in accordance with the provisions of this act, shall subject such public utility and any officer or agent thereof participating or aiding therein or such labor union or representative of any craft, class or group of employees of a public utility to a penalty in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per day for each day during the period of such lockout, strike, concerted work stoppage, or failure or refusal to abide by the terms of such decision or order, such penalty to be recovered in the name of the State in an action at law in any court of competent jurisdiction.

     L.1947, c. 47, p. 164, s. 8.  Amended by L.1947, c. 75, p. 450, s. 8; L.1950,  c. 14, p. 40, s. 2.

34:13B-25.  Violations
    Any officer or agent of any public utility or labor union, or any person performing the duties of such officer or agent, who shall willfully violate, or  aid and abet the violation of any of the provisions of this act, or attempt to  do so, shall, for each such offense, be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon  conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00)  nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).  Each day's continuance of  the violation shall constitute a separate offense.

     L.1947, c. 47, p. 164, s. 9.  Amended by L.1947, c. 75, p. 453, s. 12.

34:13B-26.  Injunctive relief;  declaratory or other relief
    Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary:

    The commissioner, director or other chief administrative officer of any department or agency of the Government of the State of New Jersey through which  the power and authority of the Governor in the use and operation of the plant,  equipment or facility of any public utility is exercised pursuant to the  provisions of section thirteen of chapter thirty-eight of the laws of one thousand nine hundred and forty-six, or the Attorney-General, may institute an action in the Superior Court in the name of this State, on the relation of said  commissioner, director or other chief administrative officer, or Attorney-General, as the case may be, for injunctive relief to prohibit any violation of any of the provisions of this act, or of any provision of any act which this act supplements or amends, or for any declaratory and other relief. The court shall have power and authority to grant such relief and make or render such orders and judgments as it shall determine to be equitable and just  in the premises.

     L.1947, c. 75, p. 452, s. 11.  Amended by L.1953, c. 33, p. 594, s. 48.

34:13B-27.  Written findings and decision;  factors to be considered
    (a) It shall be the duty of each board of arbitration appointed pursuant to  chapter forty-seven of the laws of one thousand nine hundred and forty-seven to  make written findings of fact and to promulgate a written decision and order  upon the issue or issues presented in each case and on the basis of the  evidence in the record;  provided, however, that such issue or issues shall  have been in dispute between the parties;  and provided further, that the board  shall not render findings of fact, decision or order upon any issue or issues  which are not proper subjects for collective bargaining for the reason that  they do not pertain to wages, hours or conditions of employment.

    (b) Where there is no contract between the parties, or where there is a contract but the parties are negotiating a new contract or amendments to the existing contract, and issues arise which are the subject of dispute between the parties in such negotiations, the board shall make a just and reasonable determination of the dispute, and in determining such issues, base its findings  of fact, decision and order upon the following factors:

    (1) The interests and welfare of the public.

     (2) Comparison of the wages, hours and conditions of employment of the employees involved in the arbitration proceedings, and the wages, hours and conditions of employment of employees doing the same, similar or comparable work or work requiring the same, similar or comparable skills and expenditure of energy and effort, giving consideration to such factors as are peculiar to the industry involved.

    (3) Comparison of wages, hours and conditions of employment as reflected in  industries in general and in public utilities in particular throughout the nation and in the State of New Jersey.

    (4) The security and tenure of employment with due regard for the effect of  technological changes thereon as well as the effect of any unique skills and  attributes developed in the industry.

    (5) Such other factors not confined to the foregoing which are normally or traditionally taken into consideration in the determination of wages, hours and  conditions of employment through voluntary collective bargaining, arbitration  or otherwise between the parties or in the industry.

    (c) The board shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence applicable  in a court of law.

    (d) The findings of fact, decision and order of the board shall be made within thirty days after submission of the issues in dispute or within such additional period as may be agreed upon by a majority of the members of such board.  The findings of fact, decision and order of such board shall forthwith be filed by such board with the Governor, and a copy of such findings of fact, decision and order shall be submitted to each of the parties to the dispute and  another copy thereof filed with the State Board of Mediation.

     L.1949, c. 308, p. 995, s. 1.

34:13B-28.  Repeal
    Section six of chapter forty-seven of the laws of one thousand nine hundred  and forty-seven is repealed.

     L.1949, c. 308, p. 997, s. 2.

34:13C-1.  Importation or transportation of strikebreakers
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to import from outside the boundaries of the State of New Jersey, or to transport within the State of New Jersey, or to supply from without the State any person or persons for the purpose of being or becoming employed with an object of:

    (a) interfering by force or violence or threats thereof, or coercing or intimidating persons lawfully picketing the premises of an employer or engaged in other lawful activities in support of a strike, during the existence of a labor dispute;  or

    (b) coercing or intimidating or interfering by force or violence or threats  thereof with the right of employees to form, join or assist labor organizations  or the rights of employees or their representatives to engage in collective  bargaining with their employers.

    (c) replacing in employment any employees of any employer who are lawfully on strike or who have been locked out.

     L.1960, c. 193, p. 833, s. 1.

34:13C-2.  Recruitment, etc., of persons to take place of employees during strike or lockout
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, not directly involved in a strike or lockout, to recruit any person or persons for employment, or to secure or offer to secure for any person or persons any employment, when the purpose of such recruiting, securing or offering to secure  employment, is to have such persons take the place in employment of employees  in an industry where a strike or a lockout exists.

     L.1960, c. 193, p. 834, s. 2.

34:13C-3.  Applicability of provisions to employment agents and New Jersey Employment Service
    Employment agents licensed as such under the laws of the State of New Jersey, and the New Jersey Employment Service shall not be affected by sections  1 or 2 of this act, but no such employment agent, and no person acting on  behalf of the New Jersey Employment Service shall knowingly refer an applicant  for employment to an employer any of whose employees are then engaged in a  strike or have been locked out.

     L.1960, c. 193, p. 834, s. 3.

34:13C-4.  Importation of union pickets
    This act shall apply to the importation of union pickets from without the State.

     L.1960, c. 193, p. 834, s. 4.

34:13C-5.  Violation;  penalty
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this act shall be guilty of a  misdemeanor.

     L.1960, c. 193, p. 834, s. 5.

34:13C-6.  Inapplicability of act to common carriers
    This act shall not apply to common carriers.

     L.1960, c. 193, p. 834, s. 6.

34:15-1.    Employees' right to recover for negligent injury;  willful negligence as defense;  jury question
    When personal injury is caused to an employee by accident arising out of and  in the course of his employment, of which the actual or lawfully imputed negligence of the employer is the natural and proximate cause, he shall receive  compensation therefor from his employer, provided the employee was himself not  willfully negligent at the time of receiving such injury, and the question of  whether the employee was willfully negligent shall be one of fact to be  submitted to the jury, subject to the usual superintending powers of a court to  set aside a verdict rendered contrary to the evidence.

34:15-2.    Defenses abolished
    The right to compensation as provided by this article shall not be defeated  upon the ground that the injury was caused in any degree by the negligence of a  fellow employee;  or that the injured employee assumed the risks inherent in or  incidental to or arising out of his employment or arising from the failure of  the employer to provide and maintain safe premises and suitable appliances;   which said grounds of defense are hereby abolished.

34:15-3.    Contract not to bar liability
    If an employer enters into a contract, written or verbal, with an independent contractor to do part of such employer's work, or if such contractor enters into a contract, written or verbal, with a subcontractor to do all or any part of such work comprised in such contractor's contract with the employer, such contract or subcontract shall not bar the liability of the employer for injury caused to an employee of such contractor or subcontractor by any defect in the condition of the ways, works, machinery or plant if the defect arose or had not been discovered and remedied through the negligence of the employer or some one intrusted by him with the duty of seeing that they were in proper condition.  This section shall apply only to actions arising under this article.

34:15-4.    Death of employee
    The provisions of this article shall apply to any claim for the death of an  employee arising under sections 2A:31-1 to 2A:31-6 of the New Jersey Statutes.

     Amended by L.1953, c. 33, p. 594, s. 49.

34:15-5.    Burden of proof
    In all actions at law brought pursuant to this article, the burden of proof  to establish willful negligence of the injured employee shall be upon the  defendant.

34:15-6.     Liens for legal services  
     34:15-6. No claim for legal services or disbursements pertaining to any demand or suit under this chapter shall be an enforceable lien against the amount paid as compensation, unless approved in writing by the court in which the claim is sued upon, or in case of settlement without trial, by the Superior Court, unless notice in writing be given the defendant of such claim, in which event the same shall be a lien against the amount paid as compensation, subject to determination of the amount and approval hereinbefore provided.  

    Amended 1953,c.33,s.50; 1991,c.91,s.357.  

34:15-7.  Compensation by agreement;  defenses;  burden of proof
    When employer and employee shall by agreement, either express or implied, as  hereinafter provided, accept the provisions of this article compensation for  personal injuries to, or for the death of, such employee by accident arising  out of and in the course of employment shall be made by the employer without  regard to the negligence of the employer, according to the schedule contained  in sections 34:15-12 and 34:15-13 of this Title in all cases except when the  injury or death is intentionally self-inflicted, or when intoxication or the  unlawful use of controlled dangerous substances as defined in the  "New Jersey  Controlled Dangerous Substances Act," P.L.1970, c. 266 (C. 24:21-1 et seq.),  or willful failure to make use of a reasonable and proper personal protective  device or devices furnished by the employer, which has or have been clearly  made a requirement of the employee's employment by the employer and uniformly  enforced and which an employer can properly document that despite repeated  warnings, the employee has willfully failed to properly and effectively  utilize, is the natural and proximate cause of injury or death provided,  however, this latter provision shall not apply where there is such imminent  danger or need for immediate action which does not allow for appropriate use of  personal protective device or devices, and the burden of the proof of such fact shall be upon the employer or when recreational or social activities, unless such recreational or social activities are a regular incident of employment and  produce a benefit to the employer beyond improvement in employee health and  morale, are the natural and proximate cause of the injury or death.

     Amended by L.1979, c. 283, s. 1, eff. Jan. 10, 1980.

34:15-7.1.  Horseplay or skylarking on part of fellow employees
    An accident to an employee causing his injury or death, suffered while engaged in his employment but resulting from horseplay or skylarking on the part of a fellow employee, not instigated or taken part in by the employee who suffers the accident, shall be construed to have arisen out of and in the course of the employment of such employee and shall be compensable under the act hereby supplemented accordingly.

     L.1956, c. 141, p. 579, s. 9.

34:15-7.2.  Claim based on cardiovascular or cerebral vascular causes; preponderance of credible evidence of proof of cause by work effort
    In any claim for compensation for injury or death from cardiovascular or cerebral vascular causes, the claimant shall prove by a preponderance of the credible evidence that the injury or death was produced by the work effort or strain involving a substantial condition, event or happening in excess of the wear and tear of the claimant's daily living and in reasonable medical probability caused in a material degree the cardiovascular or cerebral vascular  injury or death resulting therefrom.

    Material degree means an appreciable degree or a degree substantially greater than de minimis.

     L.1979, c. 283, s. 3, eff. Jan. 10, 1980.

34:15-7.3.   Worker's compensation for injury, death occurring while responding to law enforcement, public safety, medical emergency.
	1. a. For any cardiovascular or cerebrovascular injury or death which occurs to an individual covered by subsection b. of this section while that individual is engaged in a response to an emergency, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the response to the emergency included a work effort sufficient to cause injury or death  and thus compensable under R.S. 34:15-1 et seq., if that injury or death occurs while the individual is responding  to or, in the case of paid, part-paid, or volunteer firefighters, members of a volunteer first aid or rescue squad, or career emergency medical technicians or paramedics, remediating from a law enforcement, public safety or medical emergency as defined in subsection c. of this section.
 
	b.	This section shall apply to:
 
	(1) Any permanent or temporary member of a paid or part-paid fire or police department and force;
 
	(2) Any member of a volunteer fire company;
 
	(3) Any member of a volunteer first aid or rescue squad;
 
	(4) Any special, reserve, or auxiliary policeman doing volunteer duty; and
 
	(5) Any career emergency medical technician or paramedic, employed by the State, a county, a municipality, or a private sector counterpart, who is engaged in public emergency medical and rescue services.
 
	c.	As used in this section: 
 
	"Law enforcement, public safety or medical emergency" means any combination of circumstances requiring immediate action to prevent the loss of human life, the destruction of property, or the violation of the criminal laws of this State or its political subdivisions, and includes, but is not limited to, the suppression of a fire, a firemanic drill, the apprehension of a criminal, or medical and rescue service.
 
	"Remediating from" means leaving an emergency in a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 24 hours from the end of the emergency, to carry out post-incident agency protocols and decompression including measures such as critical incident stress debriefings.
 
	d.	The presumption of compensability pursuant to subsection a. of this section shall be rebuttable by use of causal factors such as horseplay, skylarking, self-infliction, voluntary intoxication, and illicit drug use.  Rebuttal of the presumption based upon medical causation shall require clear and convincing medical evidence that the work experience was not a substantial cause of the cardiovascular or cerebrovascular injury.

      1987,c.382; amended 2023, c.348.

34:15-8.  Election surrender of other remedies
    Such agreement shall be a surrender by the parties thereto of their rights to any other method, form or amount of compensation or determination thereof than as provided in this article and an acceptance of all the provisions of this article, and shall bind the employee and for compensation for the employee's death shall bind the employee's personal representatives, surviving spouse and next of kin, as well as the employer, and those conducting the employer's business during bankruptcy or insolvency.

    If an injury or death is compensable under this article, a person shall not  be liable to anyone at common law or otherwise on account of such injury or  death for any act or omission occurring while such person was in the same employ as the person injured or killed, except for intentional wrong.

     Amended by L.1961, c. 2, p. 14, s. 1;  L.1979, c. 283, s. 2, eff. Jan. 10, 1980.

34:15-9.  Presumption as to acceptance of elective compensation provisions
    Every contract of hiring made subsequent to the fourth day of July, one thousand nine hundred and eleven, shall be presumed to have been made with reference to the provisions of this article, and unless there be as a part of such contract an express statement in writing prior to any accident, either in the contract itself or by written notice from either party to the other, that the provisions of this article are not intended to apply, then it shall be presumed that the parties have accepted the provisions of this article and have  agreed to be bound thereby.

    Every contract of hiring made or implied or in operation before the fourth day of July, one thousand nine hundred and eleven, shall be presumed to continue subject to the provisions of this article unless either party shall prior to accident, in writing, notify the other party to such contract that the  provisions of this article are not intended to apply.

34:15-10.  Employment of minors
	34:15-10.  In the employment of minors, this article shall be presumed to apply unless the notice be given by or to the parent or guardian of the minor.  If the injured employee at the time of the accident or compensable occupational disease is a minor under 14 years of age employed in violation of the labor law or a minor between 14 and 18 years of age employed, permitted or suffered to work without an employment certificate or special permit if required by law or at an occupation prohibited at the minor's age by law, a compensation or death benefit shall be payable to the employee or his dependents which shall be double the amount payable under the schedules provided in R.S.34:15-12 and R.S.34:15-13.

	The possession of such duly issued employment certificate shall be conclusive evidence for an employer that the minor has reached the age certified to therein and no extra compensation shall be payable to any minor engaged in an employment allowed by the law for the age and sex certified to in such certificate.  If the certificate presented by the employee as one issued to that person shall have been really issued to another child and the real age of the employee shall be such that employment in any capacity or in the particular capacity the employee was employed by the employer was prohibited and if the employer shall show to the satisfaction of the Division of Workers' Compensation that the employer accepted the certificate in good faith as having been issued to the employee and could not have, despite reasonable diligence, discovered the fraud, in such event no extra compensation shall be paid to the employee illegally employed.

	The employer alone and not the insurance carrier shall be liable for the extra compensation or death benefit which is over and above the amount of the compensation or death benefit provided under R.S.34:15-12 or R.S.34:15-13. Any provision in an insurance policy undertaking to relieve an employer from the liability for the extra compensation or extra death benefit shall be void.

	Nothing in this chapter contained shall deprive an infant under the age of 18 years of the right or rights now existing to recover damages in a common law or other appropriate action or proceeding for injuries received by reason of the negligence of his or her master.

	Nothing in this section regarding the payment of a compensation or death benefit in double the amount payable under the schedules provided in R.S.34:15-12 and R.S.34:15-13 shall apply to: members of a junior firemen's auxiliary established pursuant to N.J.S.40A:14-95; employees, of the age of 18 years or under, employed in summer camps operated by the Boy Scouts of America, the Girl Scouts of America, the Knights of Columbus, the Young Men's Christian Association, the Young Women's Christian Association, the Young Men's Hebrew Association, or any domestic corporation organized solely for religious or charitable purposes; student-learners employed in a cooperative vocational education program approved by the State Board of Education; persons, 18 years of age or younger, participating, under the supervision of the Palisades Interstate Park Commission, in volunteer programs in that part of the Palisades Interstate Park located in New Jersey; or persons, 18 years of age or younger, doing volunteer work for the Division of Parks and Forestry, the Division of Fish, Game and Wildlife, or the New Jersey Natural Lands Trust, as authorized by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection, or for the New Jersey Historic Trust.

	Amended 1940, c.176; 1945, c.74, s.4; 1956, c.141, s.1; 1971, c.416; 1979, c.283, s.4; 1987, c.259, s.2; 1997, c.199, s.1; 1999, c.152, s.50.

34:15-11.  Termination of contract
    The contract for the operation of the provisions of this article may be terminated by either party upon sixty days' notice in writing prior to any accident.

34:15-12  Schedule of payments.
  	34:15-12.  Following is a schedule of compensation:
	a.	For injury producing temporary disability, 70% of the worker's weekly wages received at the time of the injury, subject to a maximum compensation of 75% of the average weekly wages earned by all employees covered by the "unemployment compensation law" (R.S.43:21-1 et seq.) and a minimum of 20% of such average weekly wages a week.  This compensation shall be paid during the period of such disability, not however, beyond 400 weeks.  The amount of the maximum compensation shall be computed, determined, rounded out to the nearest dollar, and promulgated by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development on or before September 1 in each year based on said average weekly wages as of the calendar year preceding, and shall be effective as to injuries occurring in the calendar year following such promulgation.  In any year in which the maximum benefit rate based upon said computation would not be increased or decreased beyond $1.00 in amount, the rate promulgated theretofore shall continue.  
 
	b.	For disability total in character and permanent in quality, 70% of the weekly wages received at the time of injury, subject to a maximum and a minimum compensation as stated in subsection a. of this section.  This compensation shall be paid for a period of 450 weeks, at which time compensation payments shall cease unless the employee shall have submitted to such physical or educational rehabilitation as may have been ordered by the rehabilitation commission, and can show that because of such disability it is impossible for the employee to obtain wages or earnings equal to those earned at the time of the accident, in which case further weekly payments shall be made during the period of such disability, the amount thereof to be the previous weekly compensation payment diminished by that portion thereof that the wage, or earnings, the employee is then able to earn, bears to the wages received at the time of the accident.  If the employee's wages or earnings equal or exceed wages received at the time of the accident, then the compensation rate shall be reduced to $5.00.  In calculating compensation for this extension beyond 450 weeks the above minimum provision shall not apply. This extension of compensation payments beyond 450 weeks shall be subject to such periodic reconsiderations and extensions as the case may require, and shall apply only to disability total in character and permanent in quality, and shall not apply to any accident occurring prior to July 4, 1923.  
 
	c.	For disability partial in character and permanent in quality, weekly compensation shall be paid based upon 70% of the weekly wages received at the time of the injury, subject to a maximum compensation per week of 75% of the Statewide average weekly wages (SAWW) earned by all employees covered by the "unemployment compensation law" (R.S.43:21-1 et seq.) and paid in accordance with the following "Disability Wage and Compensation Schedule" and a minimum of $35.00 per week.  The amount of awards for up to and including 180 weeks shall remain at the amounts listed in the "Disability Wage and Compensation Schedule" until January 1, 1982.  On January 1, 1982, the dollar amounts listed for the first 180 weeks in the "Disability Wage and Compensation Schedule" shall be replaced by the following percentages of the Statewide average weekly wage:
 	    $47-20% of the Statewide                        $61-26% SAWW
 	      average weekly                                      $63-27% SAWW
	      wages, hereinafter                                  $66-28% SAWW
 	      referred to as "SAWW"                         $68-29% SAWW
 	      $49-21% SAWW                                   $70-30% SAWW
 	      $51-22% SAWW                                   $73-31% SAWW
 	      $54-23% SAWW                                   $75-32% SAWW
	      $56-24% SAWW                                   $77-33% SAWW
 	      $59-25% SAWW                                   $80-34% SAWW
 	                                                                     $82-35% SAWW
 
	In the event that the 20% limitation for attorney fees as set forth in R.S.34:15-64 is reduced to a maximum of 10% before January 1, 1982, the above schedule shall be effective within 60 days of such reduction in attorney fees. All amounts in the "Disability Wage and Compensation Schedule" shall be rounded out to the nearest dollar. When a claim petition alleges more than one disability, the number of weeks in the award shall be determined and entered separately for each such disability and the number of weeks for each disability shall not be cumulative when entering an award.  
 
 	DISABILITY WAGE AND COMPENSATION SCHEDULE
	Weeks of Allowable			Maximum Weekly Compensation
 	 Compensation				Applicable
 	
 	first 90 weeks. 				$47
 	91 through 96 weeks 				$49
 	97 through 102 weeks				$49 for the first 96 weeks then $51
 							for each remaining week
 	103 through 108 weeks			$49 for the first 96 weeks then $51
 							for the next 6 weeks then $54 for
 							each remaining week
	109-114 weeks				$49 for the first 96 weeks then
 							$51 for the next 6 weeks then $54
 	 						for the next 6 weeks then $56 for
 							each remaining week
 	115-120 weeks				$49 for the first 96 weeks
 							then $51 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $54 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $56 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $59 for each remaining week
 	121-126 weeks				$49 for the first 96 weeks
 							then $51 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $54 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $56 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $59 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $61 for each remaining week
 	127-132 weeks				$49 for the first 96 weeks
 							then $51 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $54 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $56 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $59 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $61 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $63 for each remaining week
	133-138 weeks				$49 for the first 96 weeks
							then $51 for the next 6 weeks
							then $54 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $56 for the next 6 weeks
							then $59 for the next 6 weeks
							then $61 for the next 6 weeks
							then $63 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $66 for each remaining week
	139-144 weeks 				$49 for the first 96 weeks
 							then $51 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $54 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $56 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $59 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $61 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $63 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $66 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $68 for each remaining week
 	145-150 weeks				$49 for the first 96 weeks
 							then $51 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $54 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $56 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $59 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $61 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $63 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $66 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $68 for the next 6 weeks
							then $70 for each remaining week
 	151-156 weeks 		 		$49 for the first 96 weeks
 	 						then $51 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $54 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $56 for the next 6 weeks
							then $59 for the next 6 weeks
							then $61 for the next 6 weeks
							then $63 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $66 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $68 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $70 for the next 6 weeks
							then $73 for each remaining week
 	157-162 weeks				$49 for the first 96 weeks
 							then $51 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $54 for the next 6 weeks
 	 						then $56 for the next 6 weeks
 	 						then $59 for the next 6 weeks
							then $61 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $63 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $66 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $68 for the next 6 weeks
							then $70 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $73 for the next 6 weeks
							then $75 for each remaining week
 	163-168 weeks				$49 for the first 96 weeks
 							then $51 for the next 6 weeks
							then $54 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $56 for the next 6 weeks
							then $59 for the next 6 weeks
							then $61 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $63 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $66 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $68 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $70 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $73 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $75 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $77 for each remaining week
 	169-174 weeks				$49 for the first 96 weeks
							then $51 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $54 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $56 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $59 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $61 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $63 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $66 for the next 6 weeks
							then $68 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $70 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $73 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $75 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $77 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $80 for each remaining week
 	175-180 weeks				$49 for the first 96 weeks
 							then $51 for the next 6 weeks
							then $54 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $56 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $59 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $61 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $63 for the next 6 weeks
							then $66 for the next 6 weeks
							then $68 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $70 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $73 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $75 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $77 for the next 6 weeks
 							then $80 for the next 6 weeks
 	 						then $82 for each remaining week
	181-210 weeks				35% of the Statewide average
 							weekly wages, hereinafter referred
 							to as "SAWW"
 	211-240 weeks 				40% of SAWW
	241-270 weeks				45% of SAWW
 	271-300 weeks				50% of SAWW
	301-330 weeks				55% of SAWW
 	331-360 weeks				60% of SAWW
	361-390 weeks				65% of SAWW
 	391-420 weeks				70% of SAWW
 	421-600 weeks				75% of SAWW
 
	 Said compensation shall be expressly subject to the provisions of R.S.34:15-37, and shall be paid to the employee for the period named in the following schedule (paragraphs 1 to 23 inclusive):  
 
	Lost Member						Number of Weeks' Compensation
 	1.	Thumb . . . . . . . . . . .                       			80
 	2.	First finger (commonly called index finger)		60
	3.	Second finger . . . . . . .                      			50
 	4.	Third finger. . . . . . . .                  			40
 	5.	Fourth finger (commonly called little finger).	30
 	6.	Great toe . . . . . . . . .                         			40
 	7.	Toe, other than a great toe				15
 	8.	Hand, or thumb and first and second fingers
 	(on one hand) or four fingers (on one hand)			260
 except that, in the event that the loss of function of the 
 hand is determined to be equal to or greater than a 25%
 loss of use of the hand, the award shall be calculated
based on 300 weeks of compensation.
	9.	Arm . . . . . . . . . . .                            			330
	10.	Foot. . . . . . . . . . .                       	          		250
 except that, in the event that the loss of function of 
 the foot is determined to be equal to or greater than a 
 25% loss of use  of the foot, the award shall be 
calculated based on 285weeks of compensation.
 
	11.	Leg . . . . . . . . . . .                            			315
 
	12.	The loss of the first phalange of the thumb or of any finger shall be considered to be equal to the loss of 1/2 of such thumb or finger, and the compensation shall be for 1/2 of the periods of time above specified. The loss of any portion of the thumb or any finger between the terminal joint and the end thereof shall be compensated for a like proportion of the period of time prescribed for the loss of the first phalange of such member.  
 
	13.	The loss of the first phalange and any portion of the second shall be considered as the loss of the entire finger or thumb, but in no case shall the amount received for more than one finger exceed the amount provided in this schedule for the loss of a hand.  
 
	14.  The loss of the first phalange of any toe shall be considered to be equal to the loss of 1/2 of such toe, and compensation shall be for 1/2 of the period of time above specified.  
 
	15.	The loss of the first phalange and any portion of the second shall be considered as the loss of the entire toe.
 
	16.	For the loss of vision of an eye, 200 weeks.
 
	17.	For the enucleation of an eye, 25 weeks, in addition to such compensation, if any, as may be allowable under paragraph 16 of this subsection.
 
	18.	For the loss of a natural tooth, four weeks for each tooth lost.
 
	19.	For the total loss of hearing in one ear, 60 weeks.  For the total loss of hearing in both ears by one accident, 200 weeks.
 
	20.	The loss of both hands, or both arms, or both feet, or both legs, or both eyes, or any two thereof as the result of any one accident, shall constitute total and permanent disability to be compensated according to the provisions of subsection b. of this section.  
 
	21.	Amputation between the elbow and the wrist shall be considered as the equivalent of the loss of a hand and amputation at the elbow shall be considered equivalent to the loss of the arm. Amputation between the knee and ankle shall be considered as the equivalent of the loss of a foot, and amputation at the knee shall be considered equivalent to the loss of the leg. An additional amount of 30% of the amputation award shall be added to that award to compute the total award made in amputations of body members, provided, however, that this additional amount shall not be subject to legal fees.  An award of permanent total disability shall not bar an additional amount from being added to an amputation award.  The amount of the additional award shall not be subject to subrogation pursuant to R.S.34:15-40, as it shall not be considered a payment of compensation except for rating purposes.

	22.	In all lesser or other cases involving permanent loss, or where the usefulness of a member of any physical function is permanently impaired, the duration of compensation shall bear such relation to the specific periods of time stated in the above schedule as the disabilities bear to those produced by the injuries named in the schedule.  In cases in which the disability is determined as a percentage of total and permanent disability, the duration of the compensation shall be a corresponding portion of 600 weeks.  Should the employer and employee be unable to agree upon the amount of compensation to be paid in cases not covered by the schedule, either party may appeal to the Division of Workers' Compensation for a settlement of the controversy.
 
	23.	Where there is a traumatic hernia, compensation will be allowed if notice thereof is given by the claimant to the employer within 48 hours after the occurrence of the hernia but any Sunday, Saturday or holiday shall be excluded from this 48-hour period.  
 
	d.	If previous loss of function to the body, head, a member or an organ is established by competent evidence, and subsequently an injury or occupational disease arising out of and in the course of an employment occurs to that part of the body, head, member or organ, where there was a previous loss of function, then the employer or the employer's insurance carrier at the time of the subsequent injury or occupational disease shall not be liable for any such loss and credit shall be given the employer or the employer's insurance carrier for the previous loss of function and the burden of proof in such matters shall rest on the employer.
 
	e.	In case of the death of the person from any cause other than the accident or occupational disease, during the period of payments for permanent injury, the remaining payments shall be paid to such of the deceased person's dependents as are included in the provisions of R.S.34:15-13 or, if no dependents, the remaining amount due, but not exceeding $5,000, shall be paid in a lump sum to the proper person for burial and funeral expenses; but no compensation shall be due any other person than the injured employee on account of compensation being paid in excess of 450 weeks on account of disability total in character and permanent in quality as provided by subsection b. of this section.
 
	amended 1939, c.287; 1942, c.97; 1945, c.74, s.5; 1950, c.175; 1951, c.105; 1956, c.141, s.2; 1962, c.57, s.1; 1966, c.126, s.1; 1979, c.283, s.5; 1990, c.122, s.1; 2019, c.387, s.1.

34:15-12.1.  Employees receiving subsistence payments from Veterans Administration;  special benefits
    Any employee receiving subsistence payments from the Veterans Administration  of the Federal Government under the Act of Congress of June twenty-second, one  thousand nine hundred and forty-four, known as the Servicemen's Readjustment  Act of 1944, or any act amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto, as a  veteran, in connection with educational training on the job, and who obtains  compensation pursuant to chapter fifteen of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes,  and whose wages were less than an amount entitling the employee to the maximum  rate of compensation, shall be entitled to the special benefits provided by  this act upon the following conditions:

    (a) The accident to the employee must have occurred subsequent to July first, one thousand nine hundred and forty-six;

    (b) The accident must have occurred under circumstances entitling the employee to compensation under said chapter;

    (c) The employee's wages must have been less than forty-five dollars ($45.00) per week;

    (d) The employee's wages must have been received by him during the period for which the subsistence was paid;

    (e) The compensation must have included compensation for a permanent disability, either partial or total.

     L.1947, c. 364, p. 1174, s. 1.  Amended by L.1953, c. 223, p. 1678, s. 1.

34:15-12.2.  Fund from which special benefit payable
    Any such employee shall be entitled to receive a special benefit payable from the fund provided for by sections 34:15-94 and 34:15-95 of the Revised Statutes.

     L.1947, c. 364, p. 1175, s. 2.

34:15-12.3.  Amount of special benefit
    The amount of such special benefit shall be computed by determining the difference between the amount of the compensation for such permanent disability  and any temporary disability and the amount which such compensation would have  been had the employee received such subsistence payments in connection with  educational training as wages from his employer instead of from the said  veterans administration.

     L.1947, c. 364, p. 1175, s. 3.  Amended by L.1950, c. 342, p. 1133, s. 1.

34:15-12.4.  Application for special benefits;  payment
    Such special benefits shall be applied for, ordered paid, and payable in similar manner as other payments from said fund to employees are applied for, ordered paid, and payable.

     L.1947, c. 364, p. 1175, s. 4.

34:15-12.5.  Retroactive effect
    This act shall apply to accidents occurring after July first, one thousand nine hundred and forty-six.

     L.1947, c. 364, p. 1175, s. 5.

34:15-12.6.  Period for making application
    Applications for such special benefits must be made not later than within one year from the date of the last payment of compensation to the employee.

     L.1947, c. 364, p. 1175, s. 6.

34:15-12.7.  Damage to prosthetic devices, hearing aids, artificial members;   dental appliances or eyeglasses;  liability
    Whenever as the result of an accident for which compensation is payable to any employee of any employer under article 2 of chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes, to which this act is a supplement, such employee sustains damage to, or destruction of, a prosthetic device, hearing aid, artificial member, dental appliance or eyeglasses, it shall be the obligation of the employer to repair or replace the same or to make payment of the cost or value thereof, upon claim made therefor, which obligation shall be in addition to the  obligation for the payment of the compensation payable to said employee for  injuries sustained as a result of such accident.

     L.1956, c. 141, p. 579, s. 10.  Amended by L.1963, c. 81, s. 9, eff. June 4, 1963.

34:15-13  Death benefits, burial expenses; computation and distribution.
 	34:15-13. Except as hereinafter provided, in case of death, compensation shall be computed, but not distributed, on the following basis:
 
	a.	For one or more dependents, 70% of wages.
 
	b.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2003, c.253).
 
	c.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2003, c.253).
 
	d.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2003, c.253).
 
	e.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2003, c.253).
 
	f.	The term "dependents" shall apply to and include any or all of the following who are dependent upon the deceased at the time of accident or the occurrence of occupational disease, or at the time of death, namely: husband, wife, parent, stepparents, grandparents, children, stepchildren, grandchildren, child in esse, posthumous child, illegitimate children, brothers, sisters, half brothers, half sisters, niece, nephew. Legally adopted children shall, in every particular, be considered as natural children. Dependency shall be conclusively presumed as to the decedent's spouse and to any natural child of a decedent under 18 years of age or, if enrolled as a full-time student, under 23 years of age, who was actually a part of the decedent's household at the time of the decedent's death.  Every provision of this article applying to one class shall be equally applicable to the other, except for the surviving spouses of members of the State Police or members of fire or police departments or forces who die in line of duty. Should any dependent of a deceased employee die during the period covered by such weekly payments the right of such dependent to compensation under this section shall cease, but should the surviving spouse of a deceased employee, other than the surviving spouse of a deceased member of the State Police or member of a fire or police department or force who died in line of duty, remarry during such period and before the total compensation is paid, the spouse shall be entitled to receive the remainder of the compensation which would have been due the spouse had the spouse not remarried, or 100 times the amount of weekly compensation paid immediately preceding the remarriage, whichever is the lesser.  If the deceased was a member of the State Police or member of a fire or police department or force who died in the line of duty, the compensation shall be paid to the surviving spouse during the entire period of survivorship, even if the surviving spouse remarries, but the surviving spouse shall not receive a lump sum payment pursuant to this subsection.  The foregoing schedule applies only to persons wholly dependent, and in the case of persons only partially dependent, except in the case of the surviving spouse and children who were actually a part of the decedent's household at the time of death, the compensation shall be such proportion of the scheduled percentage as the amounts actually contributed to them by the deceased for their support constituted of his total wages and the provision as to a minimum of 20% of the average weekly wage as set forth in subsection a. of R.S.34:15-12 shall not apply to such compensation.  In determining the number of dependents, where the deceased employee was a minor, the number of persons dependent upon the deceased employee shall be determined in the same way as if the deceased employee were an adult, notwithstanding any rule of law as to the person entitled to a minor's wages. Nothing in this subsection pertaining to the surviving spouse of a member of the State Police or member of a fire or police department or force who died in the line of duty shall be construed to entitle the surviving spouse to resumed payments of compensation if that surviving spouse received a lump sum payment pursuant to this subsection or remarried prior to the effective date of P.L.2013, c.62.
 
	g.	Compensation shall be computed upon the foregoing basis. Distribution shall be made among dependents, if more than one, according to the order of the Division of Workers' Compensation, which shall, when applied to for that purpose, determine, upon the facts being presented to it, the proportion to be paid to or on behalf of each dependent according to the relative-dependency. Payment on behalf of infants shall be made to the surviving parent, if any, or to the statutory or testamentary guardian.
 
	h.	If death results from the accident or occupational disease, whether there be dependents or not, expenses of the last sickness of the deceased employee shall be paid in accordance with the provisions for medical and hospital service as set forth in R.S.34:15-15.  In addition, the cost of burial and of a funeral, not to exceed $5,000, shall be paid to the dependent or other person having paid the costs of burial and the funeral.  In the event that the dependent or other person has paid less than  $5,000 for the costs of burial and the funeral, the dependent or other person shall be reimbursed in the amount paid and, if the costs of burial and the funeral exceed the amount so paid, the difference between the said amount and  $5,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary to pay the cost of burial and the funeral, shall be paid to the undertaker or embalmer or the dependent or other person having paid the costs of burial and the funeral.  In the event that no part of the costs of burial and the funeral have been paid, the amount of such cost of burial and the funeral, not to exceed  $5,000 , shall be paid to the undertaker or embalmer or the dependent or other person who is to pay the costs of burial and the funeral.
 
	i.	In computing compensation to those named in this section, except husband, wife, parents and stepparents, and except as otherwise provided in this section, only those under 18 or over 40 years of age shall be included and then only for that period in which they are under 18 or over 40; provided, however, that payments to such physically or mentally deficient persons as are for such reason dependent shall be made during the full compensation period of 450 weeks.
 
	j.	The maximum compensation in case of death shall be subject to the maximum compensation as stated in subsection a. of R.S.34:15-12 and a minimum of 20% of average weekly wages per week as set forth in subsection a. of R.S.34:15-12, except in the case of partial dependency as provided in this section.  This compensation shall be paid, in the case of a surviving spouse, other than a surviving spouse of a member of the State Police or member of a fire or police department or force who died in the line of duty, during the entire period of survivorship or until such surviving spouse shall remarry and, in the case of other dependents, during 450 weeks and if at the expiration of 450 weeks there shall be one or more dependents under 18 years of age, compensation shall be continued for such dependents until they reach 18 years of age, or 23 years of age while enrolled as a full-time student, at the schedule provided under subsection a. of this section.  If the deceased was a member of the State Police or member of a fire or police department or force who died in the line of duty, the compensation shall be paid to the surviving spouse during the entire period of survivorship, even if the surviving spouse remarries, but the surviving spouse shall not receive a lump sum payment pursuant to subsection f. of this section.
 
	amended 1938, c.36; 1945, c.74, s.6; 1953, c.159; 1956, c.141, s.3; 1966, c.126, s.2; 1979, c.283, s.6; 1990, c.122, s.2; 1995, c.185; 2003, c.253, s.1; 2013, c.62; 2020, c.116, s.2.

34:15-14  Waiting period.

	34:15-14.  Except as provided pursuant to R.S.34:15-75, no compensation other than medical aid shall accrue and be payable until the employee has been disabled seven days, whether the days of disability immediately follow the accident, or whether they be consecutive or not.  These days shall be termed the waiting period.  The day that the employee is unable to continue at work by reason of his accident, whether it be the day of the accident or later, shall count as one whole day of the waiting period.  Should the total period of disability extend beyond seven days, additional compensation shall at once become payable covering the above prescribed waiting period.

	amended 1945, c.74, s.7; 1966, c.126, s.3; 2001, c.328, s.1.

34:15-15  Medical and hospital service.
 	34:15-15.  The employer shall furnish to the injured worker such medical, surgical and other treatment, and hospital service as shall be necessary to cure and relieve the worker of the effects of the injury and to restore the functions of the injured member or organ where such restoration is possible; provided, however, that the employer shall not be liable to furnish or pay for physicians' or surgeons' services in excess of $50.00 and in addition to furnish hospital service in excess of $50.00, unless the injured worker or the worker's physician who provides treatment, or any other person on the worker's behalf, shall file a petition with the Division of Workers' Compensation stating the need for physicians' or surgeons' services in excess of $50.00, as aforesaid, and such hospital service or appliances in excess of $50.00, as aforesaid, and the Division of Workers' Compensation after investigating the need of the same and giving the employer an opportunity to be heard, shall determine that such physicians' and surgeons' treatment and hospital services are or were necessary, and that the fees for the same are reasonable and shall make an order requiring the employer to pay for or furnish the same.  The mere furnishing of medical treatment or the payment thereof by the employer shall not be construed to be an admission of liability.
 
	If the employer shall refuse or neglect to comply with the foregoing provisions of this section, the employee may secure such treatment and services as may be necessary and as may come within the terms of this section, and the employer shall be liable to pay therefor; provided, however, that the employer shall not be liable for any amount expended by the employee or by any third person on the employee's behalf for any such physicians' treatment and hospital services, unless such employee or any person on the employee's behalf shall have requested the employer to furnish the same and the employer shall have refused or neglected so to do, or unless the nature of the injury required such services, and the employer or the superintendent or foreman of the employer, having knowledge of such injury shall have neglected to provide the same, or unless the injury occurred under such conditions as make impossible the notification of the employer, or unless the circumstances are so peculiar as shall justify, in the opinion of the Division of Workers' Compensation, the expenditures assumed by the employee for such physicians' treatment and hospital services, apparatus and appliances.
 
	All fees and other charges for such physicians' and surgeons' treatment and hospital treatment shall be reasonable and based upon the usual fees and charges which prevail in the same community for similar physicians', surgeons' and hospital services.
 
	When an injured employee may be partially or wholly relieved of the effects of a permanent injury, by use of an artificial limb or other appliance, which phrase shall also include artificial teeth or glass eye, the Division of Workers' Compensation, acting under competent medical advice, is empowered to determine the character and nature of such limb or appliance, and to require the employer or the employer's insurance carrier to furnish the same.
 
	Fees for medical, surgical, other treatment, or hospital services that have been authorized by the employer or its carrier or its third party administrator or determined by the Division of Workers' Compensation to be the responsibility of the employer, its carrier or third party administrator, or have been paid by the employer, its carrier or third party administrator pursuant to the workers' compensation law, R.S.34:15-1 et seq., shall not be charged against or collectible from the injured worker.  Exclusive jurisdiction for any disputed medical charge arising from any claim for compensation for a work-related injury or illness shall be vested in the division.  The treatment of an injured worker or the payment of workers' compensation to an injured worker or dependent of an injured or deceased worker shall not be delayed because of a claim by a medical provider.
 
	No provider to the injured worker of medical, surgical, other treatment, or hospital service pursuant to the workers' compensation law, R.S.34:15-1 et seq., shall report any portion of their charges which are alleged to be unpaid, to any collection or credit reporting agency, bureau, or data collection facility until: (1) a judge of compensation within the Division of Workers' Compensation has fully adjudicated the rights and liabilities of all parties, including the rights of the claimant for payments pursuant to this section, section 1 of P.L.1953, c.207 (C.34:15-15.1), and section 1 of P.L.1966, c.115 (C.34:15-15.2), regarding the payment of these charges; or (2) a notice of a stipulation settlement or an order approving settlement regarding the payment of these charges has been filed with the court.  Upon a finding that non-compliance with this paragraph has occurred, a judge of compensation, in summary fashion, and in addition to such other provisions under the workers' compensation law, R.S.34:15-1 et seq., may:
 
	a.	order the non-compliant  provider to retract the medical, surgical, other treatment, or hospital service charges reported to the collection or credit reporting agency, bureau, or data collection facility;
 
	b.	impose a fine on the non-compliant  provider, not to exceed $5,000, payable to the Second Injury Fund;
 
	c.	order the non-compliant provider to paya reasonable counsel fee in connection with a claimant for payments who has suffered damage to credit rating due to the reporting of unpaid medical, surgical, other treatment, or hospital service charges to a collection or credit reporting agency, bureau, or data collection facility; 
 
	d.	order the non-compliant  provider to take such steps as are necessary, within 30 days of the order, to rehabilitate the credit record of a claimant, with a showing made to the court of the efforts made in that regard; and
 
	e.	order the non-compliant provider to pay an award of damages to the claimant not to exceed 25 percent of the medical, surgical, other treatment, or hospital service charges reported by the non-compliant  provider to the collection or credit reporting agency, bureau, or data collection facility, the minimum award being $350.00.
 
	amended 1979, c.283, s.7; 2012, c.67; 2019, c.416, s.1.

34:15-15.1.  Reimbursement of insurance company or others paying medical, surgical or hospital expenses
    Whenever the expenses of medical, surgical or hospital services, to which the petitioner would be entitled to reimbursement if such petitioner had paid the same as provided in section 34:15-15 of the Revised Statutes, shall have been paid by any insurance company or other organization by virtue of any insurance policy, contract or agreement which may have been procured by or on behalf of such petitioner, or shall have been paid by any person, organization or corporation on behalf of such petitioner, the deputy directors or referees of the Division of Workmen's Compensation are authorized to incorporate in any award, order or approval of settlement, an order requiring the employer or his insurance carrier to reimburse such insurance company, corporation, person or organization in the amount of such medical, surgical or hospital services so paid on behalf of such petitioner.

     L.1953, c. 207, p. 1563, s. 1.

34:15-15.2.  Hospital service;  care required;  expenses
    Whenever hospital service is required to cure or to relieve an injured workman of the effects of the injury or to restore the functions of the injured  member or organ or to provide treatment for occupational disease in accordance  with the provisions of the chapter hereby supplemented, the injured workman  shall be entitled to hospital service of a quality and character no less than  that provided for patients receiving services known as "semi-private"  room  care, and shall be entitled to such nursing service as may be deemed proper by  the treating physician, the expense thereof to be paid or reimbursed, in  accordance with the provisions of section 34:15-15 of the Revised Statutes and  chapter 207 of the laws of 1953, by the employer. No hospital shall supply the  injured workman with services of lesser quality or character than   "semi-private"  room care if a  "semi-private"  room or a "private room"  is  available.

     L.1966, c. 115, s. 1, eff. June 17, 1966.

34:15-15.3  Motion by worker for emergent medical treatment.
 
 	1.	When through medical documentation a physician states that a worker is in need of emergent medical care that is not, following a request by the worker to the employer or the employer's carrier, being provided or authorized by the employer, the worker may file a motion for emergent medical treatment with or after the filing of a claim petition.  The physician shall further state that delay of treatment will result in irreparable harm or damage and state the specific nature of the irreparable harm or damage.  The motion, to which shall be appended all medical records in possession of the moving party, shall also be served on the employer and the employer's carrier, or their attorneys, at the time of filing.  An answer to the motion shall be filed not later than five calendar days after the date of service.  An initial conference on the motion shall take place within five calendar days of the filing of the answer.  Thereafter the judge of compensation shall schedule the matter for a hearing in accordance with the rules adopted pursuant to section 3 of this act.  The respondent shall be provided 15 calendar days from the date of service of the motion to secure a medical examination if it requires one.
 
	L.2008, c.96, s.1.

34:15-15.4  Designation of contact person by carrier, self-insured employer.
 
	2.	Every carrier and self-insured employer shall designate a contact person who is responsible for responding to issues concerning medical and temporary disability benefits where no claim petition has been filed or where a claim petition has not been answered.  The full name, telephone number, address, e-mail address, and fax number of the contact person shall be submitted to the division.  Any changes in information about the contact person shall be immediately submitted to the division as they occur.  After an answer is filed with the division, the attorney of record for the respondent shall act as the contact person in the case.  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall result in a fine of $2,500 for each day of noncompliance, payable to the Second Injury Fund.
 
	L.2008, c.96, s.2.

34:15-16.  Compensation to run consecutively;  payment for compensation, medical treatment, etc., after termination of liability
    Compensation for all classes of injuries shall run consecutively, and not concurrently, except as provided in this section and in section 34:15-15 of this Title, as follows:  First, medical and hospital services and medicines as provided in said section 34:15-15.  After the waiting period, compensation during temporary disability.  If total period of disability extends beyond 4 7 days, compensation to cover waiting period. Following both, either or none of the above, compensation consecutively for each permanent injury, except that permanent disability, total or partial, shall not be determined or awarded until after 26 weeks from the date of the employee's final active medical treatment, or until after 26 weeks from the date of the employee's return to work, whichever is earlier, or, if no time is lost or no treatment is rendered,  then permanent disability, total or partial, shall not be determined or awarded  until after 26 weeks from the date of the accident, except in cases of  amputation or enucleation or death from other cause within that time and except  when earlier determination of permanent disability is waived by the employer or  his insurance carrier.  Nothing herein contained shall prevent an employer or his insurance carrier from paying permanent disability compensation voluntarily  prior to the expiration of the 26-week period.  Following any or all or none of  the above, if death results from the accident, expenses of last sickness and  burial.  Following which compensation to dependents, if any.

    Where an employer or his insurance carrier desires to pay for or furnish compensation, medical, surgical, or hospital treatment, drugs, orthopedic or prosthetic appliances, after the date when payments under sections 34:15-12 and  34:15-13 of this Title have terminated, the employer or his insurance carrier  may, in writing, reserve the defense of the jurisdictional limitations provided  by sections 34:15-27, 34:15-34, 34:15-41 and 34:15-51 of this Title;  provided,  that the reservation is approved by a deputy director after advising the  petitioner personally of his rights and of the effect of such reservation.

     Amended by L.1945, c. 74, p. 390, s. 8;  L.1956, c. 141, p. 572, s. 4; L.1959, c. 138, p. 579, s. 1;  L.1966, c. 126, s. 4.

34:15-17.  Notification of employer
    Unless the employer shall have actual knowledge of the occurrence of the injury, or unless the employee, or some one on his behalf, or some of the dependents, or some one on their behalf, shall give notice thereof to the employer within fourteen days of the occurrence of the injury, then no compensation shall be due until such notice is given or knowledge obtained. If the notice is given, or the knowledge obtained within thirty days from the occurrence of the injury, no want, failure, or inaccuracy of a notice shall be a bar to obtaining compensation, unless the employer shall show that he was prejudiced by such want, defect or inaccuracy, and then only to the extent of such prejudice.  If the notice is given, or the knowledge obtained within ninety days, and if the employee, or other beneficiary, shall show that his failure to give prior notice was due to his mistake, inadvertence, ignorance of  fact or law, or inability, or to the fraud, misrepresentation or deceit of another person, or to any other reasonable cause or excuse, then compensation may be allowed, unless, and then to the extent only that the employer shall show that he was prejudiced by failure to receive such notice.  Unless knowledge be obtained, or notice given, within ninety days after the occurrence  of the injury, no compensation shall be allowed.

34:15-18.  Service of notice; form; sufficiency 
    The notice referred to may be served personally upon the employer, or upon any agent of the employer upon whom a summons may be served in a civil action, or by sending it through the mail to the employer at the last known residence or business place thereof within the state, and shall be substantially in the following form: 

    "To (name of employer):

   

   You are hereby notified that a personal injury was received by (name of employee injured), who was in your employ at (place) while engaged as (nature of employment), on or about the ....... day of ................... , nineteen hundred and ........ , and that compensation will be claimed therefor. 

                Signed,

   

                .................................................. ."

   

   No variation from this form shall be material if the notice is sufficient to  advise the employer that a certain employee, by name, received an injury in the  course of his employment on or about a specified time, at or near a certain  place.  Notice served at the office of, or on the person who was the employee's  immediate superior, shall be a compliance with this article. 

34:15-19.  Examination of employee as to physical condition;  X-rays
    After an injury, the employee, if so requested by his employer, must submit  himself for physical examination and X-ray at some reasonable time and place  within this state, and as often as may be reasonably requested, to a physician  or physicians authorized to practice under the laws of this state. If the  employee requests, he shall be entitled to have a physician or physicians of  his own selection present to participate in such examination. The refusal of  the employee to submit to such examination shall deprive him of the right to  compensation during the continuance of such refusal.  When a right to  compensation is thus suspended no compensation shall be payable in respect to  the period of suspension.  On request, the workmen's compensation bureau may  examine the X-ray for the purpose of determining the amount of disability due,  if any.

34:15-20.  Dispute;  submission to division;  order approving settlement
    In case of a dispute over or failure to agree upon a claim for compensation  between employer and employee, or the dependents of the employee, either party  may submit the claim, both as to the questions of fact, the nature and effect  of the injuries, and the amount of compensation therefor according to the  schedule herein provided, to the Division of Workers' Compensation, as  prescribed in article 4 of this chapter (section 34:15-49 et seq.).  After a  petition for compensation or dependency claims has been filed, seeking  compensation by reason of accident, injury or occupational disease of any  employee, and when the petitioner is represented by an attorney of the State of  New Jersey, and when it shall appear that the issue or issues involve the  question of jurisdiction, liability, causal relationship or dependency of the  petitioner under this chapter, and the petitioner and the respondent are  desirous of entering into a lump-sum settlement of the controversy, a judge of  compensation may with the consent of the parties, after considering the  testimony of the petitioner and other witnesses, together with any stipulation  of the parties, and after such judge of compensation has determined that such settlement is fair and just under all the circumstances, enter  "an order approving settlement."   Such settlement, when so approved, notwithstanding any  other provisions of this chapter, shall have the force and effect of a dismissal of the claim petition and shall be final and conclusive upon the employee and the employee's dependents, and shall be a complete surrender of any right to compensation or other benefits arising out of such claim under the  statute.  Any payments made under this section shall be recognized as payments  of workers' compensation benefits for insurance rating purposes only.

     Amended by L.1979, c. 283, s. 8, eff. Jan. 10, 1980.

34:15-21.    Payments in case of death; to whom made; bond  
     34:15-21.  Payments in case of death; to whom made; bond.  In case of death, compensation payments may be made directly to dependents of full age and on behalf of infants to the surviving parent, if any, or to the statutory or testamentary guardian of any such infant.  The Division of Workers' Compensation, on application or when a petition has been filed, may order such payments to be made to the administrator or executor of the decedent, or to such person as would be appointed administrator of the estate of the decedent, and may, if compensation is to be paid weekly, require, in the discretion of the division, the filing with the division of a bond, with satisfactory surety, to the dependents, in an amount determined by the division, for the proper application of the compensation payments.  If a commutation of the award is ordered and it is impracticable to make distribution of the commuted sum among the persons entitled thereto, then the division, on making the commutation, shall require a bond, with such sureties and in such amount as will, in the judgment of the division, fully secure the persons severally entitled to portions of the commuted sum.  

    Amended 1990,c.122,s.3.  

34:15-22.  Dispute;  procedure;  agreement no bar to determination on merits
    Procedure in case of dispute shall be in accordance with article four of this chapter (section 34:15-49, et seq.).

    No agreement between an employee and his employer or insurance carrier for compensation shall operate as a bar to the formal determination of any controversy, unless such agreement has been approved by the commissioner, the director, a deputy director or a referee designated as a  "referee, formal hearings,"  in open court;  provided, that after a petition has been filed and when the petitioner is represented by an attorney licensed in the State of New Jersey, and when it shall appear to the commissioner, the director, a deputy director or a referee designated as a  "referee, formal hearings,"  that the only issue involved is the extent of disability, the commissioner, the director, a deputy director or a referee designated as a "referee, formal hearings,"  may, with the consent of the parties, after considering the sworn testimony of the petitioner and such other witnesses present, together with any  stipulations of the parties, enter a determination and rule for judgment which  shall include a finding of fact as to the amount of the then present disability.  Such determination and rule for judgment may be reopened only in accordance with the provisions of section 34:15-27 of this Title;  provided, that after a petition has been filed and when the petitioner is represented by an attorney of the State of New Jersey, and where the only issue involved is agreed by the parties to be the extent of disability, the parties may enter into a settlement concerning the extent of disability and present such settlement to the commissioner, the director, a deputy director or a referee who, after considering the sworn testimony of the petitioner and such other witnesses present together with any stipulations of the parties and the consent  of the petitioner, may enter an order approving settlement which shall include a finding that the terms of the settlement are fair and just and which order shall have the same effect as a determination and rule for judgment.  Such determination and rule for judgment or order approving settlement may be reopened only in accordance with the provisions of section 34:15-27 of this Title.

     Amended by L.1945, c. 74, p. 390, s. 9;  L.1952, c. 269, p. 918, s. 1.

34:15-23.  Refusal of medical and surgical treatment by employee
    Whenever it shall appear that an employer is being prejudiced by virtue of the refusal of an injured employee to accept proffered medical and surgical treatment deemed necessary by the physician selected by the employer, or his failure or neglect to comply with the instructions of the physician in charge of the case, the employer is hereby authorized to file a petition with the workmen's compensation bureau, which is hereby empowered to order proper medical and surgical treatment at the expense of the employer.  In the event of  refusal or neglect by the employee to comply with this order the bureau shall  make such modification in the award contained in the schedule as the evidence  produced shall justify.

34:15-24.  Payment of whole award in trust
    At any time after the entry of the award, a sum equal to all future installments of compensation may where death or the nature of the injury renders the amount of future payments certain, by leave of court, be paid by the employer to any savings bank, trust company or life insurance company in good standing and authorized, to do business in this state and having an office  in the county in which the award was entered, and such sum, together with all  interest thereon, shall thereafter be held in trust for the employee or the  dependents of the employee, who shall have no further recourse against the  employer.  The payment of such sum by the employer, evidenced by the receipt of  the trustee noted upon the docket of the clerk of the court, shall operate as a  satisfaction of said award as to the employer.  Payments from said fund shall  be made by the trustee in the same amounts and at the same times as are herein  required of the employer until the fund and interest shall be exhausted.  In  the appointment of the trustee, preference shall be given, in the discretion of  the court, to the choice of the employee or the dependents of the deceased  employee.  The expense of administration of such trust shall be fixed by the  court and paid by the employer.

34:15-25.  Commutation of award  
     34:15-25. Compensation may be commuted by the bureau at its present value, when discounted at five per centum (5%) simple interest, upon application of either party, with due notice to the other, if it appears that such commutation will be for the best interest of the employees or the dependents of the deceased employee, or that it will avoid undue expense or undue hardship to either party, or that the employee or dependent has removed or is about to remove from the United States, or that the employer has sold or otherwise disposed of the greater part of his business or assets.  

    Unless so approved, no compensation payments shall be commuted.

  

    In determining whether commutation will be for the best interest of the employee or the dependents of the deceased employee, or that it will avoid undue expense or undue hardship to either party, the bureau and the Superior Court will regard the intention of this chapter that compensation payments are in lieu of wages, and are to be received by the injured employee or his dependents in the same manner in which wages are ordinarily paid. Commutation is to be allowed only when it clearly appears that an unusual circumstance warrants a departure from the normal manner of payment and not to enable the injured employee or dependents of a deceased employee to satisfy a debt, or to make payment to physicians, lawyers or others.  

    Amended 1953,c.33,s.51; 1991,c.91,s.358.  

34:15-26.  Counsel fees  
     34:15-26. When any proceedings have been taken under the provisions of article two of this chapter, the bureau or the Superior Court shall, as a part of the determination and order, either for payment or for commutation of payment, settle and determine the amount of compensation to be paid by the injured employee or his dependents, on behalf of whom such proceedings are instituted, to his legal advisers, and it shall be unlawful for any lawyer, or other person acting in that behalf, to ask for, contract for or receive any larger sum than the amount so fixed. In the order determining weekly payments where no commutation is made, the bureau or the court shall also determine the amount to be paid per week from the compensation payment on account of the legal fee thus awarded, and it shall be unlawful for the legal adviser, or other person acting in that behalf, to ask for, contract for or receive a larger sum per week than the allowance thus determined.  

    Amended 1945,c.74,s.10; 1953,c.33,s.52; 1991,c.91,s.359.  

34:15-27  Modification of agreement.
 
 	34:15-27. An agreement for compensation may be modified at any time by a subsequent agreement.  Upon the application of any party, a formal award, determination, judgment, or order approving settlement may be reviewed within two years from the date when the injured person last received a payment on the ground that the incapacity of the injured employee has subsequently increased.  If a party entitled to a review under this section shall become mentally incapacitated within the two-year period, the mental incapacity shall constitute grounds for tolling the unexpired balance of the two-year period, which shall only begin to run again after the party returns to mental capacity.  An award, determination, judgment, or order approving settlement may be reviewed at any time on the ground that the disability has diminished.  In such case, the provisions of R.S.34:15-19 with reference to medical examination shall apply.
 
	amended 1952, c.269, s.2; 1975, c.319; 2013, c.103, s.104.

34:15-28  Interest on payments withheld.
 
 	34:15-28.  Interest on payments withheld.  Whenever lawful compensation shall have been withheld from an injured employee or dependents for a term of 60 or more days following entry of a judgment or order, simple interest on each weekly payment for the period of delay of each payment may, at the discretion of the division, be added to the amount due at the time of settlement.  The annual rate of interest on payments withheld shall equal the average rate of return, to the nearest whole or one-half percent, for the corresponding preceding fiscal year terminating on June 30, of the State of New Jersey Cash Management Fund (State accounts) as reported by the Division of Investment in the Department of the Treasury. 
 
	Amended 1987, c.126, s.2; 2007, c.3.

34:15-28.1.  Delay or refusal in payment of temporary disability compensation;  penalty
    If a self-insured or uninsured employer or employer's insurance carrier, having actual knowledge of the occurrence of the injury, or having received notice thereof such that temporary disability compensation is due pursuant to R.S. 34:15-17, unreasonably or negligently delays or refuses to pay temporary disability compensation, or unreasonably or negligently delays denial of a claim, it shall be liable to the petitioner for an additional amount of 25% of the amounts then due plus any reasonable legal fees incurred by the petitioner as a result of and in relation to such delays or refusals.  A delay of 30 days or more shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption of unreasonable and negligent conduct on the part of a self-insured or uninsured employer or an employer's insurance carrier.

     L.1979, c. 468, s. 1.

34:15-28.2  Powers of judges of compensation.
 
	1.	If any employer, insurer, claimant, or counsel to the employer, insurer, or claimant, or other party to a claim for compensation, fails to comply with any order of a judge of compensation or with the requirements of any statute or regulation regarding workers' compensation, a judge of compensation may, in addition to any other remedies provided by law:
 
	a.	Impose costs, simple interest on any moneys due, an additional assessment not to exceed 25% of moneys due for unreasonable payment delay, and reasonable legal fees, to enforce the order, statute or regulation;
 
	b.	Impose additional fines and other penalties on parties or counsel in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for unreasonable delay, with the proceeds of the penalties paid into the Second Injury Fund;
 
	c.	Close proofs, dismiss a claim or suppress a defense as to any party;
 
	d.	Exclude evidence or witnesses;
 
	e.	Hold a separate hearing on any issue of contempt and, upon a finding of contempt by the judge of compensation, the successful party or the judge of compensation may file a motion with the Superior Court for enforcement of those contempt proceedings; and 
 
	f.	Take other actions deemed appropriate by the judge of compensation with respect to the claim.
 
	L.2008, c.93, s.1.

34:15-28.3  Fines, penalties, assessments, costs not included in expense base of insurer.
  
	2.	Any fine, penalty, assessment, or cost, imposed on an insurer pursuant to section 1 of this act, shall not be included in the expense base of that insurer for the purpose of determining rates.
 
	L.2008, c.93, s.2.

34:15-28.4  Rules, regulations.
 
	3.	The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), promulgate rules and regulations necessary to implement the provisions of this act.
 
	L.2008, c.93, s.3.

34:15-29.  Compensation preferential lien;  claim not assignable;  set offs
    The right of compensation granted by this chapter shall have the same preference against the assets of the employer as is now or may hereafter be allowed by law for a claim for unpaid wages for labor.  Claims or payments due under this chapter shall not be assignable, and shall be exempt from all claims  of creditors and from levy, execution or attachment.  The right of compensation  granted by this chapter may be set off against disability pension benefits or  payments but shall not be set off against employees' retirement pension  benefits or payments.

     Amended by L.1977, c. 156, s. 1, eff. July 14, 1977.

34:15-30.  Occupational disease;  compensation for death or injury; exception
    When employer and employee have accepted the provisions of this article as aforesaid, compensation for personal injuries to or for death of such employee by any compensable occupational disease arising out of and in the course of his  employment, as hereinafter defined, shall be made by the employer to the extent  hereinafter set forth and without regard to the negligence of the employer,  except that no compensation shall be payable when the injury or death by  occupational disease is caused by willful self-exposure to a known hazard or by  the employee's willful failure to make use of a reasonable and proper guard or  personal protective device furnished by the employer which has been clearly  made a requirement of the employee's employment by the employer and which an  employer can properly document that despite repeated warnings, the employee has  willfully failed to properly and effectively utilize, provided, however, this  latter provision shall not apply where there is such imminent danger or need  for immediate action which does not allow for appropriate use of personal protective device or devices.

     Amended by L.1949, c. 29, p. 102, s. 1;  L.1979, c. 283, s. 9, eff. Jan. 10, 1980.

34:15-31.   "Compensable occupational disease"  defined
    a.  For the purpose of this article, the phrase  "compensable occupational disease"  shall include all diseases arising out of and in the course of employment, which are due in a material degree to causes and conditions which are or were characteristic of or peculiar to a particular trade, occupation, process or place of employment.

    b.  Deterioration of a tissue, organ or part of the body in which the function of such tissue, organ or part of the body is diminished due to the natural aging process thereof is not compensable.

     Amended by L.1938, c. 419, p. 1208, s. 1;  L.1945, c. 53, p. 318, s. 1; L.1949, c. 29, p. 103, s. 2;  L.1979, c. 283, s. 10, eff. Jan. 10, 1980.

34:15-31.2  Short title.
  	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Thomas P. Canzanella Twenty First Century First Responders Protection Act."
 
	L.2019, c.156, s.1.

34:15-31.3  Findings, declarations relative to workers' compensation for certain public safety workers.
 	2.	The Legislature hereby finds and declares:

	a.	Since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, and the subsequent discovery of terrorist use of anthrax against American citizens that year, millions of dollars of State and federal funds have been spent, and many thousands of man-hours dedicated, to train and equip public safety workers in New Jersey regarding the management of terrorist attacks and other man-made or natural disasters;
 
	b.	Public safety workers are required by necessity to take great personal risks of serious injury, illness and death in their duties to protect the people of New Jersey from the dangers of catastrophic emergencies, including, but in no way limited to, terrorist attacks and epidemics;
 
	c.	The risks of exposure to carcinogens, communicable diseases, radiation and related hazards to health, already especially high for fire, police, emergency, medical and other public safety workers, is further increased by the duties of such workers in response to catastrophic emergencies, epidemics, and terrorist attacks which may involve materials related to biological or chemical warfare, or industrial chemicals or other hazardous materials released in connection with terrorist attacks against military, governmental, industrial, infrastructural, and other vulnerable facilities; and
 
	d.	Many of the severe, painful and even fatal diseases and health conditions which afflict these workers because of those exposures and duties, such as cancer, may take long periods of time to manifest themselves;
 
	e.	It is therefore an appropriate public policy to modernize the workers' compensation system in this State to ensure the meeting of the critical needs of public safety workers who are New Jersey's first line of defense in the event of catastrophic emergencies, epidemics and terrorist attacks, and assure that those workers are not denied a level of support which is commensurate to the sacrifices they and their families make for the safety and wellbeing of the citizens of this State and the nation.
 
	L.2019, c.156, s.2.

34:15-31.4  Definitions relative to workers' compensation for certain public safety workers.
 	3.	For the purposes of this act:

	"Hazardous chemicals or materials used in, or related to, chemical warfare" means chemicals and materials which may be used in chemical warfare, including, but not limited to, nerve agents, chemical asphyxiates, choking agents, blister agents, incapacitating agents, explosives, and includes other toxic, carcinogenic or otherwise hazardous industrial chemicals and materials to which public safety workers and members of the public may be exposed in connection with possible terrorist attacks against military, governmental, industrial, infrastructural, and other vulnerable facilities.
 
	"Known carcinogen" means a substance which is known, or generally accepted by the scientific community to cause cancer in humans, as identified by the State Department of Health or by the International Agency for Research on Cancer.
 
	"Pathogens or biological toxins used in, or related to, biological warfare or epidemics" means serious communicable diseases, pathogens not necessarily transmitted by sick or infected individuals, such as anthrax, and biological toxins, such as ricin, whether or not in weaponized form.
 
	"Public safety worker" includes a member, employee, or officer of a paid, partially-paid, or volunteer fire or police department, force, company or district, including the State Police, a Community Emergency Response Team approved by the New Jersey Office of Emergency Management, or a correctional facility, or a basic or advanced medical technician of a first aid or rescue squad, or any other nurse, basic or advanced medical technician responding to a catastrophic incident and directly involved and in contact with the public during such an incident, either as a volunteer, member of a Community Emergency Response Team or employed or directed by a health care facility.
 
	"Serious communicable disease" means any disease which is characterized by the interruption, cessation or disorder of body functions, systems or organs which may result, if not treated, in disability, chronic illness or death, and is transmittable by association with, or proximity to, sick, infected or colonized individuals, including airborne transmission, or is transmittable by contact with their bodily fluids, secretions or excretions.  "Serious communicable disease" includes, but is not limited to, meningitis, tuberculosis, viral hepatitis, human immunodeficiency virus infections, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, cholera, hemorrhagic fever, plague, smallpox, or other disease identified as a serious communicable disease by the Department of Health, and also includes diseases caused by antibiotic resistant organisms.
 
	L.2019, c.156, s.3.

34:15-31.5  Requirements for public safety worker to receive compensation.
  	4.	If a public safety worker can demonstrate that in the course of his or her employment, the worker is: 
 
	a.	exposed to: 
 
	(1)	the excretions, secretions, blood or other bodily fluids of one or more other individuals or is otherwise subjected to a potential exposure, by the other individual or individuals, including airborne exposure, to a serious communicable disease and any one of the other individuals is diagnosed with a serious communicable disease, or is otherwise determined to be infected with or at significant risk of contracting the serious communicable disease; or
 
	(2)	any pathogen or biological toxin used in, or related to, biological warfare or epidemics, including airborne exposure, then all care or treatment of the public safety worker, including testing, diagnosis, surveillance or other services needed to ascertain whether the public safety worker contracted a serious communicable disease and any related monitoring of the worker's condition, and all time during which the public safety worker is unable to work while receiving the care or treatment, shall be compensable under the provisions of R.S.34:15-1 et seq., even if, after the care or treatment, it is ascertained that the public safety worker did not contract a serious communicable disease. 
 
	b.	If it is ascertained that the public safety worker has contracted a serious communicable disease or related illness under the circumstances set forth in subsection a. of this section, there shall be a presumption that any injury, disability, chronic or corollary illness or death of the public safety worker caused by, attributable to, or attendant to the disease is compensable under the provisions of R.S.34:15-1 et seq. This prima facie presumption may be rebutted by a preponderance of the evidence showing that the exposure is not linked to the occurrence of the disease.  The employer may require the worker to undergo, at the expense of the employer, reasonable testing, evaluation and monitoring of health conditions of the worker which is relevant to determining whether the exposure is linked to the occurrence of the disease, but the presumption of compensability shall not be adversely affected by any failure of the employer to require such testing, evaluation or monitoring.
 
	L.2019, c.156, s.4.

34:15-31.6  Injury, illness, death resulting from administration of vaccine eligible for compensation.
 	5.	Any injury, illness or death of any public safety worker, resulting from the administration to the worker of a vaccine including, but not limited to, smallpox vaccine, to prepare for, or respond to, any actual, threatened, or potential bioterrorism or epidemic, as part of an inoculation program in connection with the worker's employment or in connection with any governmental program or recommendation for the inoculation of workers in the worker's occupation, geographical area, or other category that includes the worker, or resulting from the transmission of disease from another employee or member of the public inoculated under the program, is presumed to arise out of and in the course of the employment and all care or treatment of the worker, including testing, diagnosis, surveillance and monitoring of the worker's condition, and all time during which the worker is unable to work while receiving the care or treatment, is compensable under the provisions of R.S.34:15-1 et seq.  This section shall not be regarded as authorizing any requirement that employees participate in an inoculation program or as diminishing any requirement of law that an inoculation program be voluntary. This prima facie presumption may be rebutted by a preponderance of the evidence showing that the administration of the vaccine is not linked to the injury, illness or death.  The employer may require the worker to undergo, at the expense of the employer, reasonable testing, evaluation and monitoring of health conditions of the worker which is relevant to determining whether the administration of the vaccine is linked to the occurrence, but the presumption of compensability shall not be adversely affected by any failure of the employer to require such testing, evaluation or monitoring.
 
	L.2019, c.156, s.5.

34:15-31.7  Injury, illness, death caused by certain substances eligible for compensation.
 	6.	Any injury, illness or death of a public safety worker which may be caused by exposure to a known carcinogen, cancer-causing radiation or a radioactive substance, including cancer and damage to reproductive organs, shall be presumed to be compensable under the provisions of R.S.34:15-1 et seq., if the worker demonstrates that he was exposed, due to fire, explosion, spill or other means, to a known carcinogen, cancer-causing radiation or radioactive substances in the course of the worker's employment as a public safety worker and demonstrates that the injury, illness or death has manifested during his or her employment as a public safety worker.  This prima facie presumption may be rebutted by a preponderance of the evidence that the exposure is not linked to the injury, illness or death.  The employer of the public safety worker may require the worker to undergo, at the expense of the employer, reasonable testing, evaluation and monitoring of health conditions of the worker which is relevant to determining whether the exposure is linked to the occurrence, but the presumption of compensability shall not be adversely affected by any failure of the employer to require such testing, evaluation or monitoring.  The employer shall maintain records regarding any instance in which any public safety worker in its employ was deployed to a facility or location where the presence of one or more substances which are known carcinogens is indicated in documents provided to local fire or police departments pursuant to the requirements of section 7 of P.L.1983, c.315 (C.34:5A-7) and where fire, explosions, spills or other events occurred which could result in exposure to those carcinogens.  The records shall include the identity of each deployed public safety worker and each worker shall be provided notice of the records.
 
	L.2019, c.156, s.6.

34:15-31.8  Injury, illness, death of firefighter caused by cancer eligible for compensation.
 	7.	Any injury, illness or death of a firefighter which may be caused by cancer, including leukemia, shall be presumed to be an occupational disease compensable under the provisions of R.S.34:15-1 et seq., if the firefighter has completed not less than seven years of service as a firefighter, regardless of whether the firefighter is in active service or is no longer in active service of a paid, part-paid, or volunteer fire department at the time of the injury, illness or death, provided that the firefighter is not more than 75 years of age or has not been out of active service for more than 20 years.  This prima facie presumption may be rebutted by a preponderance of the evidence that the occupational disease did not arise out of and in the course of the employment.  The employer may require the firefighter to undergo, at the expense of the employer, reasonable testing, evaluation and monitoring of health conditions of the firefighter which is relevant to determining whether the occupational disease arose out of and in the course of the employment, but the presumption of compensability shall not be adversely affected by any failure of the employer to require such testing, evaluation or monitoring.  In order to receive this occupational cancer disability benefit, the type of cancer involved shall be a type which may be caused by exposure to heat, radiation, or a known or suspected carcinogen as defined by the International Agency for Research on Cancer.  A firefighter with less than seven years of service as a firefighter who experiences injury, illness or death which may be caused by exposure to a known carcinogen, cancer-causing radiation or a radioactive substance, including cancer and damage to reproductive organs, shall be subject to the provisions of section 6 of this act.
 
	L.2019, c.156, s.7.

34:15-31.9  Intent, construction of act.
 	8.	This act is intended to affirm certain rights of public safety workers and other employees under the circumstances specified in this act with respect to compensation provided pursuant to R.S.34:15-1 et seq. and shall not be construed as reducing, limiting or curtailing any rights of any other worker or employee to compensation pursuant to R.S.34:15-1 et seq. or of any worker with respect to any claim for compensation pursuant to R.S.34:15-1 et seq., including a claim initiated prior to the effective date of this act.
 
	L.2019, c.156, s.8.

34:15-31.10  Report to Legislature.
 	9.	On the first day of the 18th month following the date of enactment of P.L.2019, c.156 (C.34:15-31.2 et seq.) and annually on the anniversary of the effective date of P.L.2019, c.156 (C.34:15-31.2 et seq.), the Commissioner of the Department of Labor and Workforce Development shall, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1) and in a manner consistent with section 1 of P.L.1966, c.164 (C.34:15-128), submit to the Legislature, a report containing available information regarding:
 
	a.	The number of claim petitions with respect to which a determination was rendered by the Division of Workers' Compensation during the previous calendar year that an injury or illness enumerated within Sections 4 through 7 of P.L.2019, c.156 (C.34:15-31.5 through C.34:15-31.8) is compensable; and
 
	b.	The total amount of workers' compensation benefits awarded by the Division of Workers' Compensation for the claim petitions counted under subsection a. of this section, including medical benefits, temporary total disability benefits, permanent partial benefits, and permanent total benefits.
 
	L.2019, c.156, s.9.

34:15-31.11  Definitions relative to essential employees contracting COVID-19.
 	1.	As used in this act:

	"Essential employee" means an employee in the public or private sector who, during a state of emergency:
 
	(1)	is a public safety worker or first responder, including any fire, police or other emergency responders;
 
	(2)	is involved in providing medical and other healthcare services, emergency transportation, social services, and other care services, including services provided in health care facilities, residential facilities, or homes;
 
	(3)	performs functions which involve physical proximity to members of the public and are essential to the public's health, safety, and welfare, including transportation services, hotel and other residential services, financial services, and the production, preparation, storage, sale, and distribution of essential goods such as food, beverages, medicine, fuel, and supplies for conducting essential business and work at home; or
 
	(4)	is any other employee deemed an essential employee by the public authority declaring the state of emergency.
 
	An employee who is an employee of the State who is offered the option of working at home but has refused that option shall not be regarded as an essential employee.

	"Health care facility" means any non-federal institution, building or agency, or portion thereof, whether public or private, for profit or nonprofit, that is used, operated or designed to provide health services, medical or dental treatment or nursing, rehabilitative, or preventive care to any person.  Health care facility includes, but is not limited to: an ambulatory surgical facility, home health agency, hospice, hospital, infirmary, intermediate care facility, dialysis center, long-term care facility, medical assistance facility, mental health center, paid and volunteer emergency medical services, outpatient facility, public health center, rehabilitation facility, residential treatment facility, skilled nursing facility, and adult day care center.  Health care facility also includes, but is not limited to, the following related property when used for or in connection with the foregoing: a laboratory, research facility, pharmacy, laundry facility, health personnel training and lodging facility, patient, guest and health personnel food service facility, and the portion of an office or office building used by persons engaged in health care professions or services.
 
	"Health care worker" means an individual employed by a health care facility.
 
	"Public safety worker" includes a member, employee, or officer of a paid, partially-paid, or volunteer fire or police department, force, company or district, including the State Police, a Community Emergency Response Team approved by the New Jersey Office of Emergency Management, or a correctional facility, or a basic or advanced medical technician of a first aid or rescue squad, or any other nurse, basic or advanced medical technician.
 
	L.2020, c.84, s.1.

34:15-31.12  Rebuttable presumption that contraction of the disease is work-related and compensable.
 	2.	If, during the public health emergency declared by an executive order of the Governor and any extension of the order, an individual contracts coronavirus disease 2019 during a time period in which the individual is working in a place of employment other than the individual's own residence as a health care worker, public safety worker, or other essential employee, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the contraction of the disease is work-related and fully compensable for the purposes of benefits provided under R.S.34:15-1 et seq., ordinary and accidental disability retirement, and any other benefits provided by law to individuals suffering injury or illness through the course of their employment.  This prima facie presumption may be rebutted by a preponderance of the evidence showing that the worker was not exposed to the disease while working in the place of employment other than the individual's own residence.
 
	L.2020, c.84, s.2.

34:15-31.13  Payment of compensation not considered factor in certain calculations.
 	3.	Any workers' compensation claims paid according to section 2 of this act shall not be considered in calculating an employer's Experience Modification Factor, pursuant to the New Jersey Workers' Compensation and Employers Liability and Insurance Manual administered by the Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau established by section 2 of P.L.1995, c.393 (C.34:15-89.1) and section 1 of P.L.2008, c.97 (C. 34:15-90.1).
 
	L.2020, c.84, s.3.

34:15-31.14  Construction of act.
 	4.	This act is intended to affirm certain rights of essential employees under the circumstances specified in this act, and shall not be construed as reducing, limiting or curtailing any rights of any worker or employee to benefits provided by law.
 
	L.2020, c.84, s.4.

34:15-31.15  Definitions.
	1. As used in P.L.2025, c.134 (C.34:15-31.15 et seq.):
 
	“Critical incident” means an event involving the firing of a weapon or an exchange of gun fire; serious bodily injury to or the death of a minor; a terrorist act; a hostage situation; serious bodily injury to or the death of another first responder employed in the same agency or unit, when that serious bodily injury or death occurred in the performance of that first responder’s official duties; a personal injury or wound; serious bodily injury received in the performance of the first responder’s official duties; the visual or audible witnessing of the death or maiming, or the visual or audible witnessing of the immediate aftermath of the death or maiming, of one or more persons; the response to or direct involvement in a criminal investigation of an offense involving violent crimes against minors; the need for rescue in the line of duty where one’s life was in danger; or the response to or direct involvement in an investigation regarding the drowning or near drowning of a minor.
 
	“First responder” means a paid 9-1-1 first responder dispatcher, law enforcement officer, paid firefighter, or paid member of a duly incorporated first aid, emergency, ambulance, or rescue squad association or any other individual who, in the course of that individual's employment, is dispatched to the scene of an emergency situation for the purpose of providing medical care or other assistance.
 
	“Law enforcement officer” means a person who is employed as a sworn member of any State, county, or municipal law enforcement agency, department, division, or instrumentality of those governments who is statutorily empowered to act for the detection, investigation, arrest, conviction, detention, or rehabilitation of persons violating the criminal laws of the State.
 
	“Mental health professional” means a person who maintains a clinical practice and has been approved by an employer and employee and is a professional licensed by the Alcohol and Drug Counselor Committee, the State Board of Creative Arts and Activities Therapies, the State Board of Marriage and Family Therapy Examiners, the State Board of Medical Examiners, the Professional Counselor Examiners Committee, the Certified Psychoanalysts Advisory Committee, the State Board of Psychological Examiners, the State Board of Social Work Examiners, the New Jersey Board of Nursing, or any other entity created hereafter under Title 45 to license or otherwise regulate a mental health profession.
 
	“Minor” means a person under the age of 18 years.
 
	"Paid firefighter" or "firefighter" means a full-time paid firefighter employed by a public fire department. 
 
	“Peer support team” means law enforcement officers trained by culturally competent mental health professionals to provide emotional and practical assistance to first responders.
 
	"Public fire department" or "department" means any department of a municipality, county, fire district, or the State or any agency thereof having employees engaged in firefighting provided that such firefighting employees are included in a negotiating unit exclusively comprised of firefighting employees.
 
	“Resiliency program officer” means a designated law enforcement officer who is responsible for the training and implementation of the New Jersey Resiliency Program for Law Enforcement (NJRP-LE) within the officer’s employing agency, pursuant to Attorney General Directive No. 2019-1.
 
L.2025, c.134, s.1; amended 2025, c.272, s.5.

34:15-31.16  Employer of first responders, 12 hours of paid confidential counseling.
	2. a. An employer of first responders shall provide for up to 12 hours of paid confidential counseling compensable under the provisions of R.S.34:15-1 et seq. with a mental health professional to a first responder who experiences a critical incident in the course of the first responder’s employment related to the first responder’s experience of the critical incident. The counseling is in addition to, and separate from, any benefits already provided by an employer sponsored health plan or a group health insurance trust fund. The first responder shall be authorized to select the mental health professional who will conduct the counseling as provided by this subsection.
 
	b.	If a mental health professional determines that the first responder would benefit from additional hours of licensed counseling beyond the initial 12 hours and that the additional hours of licensed counseling are likely to improve the first responder’s condition, the employer of the first responder shall pay for up to an additional 24 hours of licensed counseling.
 
	c.	All hours of licensed counseling authorized under this section are required to be completed within one year after the first responder’s first visit to a mental health professional.
 
	d.	The employer of the first responder shall not require the use of accrued annual or vacation leave, personal leave, sick leave, or any other paid leave if a counseling session scheduled pursuant to this section occurs during the first responder’s established work hours.
 
L.2025, c.134, s.2.

34:15-31.17  Interactions between law enforcement officer and resiliency program officer, confidential.
	3.	Interactions related to mental health support between a law enforcement officer and a resiliency program officer or a member of a peer support team shall be confidential. A resiliency program officer or a member of a peer support team shall not be required to disclose mental health support related communications with another law enforcement officer, except if the law enforcement officer is reasonably believed to be a risk to themselves or others or when there is evidence of the commission of a crime by the law enforcement officer. 
 
L.2025, c.134, s.3.

34:15-32.  Occupational disease;  determining disability and amount of compensation
    The compensation payable for death or disability total in character and permanent in quality resulting from an occupational disease shall be the same in amount and duration and shall be payable in the same manner and to the same persons as would have been entitled thereto had the death or disability been caused by an accident arising out of and in the course of the employment.

    In determining the duration of temporary and permanent partial disability, either or both, and the duration of payment for the disability due to occupational diseases, the same rules and regulations as are now applicable to accident or injury occurring under this article shall apply.

34:15-33.2.  Effective date
    This act shall take effect on January first, one thousand nine hundred and forty-nine.

     L.1948, c. 468, p. 1916, s. 4.

34:15-33.3  Application to uninsured employer's fund for certain claims for exposure to asbestos.

	2. a. In the case of a claim for compensation for an occupational disease resulting in injury or death from an exposure to asbestos, if after due diligence, the standards for which shall be set forth by the Director of the Division of Workers' Compensation:  (1) the workers' compensation insurer of an employer, the employer, or the principals of the employer where the claimant was last exposed cannot be located; or (2) the employee making the claim worked for more than one employer, during which time the exposure to asbestos may reasonably be deemed to have taken place but the employer or employers where the petitioner was last exposed cannot reasonably be identified, an application shall be made to the uninsured employer's fund, created pursuant to section 10 of P.L.1966, c.126 (C.34:15-120.1), and any award by a judge of compensation shall be payable from the fund.  For the purposes of this section "occupational disease resulting in injury or death from an exposure to asbestos" means asbestosis or any asbestos-induced cancer, including mesothelioma.

	b.	In the case of any claim paid by the uninsured employer's fund pursuant to this section, the fund shall have the right of subrogation against (1) any insurer or employer identified as liable as set forth under the provisions of subsection a. of this section; or (2) against the stock workers' compensation security fund, or the mutual workers' compensation security fund, if an insolvent insurer is determined to be liable; or (3) against the New Jersey Self-Insurers Guaranty Association if an insolvent self-insurer is determined to be liable.

	c.	The fund shall have a lien pursuant to R.S.34:15-40 against any award received by the claimant from a third party resulting from the exposure to asbestos.

	d.	Compensation shall be based on the last date of exposure, if known, or if the last date of exposure cannot be known, the judge shall establish an appropriate date.

	e.	To ensure sufficient funding for the payment of claims under this section, the State Treasurer shall, within 30 days following the effective date of P.L.2003, c.253 (C.34:15-33.3 et al.) and upon request of the Commissioner of Labor, transfer an amount not to exceed $500,000 from the Second Injury Fund to the uninsured employer's fund.  At the end of the first calendar quarter immediately following that effective date and at the end of each calendar quarter thereafter, the State Treasurer shall, upon request of the Commissioner of Labor, transfer from the Second Injury Fund to the uninsured employer's fund an amount estimated by the Commissioner of Labor to be required by the uninsured employer's fund for payment of such claims for the next following calendar quarter.  Amounts transferred from the Second Injury Fund under the provisions of this subsection shall be included in the determination of surcharges and assessments for the Second Injury Fund and shall be excluded from the determination of surcharges and assessments for the uninsured employer's fund.

	f.	The Commissioner of Labor shall, within 180 days following the effective date of P.L.2003, c.253 (C.34:15-33.3 et al.), promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to effectuate the purposes of that act.

	L.2003,c.253,s.2.

34:15-34.  Time for claiming compensation for occupational disease
    Notwithstanding the time limitation for the filing of claims for compensation as set forth in sections 34:15-41 and 34:15-51, or as set forth in  any other section of this Title, there shall be no time limitation upon the  filing of claims for compensation for compensable occupational disease, as  hereinabove defined;  provided, however, that where a claimant knew the nature  of the disability and its relation to the employment, all claims for compensation for compensable occupational disease except as herein provided shall be barred unless a petition is filed in duplicate with the secretary of the division in Trenton within 2 years after the date on which the claimant first knew the nature of the disability and its relation to the employment; provided further, that in case an agreement of compensation for compensable occupational disease has been made between such employer and such claimant, then an employee's claim for compensation shall be barred unless a petition for  compensation is duly filed with such secretary within 2 years after the failure  of the employer to make payment pursuant to the terms of such agreement;  or in  case a part of the compensation has been paid by such employer, then within 2  years after the last payment of compensation.  It is the express intention of  the Legislature that, except in any case where claim is made for asbestosis,  radiation poisoning, siderosis, anthracosis, silicosis, mercury poisoning,  beryllium poisoning, chrome poisoning, lead poisoning or any occupational  disease having the same characteristics of the above enumerated diseases as  subsequently determined by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and  Health, the provisions of this section shall not be applied retroactively but  shall be applied only to those employees who shall cease to have been exposed  in the course of employment to causes of compensable occupational diseases as defined in 34:15-31(a) subsequent to January 1, 1980.

    A payment or agreement to pay by the insurance carrier shall, for the purpose of this section, be deemed a payment or agreement by the employer.

     Amended by L.1948, c. 468, p. 1915, s. 2;  L.1966, c. 126, s. 5;  L.1971, c. 397, s. 1, eff. Jan. 10, 1972;  L.1974, c. 65, s. 1, eff. July 3, 1974; L.1979, c. 283, s. 11, eff. Jan. 10, 1980.

34:15-35.  Provisions applicable to occupational diseases;  claim for accident excluded
    All provisions of this article and article 3 of this title (s. 34:15-36 et seq.), applicable to claims for injury or death by accident, shall apply to injury or death by compensable occupational disease, except to the extent that they are inconsistent with the provisions contained in sections 34:15-30 to 34:15-34 of this title.  The provisions in said sections 34:15-30 to 34:15-34 shall not apply to any claim for compensation for injury resulting from accident.

34:15-35.10.  Occupational hearing loss
    Compensation for noise induced occupational loss of hearing which constitutes an occupational disease shall be paid only as provided in this act.   All provisions of chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes applicable to  claims for injury by accident, shall apply to compensable occupational hearing  loss, except to the extent that they are inconsistent with the provisions of  this act.

     L.1979, c. 285, s. 1.

34:15-35.11. Definitions 
    As used in this act: 

   a.   "Noise induced occupational hearing loss"  means a permanent bilateral  loss of hearing acuity of the sensorineural type due to prolonged, habitual  exposure to hazardous noise in employment.  For purposes of this supplementary  act, sudden hearing loss resulting from a single, short noise exposure, such as  an explosion, shall not be considered an occupational disease but shall be  considered as an injury by accident. Exceptional cases of sensorineural  hearing loss can be considered occupational hearing loss provided it can be established that the cause was short term exposures to high intensity noise  levels. 

   b.   "Sensorineural hearing loss"  means a loss of hearing acuity due to damage to the inner ear which can result from numerous causes, as distinguished  from conductive hearing loss which results from disease or injury involving the  middle ear or outer ear or both and which is not caused by prolonged exposure  to noise. 

   c.   "Prolonged exposure"  means exposure to hazardous noise in employment for a period of at least 1 year. 

   d.   "Habitual exposure"  means exposure to noise exceeding the allowable daily dose, at least 3 days each week, for at least 40 weeks each year. 

   e.   "Hazardous noise"  mean noise which exceeds the permissible daily exposure to the corresponding noise level as shown in the following table: 

    Noise Level (dBA)                             Permissible Daily Exposure

          90                                              8  hours

          95                                              4  hours

          100                                             2  hours

          105                                             1  hour

          110                                            30  minutes

          115                                            15  minutes

   

   f.   "Hearing threshold level"  means the lowest decibel sound which may be  heard on the audiometer 50% of the times presented during audiometric testing. 

   L.1979, c. 285, s. 2. 

34:15-35.12.  Degree of hearing loss;  determination of degree
    a.  For purposes of determining the degree of hearing loss for awarding compensation for noise induced occupational hearing loss, the average hearing threshold for each ear shall be determined by adding the hearing thresholds (ANSI) for the three frequencies 1,000, 2,000 and 3,000 Hertz and dividing that  sum by three.  To determine the binaural disability, subtract the 30dB (low  fence) from the obtained average in each ear.  This decibel amount is then  multiplied by 1.5% for each ear.  Then multiply the smaller percentage (the  better ear) by 5 and add the larger number (the poorer ear) and divide the  resulting number by 6.  This resulting number is the percentage of binaural  hearing disability to be used pursuant to the provisions of section 9 of this  act.

    b.  If the better ear has a hearing loss of 30 dB or less as measured from O  dB on an audiometer calibrated to ANSI S3.6-1969 American National Standard "Specifications for Audiometers,"  or 20 dB or less as measured on an audiometer calibrated to ASA-Z 24.5-1951  "American Standard Specifications for  Pure-Tone Audiometers for Screening Purposes,"  the hearing loss shall not be  compensable.  If the audiogram is performed on an ASA calibrated audiometer,  the hearing threshold level must be converted to ANSI calibration levels.

     L.1979, c. 285, s. 3.

34:15-35.13.  Liability for hearing loss;  previous hearing loss; audiometric testing
    a.  Where hearing loss measurement is practicable, an employer shall be liable for the hearing loss of an employee to which his employment has contributed.  If previous occupational hearing loss or hearing loss from non-occupational causes is established by competent evidence, including the results of a placement audiogram, the employer shall not be liable for the hearing loss so established whether or not compensation has previously been paid or awarded, and shall be liable only for the difference between the percentage of disability determined as of the date of disability, as herein defined and the percentage of disability established by the placement audiogram.

    b.  An employer may require an employee to undergo audiometric testing at the expense of the employer at the time of termination of employment. The employer shall be required to notify the employee, in writing, of this requirement and the penalty, as provided herein, for noncompliance with such requirement at or before the employee's termination date.  In the event of refusal or failure by the employee to undergo audiometric testing within 60 days after receipt of written notice of the scheduling of such test by the employer, the employee shall be penalized by losing any right to compensation as granted by this act, unless such failure is due to a legitimate reason as determined by the division.

    c.  Any employee who undergoes audiometric testing at the direction of an employer may request, within 2 weeks of such testing, a copy and brief explanation of the results which shall be provided to him within 2 weeks of said request.

    d.  For purposes of verifying the degree of hearing loss for awarding compensation, an employee may introduce audiometric test results obtained within 30 days after employer testing at his own expense from any individual approved for performing hearing tests pursuant to section 7.

     L.1979, c. 285, s. 4.

34:15-35.14.  Administration of testing;  fraud
    A judge or referee of compensation shall have the discretion to order further audiometric testing if there is any suspicion of fraud or any question of reliability in the administration of the testing provided for by sections 3 and 4 of this act.

     L.1979, c. 285, s. 5.

34:15-35.15.  Frequencies;  evaluation of hearing loss
    In any evaluation of occupational hearing loss, only hearing levels at frequencies of 1,000, 2,000, and 3,000 Hertz shall be considered.

     L.1979, c. 285, s. 6.

34:15-35.16.  Hearing tests;  instruments;  test conditions
    Hearing levels shall be determined at all times by using puretone air-conduction audiometric instruments calibrated in accordance with American National Standard ANSI S3.6-1969-R 1973 and ANSI S3.13-1972 and performed in an  environment as prescribed by American National Standard S3.1-1960 R 1971 (American Standard Criteria for Background Noise in Audiometer Rooms).  To measure permanent hearing loss, hearing tests shall be performed after at least  16 hours absence from exposure to hazardous noise.  The calibration of an  audiometric instrument used to measure permanent hearing loss shall have been  performed within 1 year of the time of the hearing examination, to assure that  the audiometer is within the tolerances permitted by the ANSI standards.

     L.1979, c. 285, s. 7.

34:15-35.17.  Audiometric technician to perform hearing test; audiologic evaluation
    All hearing tests shall be performed by a person at the level of a certified  audiometric technician or above;  an individual who meets the training  requirements specified by the Intersociety Committee on Audiometric Technician  Training (American Industrial Hygiene Association Journal 27:303-304, May-June  1966) and the State Department of Health.  If hearing loss is demonstrated, an  employee shall be referred for audiologic evaluation by a certified audiologist  holding a certificate of clinical competence issued by the American Speech and  Hearing Association or its equivalent or a physician certified by the American  Board of Otolaryngology.

     L.1979, c. 285, s. 8.

34:15-35.18.  Compensation amount
    There shall be payable for total hearing loss 200 weeks of compensation. Partial disability compensation shall be paid for such periods as are proportionate to the relation which the calculated percentage loss bears to 100% hearing loss and shall be paid at the weekly compensation rate provided in  R.S. 34:15-12c. or any amendments thereto.

     L.1979, c. 285, s. 9.

34:15-35.19.  Filing claims;  time limitations
    Time limitations for the filing of claims for compensation for occupational  hearing loss shall be in accordance with time limitations for the filing of  claims for compensation for compensable occupational disease set forth in R.S.  34:15-34.

     L.1979, c. 285, s. 10.

34:15-35.20.  Time for filing claims;  date of disability
    No claims for compensation for occupational hearing loss shall be filed until after 4 full consecutive calendar weeks have elapsed since removal from exposure to hazardous noise in employment.  Removal from exposure to hazardous noise in employment may be achieved by use of effective ear protection devices.   The last day of such exposure shall be the date of disability.

     L.1979, c. 285, s. 11.

34:15-35.21.  Award;  use of hearing aids
    No reduction in award for hearing loss shall be made if the ability of the employee to understand speech is improved by the use of a hearing aid.

     L.1979, c. 285, s. 12.

34:15-35.22.  Failure to use protective devices, compensation for hearing loss
    No compensation shall be payable for loss of hearing caused by hazardous noise after the effective date of this act if an employer can properly document  that despite repeated warnings, an employee willfully fails to properly and  effectively utilize suitable protective device or devices provided by the  employer capable of diminishing loss of hearing due to occupational exposure to  hazardous noise.

     L.1979, c. 285, s. 13.

34:15-36  Definitions.
	34:15-36.  "Willful negligence" within the intent of this chapter shall consist of (1) deliberate act or deliberate failure to act, or (2) such conduct as evidences reckless indifference to safety, or (3) intoxication, operating as the proximate cause of injury, or (4) unlawful use of a controlled dangerous substance as defined in the "New Jersey Controlled Dangerous Substances Act," P.L.1970, c.226 (C.24:21-1 et seq.).
 
	"Employer" includes natural persons, partnerships, and corporations; "employee" includes all natural persons, including officers of corporations, who perform service for an employer for financial consideration, exclusive of (1) employees eligible under the federal "Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act," 44 Stat. 1424 (33 U.S.C.s.901 et seq.), for benefits payable with respect to accidental death or injury, or occupational disease or infection; and (2) casual employments, which shall be defined, if in connection with the employer's business, as employment, the occasion for which arises by chance or is purely accidental; or if not in connection with any business of the employer, as employment not regular, periodic or recurring; provided, however, that forest fire wardens and forest firefighters employed by the State of New Jersey shall, in no event, be deemed casual employees. 
 
	A self-employed person, partners of a limited liability partnership, members of a limited liability company or partners of a partnership who actively perform services on behalf of the self-employed person's business, the limited liability partnership, limited liability company or the partnership shall be deemed an "employee" of the business, limited liability partnership, limited liability company or partnership for purposes of receipt of benefits and payment of premiums pursuant to this chapter, if the business, limited liability partnership, limited liability company or partnership elects, when the workers' compensation policy of the business, limited liability partnership, limited liability company or partnership is purchased or renewed, to obtain coverage for the person, the limited liability partners, the limited liability company members or the partners. If the business, limited liability partnership, limited liability company or partnership elects to obtain coverage for the self-employed person, limited liability partners, limited liability company members or the partners, the election may only be made at purchase or at renewal and may not be withdrawn during the policy term.  If the business, limited liability partnership, limited liability company or partnership performs services covered under a homeowner's policy or other policies providing comprehensive personal liability insurance for domestic workers, household employees or the dependents thereof, the workers' compensation policy of the business, limited liability partnership, limited liability company or partnership shall have primary responsibility for the payment of benefits.  Notwithstanding the provisions of R.S.34:15-71 and 34:15-72, the business, limited liability partnership, limited liability company or partnership shall not be required to purchase a policy unless the business, limited liability partnership, limited liability company or partnership is an "employer" of a least one employee as defined in this section who is not a self-employed person, limited liability partner, limited liability company member or partner actively performing services on behalf of the business, limited liability partnership, limited liability company or partnership.
 
	Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no insurer or insurance producer as defined in section 3 of P.L.2001, c.210 (C.17:22A-28) shall be liable in an action for damages on account of the failure of a business, limited liability partnership, limited liability company or partnership to elect to obtain workers' compensation coverage for a self-employed person, limited liability partner, limited liability company member or partner, unless the insurer or insurance producer causes damage by a willful, wanton or grossly negligent act of commission or omission.  Every application for workers' compensation made on or after the effective date of this amendatory act shall include notice, as approved by the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance, concerning the availability of workers' compensation coverage for self-employed persons, limited liability partners, limited liability company members or partners. That application shall also contain a notice of election of coverage and shall clearly state that coverage for self-employed persons, limited liability partners, limited liability company members and partners shall not be provided under the policy unless the application containing the notice of election is executed and filed with the insurer or insurance producer.  The application containing the notice of election shall also contain a statement that the insurer or insurance producer shall not be liable in an action for damages on account of the failure of a business, limited liability partnership, limited liability company or partnership to elect to obtain workers' compensation coverage for a self-employed person, limited liability partner, limited liability company member or partner, unless the insurer or insurance producer causes damage by a willful, wanton or grossly negligent act of commission or omission. The failure of a self-employed person, limited liability partnership, limited liability company or partnership to elect to obtain workers' compensation coverage for the self-employed person, the limited liability partners, the limited liability company members or the partners shall not affect benefits available under any other accident or health policy.
 
	Employment shall be deemed to commence when an employee arrives at the employer's place of employment to report for work and shall terminate when the employee leaves the employer's place of employment, excluding areas not under the control of the employer; provided, however, when the employee is required by the employer to be away from the employer's place of employment, the employee shall be deemed to be in the course of employment when the employee is engaged in the direct performance of duties assigned or directed by the employer; but the employment of employee paid travel time by an employer for time spent traveling to and from a job site or of any employee who utilizes an employer authorized vehicle shall commence and terminate with the time spent traveling to and from a job site or the authorized operation of a vehicle on business authorized by the employer.  Travel by a policeman, fireman, or a member of a first aid or rescue squad, in responding to and returning from an emergency, shall be deemed to be in the course of employment.
 
	Employment shall also be deemed to commence when an employee is traveling in a ridesharing arrangement between his or her place of residence or terminal near such place and his or her place of employment, if one of the following conditions is satisfied: the vehicle used in the ridesharing arrangement is owned, leased or contracted for by the employer, or the employee is required by the employer to travel in a ridesharing arrangement as a condition of employment.
 
	Employment shall also be deemed to commence, if an employer provides or designates a parking area for use by an employee, when an employee arrives at the parking area prior to reporting for work and shall terminate when an employee leaves the parking area at the end of a work period; provided that, if the site of the parking area is separate from the place of employment, an employee shall be deemed to be in the course of employment while the employee travels directly from the parking area to the place of employment prior to reporting for work and while the employee travels directly from the place of employment to the parking area at the end of a work period.
 
	"Disability permanent in quality and partial in character" means a permanent impairment caused by a compensable accident or compensable occupational disease, based upon demonstrable objective medical evidence, which restricts the function of the body or of its members or organs; included in the criteria which shall be considered shall be whether there has been a lessening to a material degree of an employee's working ability.  Subject to the above provisions, nothing in this definition shall be construed to preclude benefits to a worker who returns to work following a compensable accident even if there be no reduction in earnings. Injuries such as minor lacerations, minor contusions, minor sprains, and scars which do not constitute significant permanent disfigurement, and occupational disease of a minor nature such as mild dermatitis and mild bronchitis shall not constitute permanent disability within the meaning of this definition.
 
	"Disability permanent in quality and total in character" means a physical or neuropsychiatric total permanent impairment caused by a compensable accident or compensable occupational disease, where no fundamental or marked improvement in such condition can be reasonably expected.
 
	Factors other than physical and neuropsychiatric impairments may be considered in the determination of permanent total disability, where such physical and neuropsychiatric impairments constitute at least 75% or higher of total disability.
 
	"Ridesharing" means the transportation of persons in a motor vehicle, with a maximum carrying capacity of not more than 15 passengers, including the driver, where such transportation is incidental to the purpose of the driver. This term shall include such ridesharing arrangements known as carpools and vanpools.
 
	"Medical services, medical treatment, physicians' services and physicians' treatment" shall include, but not be limited to, the services which a chiropractor is authorized by law to perform and which are authorized by an employer pursuant to the provisions of R.S.34:15-1 et seq.

	Amended 1945, c.74, s.11; 1956, c.141, s.5; 1956, c.160, s.1; 1956, c.216; 1979, c.283, s.12;1981, c.413, s.6; 1986, c.35; 1989, c.227; 1994, c.74; 1999, c.383; 2021, c.334; 2023, c.262, s.10.

34:15-37.  Wages;  computation.
	34:15-37. "Wages," when used in this chapter, shall be construed to mean the money rate at which the service rendered is recompensed under the contract of hiring in force at the time of the accident.  Board and lodging, when furnished by the employer as part of the wages, shall be included at market value, unless the money value of such advantages shall have been otherwise fixed by the parties at the time of hiring.  If, however, the claimant continues to receive board or lodging during a period of total temporary disability, the value of the board or lodging shall not be included in the calculation of the workers’ compensation rate for purposes of temporary total disability.  Where, prior to the accident, the rate of wages is fixed by the output of the employee, the daily wages shall be calculated by dividing the number of days the worker was actually employed into  the total amount the employee earned during the preceding 6 months, or so much  thereof as shall refer to employment by the same employer.  When the rate of wages is fixed by the hour, the daily wage shall be found by multiplying the hourly rate by the customary number of working hours constituting an ordinary day in the character of the work involved.  In any case the weekly wage shall  be found by multiplying the daily wage by the customary number of working days  constituting an ordinary week in the character of the work involved;  provided,  however, if the employee worked less than the customary number of working days  constituting an ordinary week in the character of the work involved, the weekly  wage for the purposes of compensation under provisions of R.S. 34:15-12a only  shall be found by multiplying the hourly rate by the number of hours of work regularly performed by that employee in the character of the work involved. Gratuities, received regularly in the course of employment from other than the employer, shall be included in determining the weekly wage only in those cases where the employer or employee has kept a regular daily or weekly record of the amount of gratuities so received.  In such cases the average weekly amount of gratuities over a period of 6 months, or for the entire time of employment, whichever period is less, shall be added to the fixed weekly wage to determine the employee's total weekly wage.  If no such record has been kept, then the average amount of the weekly gratuities shall be fixed by the judge of compensation or the referee hearing the matter.

     Amended by L.1945, c. 74, p. 392, s. 12;  L.1966, c. 126, s. 6;  L.1979, c. 283, s. 13, eff. Jan. 10, 1980; 2025, c.212.

34:15-37.1  Payment of full compensation to certain injured officers.
 	1.	Any State corrections officer, juvenile corrections officer, or juvenile detention officer who, in the course of performing the officer's official duties, suffers serious bodily injury as the direct result of an assault by the inmates or detainees under the officer's custody or charge shall continue to receive full wages for up to six months or until the officer begins receiving compensation for that injury under R.S.34:15-1 et seq., whichever comes first.
 
	In addition to the compensation received under R.S.34:15-1 et seq., the injured officer shall receive regular supplemental payments from the officer's employer in an amount that is sufficient, when added to the compensation received under R.S.34:15-1 et seq., to equal the net wage of the injured officer at the time of the injury.  The supplemental payments authorized under this section shall continue for up to six months so long as the injured officer remains a State corrections officer, juvenile corrections officer, or juvenile detention officer and continues to be compensated under R.S.34:15-1 et seq.
 
	The fringe benefits afforded an injured officer under the terms of a collective bargaining agreement, contract, or statute shall not be negated or impaired in any way and shall remain in full force and effect during the time that officer is receiving supplemental payments pursuant to this section.
 
	L.2017, c.93, s.1.

34:15-37.2  Payment of full compensation to certain injured parole officers.
 	2.	Any parole officer who, while in the course of performing the officer's official duties, suffers serious bodily injury as the direct result of an assault by an adult or juvenile parolee under the officer's supervision shall continue to receive full wages for up to six months or until the parole officer begins receiving compensation for that injury under R.S.34:15-1 et seq., whichever comes first.
 
	In addition to the compensation received under R.S.34:15-1 et seq., the injured officer shall receive regular supplemental payments from the officer's employer in an amount that is sufficient, when added to the compensation received under R.S.34:15-1 et seq., to equal the net wage of the injured officer at the time of the injury.  The supplemental payments authorized under this section shall continue for up to six months so long as the injured officer remains a parole officer and continues to be compensated under R.S.34:15-1 et seq.
 
	The fringe benefits afforded an injured officer under the terms of a collective bargaining agreement, contract, or statute shall not be negated or impaired in any way and shall remain in full force and effect during the time that officer is receiving supplemental payments pursuant to this section.
 
	L.2017, c.93, s.2.

34:15-37.3  Certain injured officers to receive full compensation.
 	3.	Any State Human Services police officer, State conservation police officer, State park police officer, Palisades Interstate Park officer appointed pursuant to R.S.32:14-21, or full-time campus police officer appointed by a county college or four-year public institution of higher education pursuant to P.L.1970, c.211 (C.18A:6-4.2 et seq.) who, while in the course of performing the officer's official duties, suffers serious bodily injury as the direct result of an assault during the arrest or transportation of a suspect or other person in the officer's custody shall continue to receive full wages for up to six months or until the officer begins receiving compensation for that injury under R.S.34:15-1 et seq., whichever comes first.
 
	Any senior, recruit, or assistant supervising medical security officer working under the authority of the Department of Human Services who, in the course of performing the officer's official duties, suffers serious bodily injury as the direct result of an assault by a patient or resident who requires medical security shall continue to receive full wages for up to six months or until the officer begins receiving compensation for that injury under R.S.34:15-1 et seq., whichever comes first.
 
	In addition to the compensation received under R.S.34:15-1 et seq., the injured officer shall receive regular supplemental payments from the officer's employer in an amount that is sufficient, when added to the compensation received under R.S.34:15-1 et seq., to equal the net wage of the injured officer at the time of the injury.  The supplemental payments authorized under this section shall continue for up to six months so long as the injured officer remains a State Human Services police officer, State conservation police officer, State park police officer, Palisades Interstate Park officer, campus police officer, or medical security officer and continues to be compensated under R.S.34:15-1 et seq.
 
	The fringe benefits afforded an injured officer under the terms of a collective bargaining agreement, contract, or statute shall not be negated or impaired in any way and shall remain in full force and effect during the time that officer is receiving supplemental payments pursuant to this section.
 
	L.2017, c.93, s.3; amended 2019, c.407, s.17.

34:15-37.4  Certain injured civilian employees to receive full compensation.
 	4.	Any civilian employee who directly works with or teaches inmates or detainees in a State correctional facility, juvenile correctional facility, or juvenile detention center who, in the course of performing the employee's official duties, suffers serious bodily injury as the direct result of an assault by the inmates or detainees with whom the employee works or teaches shall continue to receive full wages for up to six months or until the employee begins receiving compensation for that injury under R.S.34:15-1 et seq., whichever comes first.
 
	In addition to the compensation received under R.S.34:15-1 et seq., the injured employee shall receive regular supplemental payments from the employer in an amount that is sufficient, when added to the compensation received under R.S.34:15-1 et seq., to equal the net wage of the injured employee at the time of the injury. The supplemental payments authorized under this section shall continue for up to six months so long as the injured employee remains employed by the State correctional facility, juvenile correctional facility, or juvenile detention center and continues to be compensated under R.S.34:15-1 et seq.
 
	The fringe benefits afforded an injured employee under the terms of a collective bargaining agreement, contract, or statute shall not be negated or impaired in any way and shall remain in full force and effect during the time that employee is receiving supplemental payments pursuant to this section.
 
	L.2017, c.93, s.4.

34:15-37.5.  Certain injured probation officers to receive full compensation.
	5.	Any probation officer who, while in the course of performing the officer's official duties, suffers serious bodily injury as the direct result of an assault by a person placed on probation who is under the officer's supervision shall continue to receive full wages for up to six months or until the probation officer begins receiving compensation for that injury under R.S.34:15-1 et seq., whichever comes first.
 
	In addition to the compensation received under R.S.34:15-1 et seq., the injured officer shall receive regular supplemental payments from the officer's employer in an amount that is sufficient, when added to the compensation received under R.S.34:15-1 et seq., to equal the net wage of the injured officer at the time of the injury.  The supplemental payments authorized under this section shall continue for up to six months so long as the injured officer remains a probation officer and continues to be compensated under R.S.34:15-1 et seq.
 
	The fringe benefits afforded an injured officer under the terms of a collective bargaining agreement, contract, or statute shall not be negated or impaired in any way and shall remain in full force and effect during the time that officer is receiving supplemental payments pursuant to this section.
 
	L.2017, c.93, s.5.

34:15-37.6  "Serious bodily injury" defined.
  	6.	As used in P.L.2017, c.93 (C.34:15-37.1 et seq.), "serious bodily injury" means bodily injury which creates a substantial risk of death or which causes serious, permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
 
	L.2017, c.93, s.6.

34:15-38.  Method of calculating compensation for temporary disability
    To calculate the number of weeks and fraction thereof that compensation is payable for temporary disability, determine the number of calendar days of disability from and including as a full day the day that the employee is first unable to continue at work by reason of the accident, including also Saturdays,  Sundays and holidays, up to the first working day that the employee is able to  resume work and continue permanently thereat;  subtract from this number the  waiting period and any days and fraction thereof the employee was able to work  during this time, and divide the remainder by 7. If, however, the total period  of disability extends beyond 7 days, the waiting period shall not be subtracted  from the number indicated above. The resulting whole number and sevenths will  be the required period for which compensation is payable on account of  temporary disability.

     Amended by L.1945, c. 74, p. 393, s. 13;  L.1966, c. 126, s. 7.

34:15-39.  Agreements and releases invalid
    No agreement, composition, or release of damages made before the happening of any accident, except the agreement defined in section 34:15-7 of this title shall be valid or shall bar a claim for damages for the injury resulting therefrom, and any such agreement is declared to be against public policy. The  receipt of benefits from any association, society, or fund to which the employee shall have been a contributor shall not bar the recovery of damages by  action at law or the recovery of compensation under article 2 of this chapter  (s. 34:15-7 et seq.).

34:15-39.1.  Unlawful discharge of, or discrimination against, employee claiming compensation benefits;  penalty
    It shall be unlawful for any employer or his duly authorized agent to discharge or in any other manner discriminate against an employee as to his employment because such employee has claimed or attempted to claim workmen's compensation benefits from such employer, or because he has testified, or is about to testify, in any proceeding under the chapter to which this act is a supplement.  For any violation of this act, the employer or agent shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than 60 days or both.  Any employee so discriminated against shall be restored to his employment and shall be compensated by his employer for any loss of wages arising out of such discrimination;  provided, if such employee shall cease to be qualified to perform the duties of his employment he shall not be entitled to such restoration and compensation.

     L.1966, c. 157, s. 1, eff. June 18, 1966.  Amended by L.1968, c. 258, s. 1, eff. Sept. 4, 1968.

34:15-39.2.  Additional penalty;  summary recovery
    As an alternative to any other sanctions herein or otherwise provided by law, the Commissioner of Labor and Industry may impose a penalty not exceeding $1,000.00 for any violation of this act.  He may proceed in a summary manner for the recovery of such penalty, for the use of the State in any court of competent jurisdiction.

     L.1966, c. 157, s. 2.

34:15-39.3.  Liability of employer for penalty
    The employer alone and not his insurance carrier shall be liable for any penalty under this act.

     L.1966, c. 157, s. 3.

34:15-40  Liability of third party.
  
	34:15-40.  Where a third person is liable to the employee or his dependents for an injury or death, the existence of a right of compensation from the employer or insurance carrier under this statute shall not operate as a bar to the action of the employee or his dependents, nor be regarded as establishing a measure of damage therein.  In the event that the employee or his dependents shall recover and be paid from the said third person or his insurance carrier, any sum in release or in judgment on account of his or its liability to the injured employee or his dependents, the liability of the employer under this statute thereupon shall be only such as is hereinafter in this section provided.
 
	(a)	The obligation of the employer or his insurance carrier under this statute to make compensation payments shall continue until the payment, if any, by such third person or his insurance carrier is made.
 
	(b)	If the sum recovered by the employee or his dependents from the third person or his insurance carrier is equivalent to or greater than the liability of the employer or his insurance carrier under this statute, the employer or his insurance carrier shall be released from such liability and shall be entitled to be reimbursed, as hereinafter provided, for the medical expenses incurred and compensation payments theretofore paid to the injured employee or his dependents less employee's expenses of suit and attorney's fee as hereinafter defined.
 
	(c)	If the sum recovered by the employee or his dependents as aforesaid is less than the liability of the employer or his insurance carrier under this statute, the employer or his insurance carrier shall be liable for the difference, plus the employee's expenses of suit and attorney's fee as hereinafter defined, and shall be entitled to be reimbursed, as hereinafter provided for so much of the medical expenses incurred and compensation payments theretofore paid to the injured employee or his dependents as exceeds the amount of such difference plus such employee's expenses of suit and attorney's fee.
 
	(d)	If at any time prior to the payment by the third person or his insurance carrier to the injured employee or his dependents, the employer or his insurance carrier shall serve notice, as hereinafter provided, upon such third person or his insurance carrier that compensation has been applied for by the injured employee or his dependents it shall thereupon become the duty of such third person or his insurance carrier, before making any payment to the injured employee or his dependents, to inquire from such employer or his insurance carrier the amount of medical expenses incurred and compensation theretofore paid to the injured employee or to his dependents.  Where such notice shall have been served, it shall further become the duty of such third person or his insurance carrier, before making any payment as aforesaid, to inquire from such injured employee or his dependents the amount of the expenses of suit and attorney's fee, or either of them in the action or settlement of the claim against such third person or his insurance carrier.  Thereafter, out of that part of any amount about to be paid in release or in judgment by such third person or his insurance carrier on account of his or its liability to the injured employee or his dependents, the employer or his insurance carrier shall be entitled to receive from such third person or his insurance carrier so much thereof as may be due the employer or insurance carrier pursuant to subparagraph (b) or (c) of this section.  Such sum shall be deducted by such third person or his insurance carrier from the sum to be paid in release or in judgment to the injured employee or his dependents and shall be paid by such third person or his insurance carrier to the employer or his insurance carrier.  Service of notice, hereinbefore required to be made by the employer or his insurance carrier upon such third person or his insurance carrier, shall be by registered mail, return receipt and in cases other than an individual shall be mailed to the registered office of such other third person or his insurance carrier.
 
	(e)	As used in this section, "expenses of suit" shall mean such expenses, but not in excess of $750 and "attorney's fee" shall mean such fee, but not in excess of 33 1/3 % of that part of the sum paid in release or in judgment to the injured employee or his dependents by such third person or his insurance carrier to which the employer or his insurance carrier shall be entitled in reimbursement under the provisions of this section, but on all sums in excess thereof, this percentage shall not be binding.
 
	(f)	When an injured employee or his dependents fail within 1 year of the accident to either effect a settlement with the third person or his insurance carrier or institute proceedings for recovery of damages for his injuries and loss against the third person, the employer or his insurance carrier, 10 days after a written demand on the injured employee or his dependents, can either effect a settlement with the third person or his insurance carrier or institute proceedings against the third person for the recovery of damages for the injuries and loss sustained by such injured employee or his dependents and any settlement made with the third person or his insurance carrier or proceedings had and taken by such employer or his insurance carrier against such third person, and such right of action shall be only for such right of action that  the injured employee or his dependents would have had against the third person, and shall constitute a bar to any further claim or action by the injured employee or his dependents against the third person. If a settlement is effected between the employer or his insurance carrier and the third person or his insurance carrier, or a judgment is recovered by the employer or his insurance carrier against the third person for the injuries and loss sustained by the employee or his dependents and if the amount secured or obtained by the employer or his insurance carrier is in excess of the employer's obligation to the employee or his dependents and the expense of suit, such excess shall be paid to the employee or his dependents.  The legal action contemplated hereinabove shall be a civil action at law in the name of the injured employee or by the employer or insurance carrier in the name of the employee to the use of the employer or insurance carrier, or by the proper party for the benefit of the next of kin of the employee.  Where an injured employee or his dependents have instituted proceedings for recovery of damages for his injuries and loss against a third person and such proceedings are dismissed for lack of prosecution, the employer or insurance carrier shall, upon application made within 90 days thereafter, be entitled to have such dismissal set aside, and to continue the prosecution of such proceedings in the name of the injured employee or dependents in accordance with the provisions of this section.
 
	(g)	If such employee or his dependents effect a settlement with the third person or his insurance carrier or institute proceedings against the third person prior to the service of notice upon the third person or his insurance carrier of the compensation obligation of the employer or his insurance carrier or prior to the institution of any proceedings against the third person by the employer or his insurance carrier for the injuries and loss sustained by such employee or his dependents, such employer or his insurance carrier is barred from instituting any action or proceedings against the third person for the injuries and loss sustained by such employee or his dependents.
 
	The words "third person" as used in this section include corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms, partnerships and joint stock companies as well as individuals.
 
	Amended 1951, c.169; 1956, c.141, s.6; 2007, c.23.

34:15-41.  Claims barred after two years
    In case of personal injury or death all claims for compensation on account thereof shall be forever barred unless a petition is filed in duplicate with the secretary of the workmen's compensation bureau, as prescribed by section 34:15-51 of this title.

34:15-41.1.  Claimant in country at war with United States or with which postal communications are suspended;  limitations
    In computing any limitation of time for filing petitions and instituting proceedings prescribed by chapter fifteen of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes, the time during which any claimant is in a foreign country, while the government of or in control of said country is at war with the Government of the United States or while postal communications between said country and the United States are suspended, and twelve months thereafter shall not be computed  as part of any such period of limitation.

     L.1943, c. 72, p. 281, s. 1.

34:15-42.  Constitutionality and construction
    Article 1 of this chapter (s. 34:15-1 et seq.), and article 2 of this chapter  (s. 34:15-7 et seq.), are declared to be inseparable and if either be declared  void or inoperative in an essential part so that the whole of such article must  fall, the other article shall fall with it and not stand alone.

    Article 1 of this chapter (s. 34:15-1 et seq.) shall not apply in cases where  article 2 of this chapter (s. 34:15-7 et seq.) becomes operative but shall apply  in all other cases and in such cases shall be in extension of the common law.

34:15-43  Compensation for injury in line of duty.

	34:15-43.  Every officer, appointed or elected, and every employee of the State, county, municipality or any board or commission, or any other governing body, including boards of education, and governing bodies of service districts, individuals who are under the general supervision of the Palisades Interstate Park Commission and who work in that part of the Palisades Interstate Park which is located in this State, and also each and every member of a volunteer fire company doing public fire duty and also each and every active volunteer, first aid or rescue squad worker, including each and every authorized worker who is not a member of the volunteer fire company within which the first aid or rescue squad may have been created, doing public first aid or rescue duty under the control or supervision of any commission, council, or any other governing body of any municipality, any board of fire commissioners of such municipality or of any fire district within the State, or of the board of managers of any State institution, every county fire marshal and assistant county fire marshal, every special, reserve or auxiliary policeman doing volunteer public police duty under the control or supervision of any commission, council or any other governing body of any municipality, every emergency management volunteer doing emergency management service for the State, every health care worker, public health worker and support services personnel, registered with the Emergency Health Care Provider Registry pursuant to section 6 of P.L.2005, c.222 (C.26:13-6), and any person doing volunteer work for the Division of Parks and Forestry, the Division of Fish and Wildlife, or the New Jersey Natural Lands Trust, as authorized by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection, or for the New Jersey Historic Trust, and any person doing work related to bioterrorism, or volunteering, for the Department of Agriculture, as authorized by the Secretary of Agriculture, who may be injured in line of duty shall be compensated under and by virtue of the provisions of this article and article 2 of this chapter (R.S.34:15-7 et seq.).  No former employee who has been retired on pension by reason of injury or disability shall be entitled under this section to compensation for such injury or disability; provided, however, that such employee, despite retirement, shall, nevertheless, be entitled to the medical, surgical and other treatment and hospital services as set forth in R.S.34:15-15.

	Benefits available under this section to emergency management volunteers and volunteers participating in activities of the Division of Parks and Forestry, the Division of Fish and Wildlife, the New Jersey Natural Lands Trust or the New Jersey Historic Trust, shall not be paid to any claimant who has another single source of injury or death benefits that provides the claimant with an amount of compensation that exceeds the compensation available to the claimant under R.S.34:15-1 et seq.

	As used in this section, the terms "doing public fire duty" and "who may be injured in line of duty," as applied to members of volunteer fire companies, county fire marshals or assistant county fire marshals, and the term "doing public first aid or rescue duty," as applied to active volunteer first aid or rescue squad workers, shall be deemed to include participation in any authorized construction, installation, alteration, maintenance or repair work upon the premises, apparatus or other equipment owned or used by the fire company or the first aid or rescue squad, participation in any State, county, municipal or regional search and rescue task force or team,  participation in any authorized public drill, showing, exhibition, fund raising activity or parade, and to include also the rendering of assistance in case of fire and, when authorized, in connection with other events affecting the public health or safety, in any political subdivision or territory of another state of the United States or on property ceded to the federal government while such assistance is being rendered and while going to and returning from the place in which it is rendered.

	Also, as used in this section, "doing public police duty" and "who may be injured in line of duty" as applied to special, reserve or auxiliary policemen, shall be deemed to include participation in any authorized public drill, showing, exhibition or parade, and to include also the rendering of assistance in connection with other events affecting the public health or safety in the municipality, and also, when authorized, in connection with any such events in any political subdivision or territory of this or any other state of the United States or on property ceded to the federal government while such assistance is being rendered and while going to and returning from the place in which it is rendered.

	As used in this section, the terms "doing emergency management service" and "who may be injured in the line of duty," as applied to emergency management volunteers and health care  workers, public health workers and support services personnel registered with the Emergency Health Care Provider Registry pursuant to section 6 of P.L.2005, c.222 (C.26:13-6), mean participation in any activities authorized pursuant to P.L.1942, c.251 (C.App.A:9-33 et seq.), including participation in any State, county, municipal or regional search and rescue task force or team, except that the terms shall not include activities engaged in by a member of an emergency management agency of the United States Government or of another state, whether pursuant to a mutual aid compact or otherwise.

	Every member of a volunteer fire company shall be deemed to be doing public fire duty under the control or supervision of any such commission, council, governing body, board of fire commissioners or fire district or board of managers of any State institution within the meaning of this section, if such control or supervision is provided for by statute or by rule or regulation of the board of managers or the superintendent of such State institution, or if the fire company of which he is a member receives contributions from, or a substantial part of its expenses or equipment are paid for by, the municipality, or board of fire commissioners of the fire district or if such fire company has been or hereafter shall be designated by ordinance as the fire department of the municipality.

	Every active volunteer, first aid or rescue squad worker, including every authorized worker who is not a member of the volunteer fire company within which the first aid or rescue squad may have been created, shall be deemed to be doing public first aid or rescue duty under the control or supervision of any such commission, council, governing body, board of fire commissioners or fire district within the meaning of this section if such control or supervision is provided for by statute, or if the first aid or rescue squad of which he is a member or authorized worker receives or is eligible to receive contributions from, or a substantial part of its expenses or equipment are paid for by, the municipality, or board of fire commissioners of the fire district, or if such first aid or rescue squad has been or hereafter shall be designated by ordinance as the first aid or rescue squad of the municipality.

	As used in this section and in R.S.34:15-74, the term "authorized worker" shall mean and include, in addition to an active volunteer fireman and an active volunteer first aid or rescue squad worker, any person performing any public fire duty or public first aid or rescue squad duty, as the same are defined in this section, at the request of the chief or acting chief of a fire company or the president or person in charge of a first aid or rescue squad for the time being.

	A member of a volunteer fire company, active volunteer first aid or rescue squad worker, county fire marshal, assistant county fire marshal, special, reserve or auxiliary policeman or emergency management volunteer serving a volunteer organization duly created and under the control or supervision of any commission, council or any other governing body of any municipality, any board of fire commissioners of that municipality or of any fire district within the State, or of the board of managers of any State institution, who participated in a search and rescue task force or team in response to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 without the authorization of that volunteer organization's governing body and who suffered injury or death as a result of participation in that search and rescue task force or team shall be deemed an employee of this State for the purpose of workers' compensation benefits as would have accrued if the injury or death had occurred in the performance of the duties of the volunteer company or squad of which he was a member.

	Whenever a member of a volunteer fire company, active volunteer first aid or rescue squad worker, county fire marshal, assistant county fire marshal, special, reserve or auxiliary policeman or emergency management volunteer serving a volunteer organization duly created and under the control or supervision of any commission, council or any other governing body of any municipality, any board of fire commissioners of that municipality or of any fire district within the State, or of the board of managers of any State institution, participates in a national, multi-state, State, municipal or regional search and rescue task force or team without the authorization of that volunteer organization's governing body but pursuant to a Declaration of Emergency by the Governor of the State of New Jersey specifically authorizing volunteers to respond immediately to the emergency without requiring the authorization of the volunteer company or squad, and the member of the volunteer fire company, active volunteer first aid or rescue squad worker, county fire marshal, assistant county fire marshal, special, reserve or auxiliary policeman or emergency management volunteer suffers injury or death as a result of participation in that search and rescue task force or team, he shall be deemed an employee of this State for the purpose of workers' compensation benefits as would have accrued if the injury or death had occurred in the performance of the duties of the volunteer company or squad of which he was a member.

	Nothing herein contained shall be construed as affecting or changing in any way the provisions of any statute providing for sick, disability, vacation or other leave for public employees or any provision of any retirement or pension fund provided by law.

	Amended 1946, c.300, s.1; 1948, c.269; 1948, c.430, s.1; 1951, c.211; 1952, c.317; 1953, c.414; 1955, c.102; 1956, c.160, s.2; 1958, c.149, s.1; 1964, c.257, s.1; 1978, c.145, s.1; 1987, c.259, s.3; 1995, c.369, s.5; 1995, c.383, s.1; 1997, c.199, s.2; 1999, c.152, s.51; 1999, c.251, s.2; 2001, c.325, s.1; 2005, c.222, s.33.

34:15-43.2.  Volunteer fire department members;  respiratory diseases; presumption of occupational disease
    Any condition or impairment of health of any member of a volunteer fire department caused by any disease of the respiratory system shall be held and presumed to be an occupational disease unless the contrary be made to appear in  rebuttal by satisfactory proof;  providing

    (a) Such disease develops or first manifests itself during a period while such member is an active member of such department;  and

    (b) Said member, upon entering said volunteer fire service, has or shall have undergone a medical examination, which examination failed or fails to disclose the presence of such disease or diseases;  and

    (c) Such disease develops or first manifests itself within 90 days from the  event medically determined to be the cause thereof.

    Any present member who did not undergo a medical examination upon entering said volunteer fire service, may undergo such examination within 180 days after  the effective date of this act and in the event such examination does not  disclose the presence of such disease or diseases, he shall thereafter be entitled to the benefits of this act.

     L.1964, c. 291, s. 1.  Amended by L.1965, c. 65, s. 1.

34:15-43.3.  Time of development or first manifestation of respiratory disease
    For the purposes herein expressed, the time of development or first manifestation of such disease or diseases shall only be determined by and run from the date of first notice of the existence of such disease or diseases to such member by a physician, or the date of death as a result of such disease or  diseases.

     L.1964, c. 291, s. 2.

34:15-43.4.  Maximum benefits for volunteers 
    A person participating under the supervision of the Palisades Interstate Park Commission, in a volunteer program in that part of the Palisades Interstate Park located in New Jersey, who is deemed to be an employee of this State under R.S. 32:14-4 for the purpose of receiving workers' compensation coverage, is eligible for compensation for injury or death, or both, under chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes, based upon a weekly salary or compensation conclusively presumed to be received by this person in an amount sufficient to entitle him, or, in the event of his death, his dependents, to receive the maximum compensation available under chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes. 

   L. 1987, c. 259, s. 4. 

34:15-44.  Names of public employees carried on pay roll
    When any payment of compensation under this chapter shall be due to any public employee, the name of the injured employee, or in case of his death, the  names of the persons to whom payment is to be made as his dependents, shall be  carried upon the pay roll, and payment shall be made in the same manner and  from the same source in which and from which the wages of the injured employee  were paid.  In event that any extraordinary payment larger than the weekly rate  of compensation shall be due, such payment shall be made from any fund  available for the maintenance or incidental expenses of the institution,  department, board or governing body under and by which the employee was  employed.

34:15-45.    Guardian's powers  
     34:15-45. In any case where a person under the age of twenty-one years shall be entitled to receive any compensation or distributive share under this chapter any duly authorized guardian of the person and property of such person appointed by the surrogate or by the Superior Court, shall be authorized and empowered to act for such person to the same extent as a duly appointed guardian ad litem appointed by any court of this State and shall have the right and authority to compromise and make composition in behalf of such person of any disputed claim for compensation arising under this chapter; provided the terms of such compromise or composition shall be approved by an order of the Division of Workers' Compensation upon presentation of the facts and terms thereof to the division, before the same shall become effective.  

    Amended 1953,c.33,s.53; 1991,c.91,s.360.  

34:15-46.    Parent to act as guardian  
     34:15-46. In case a person under the age of twenty-one years shall be entitled to receive a sum or sums amounting, in the aggregate, to not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) as compensation for injuries, or as a distributive share under this chapter, the father, mother or natural guardian upon whom said person shall be dependent for support shall be authorized and empowered to receive and receipt for such moneys to the same extent as a guardian of the person and property of such person duly appointed by the surrogate of the county in which such person resides or by the Superior Court. The release or discharge of such father, mother or natural guardian shall be a full and complete discharge of all claims or demands of the said person thereunder.  

    Amended 1953,c.33,s.54; 1991,c.91,s.361.  

34:15-48.  Representative appointed for compensation beneficiary
    The commissioner and each deputy commissioner of compensation is hereby authorized and empowered when in his judgment it shall be advisable, to appoint  a representative with power to act for a person who may be entitled to  compensation, by legally receiving and disbursing said compensation under the  direction of the commissioner or any deputy commissioner of compensation, when  it shall appear that such person is mentally, legally or physically unable to  properly receive or disburse said compensation, or when said person, after due  diligence, cannot be located.  Whenever the person entitled to compensation is  a minor child, and the commissioner or any deputy commissioner of compensation  shall determine that there is no proper person available to receive and  disburse said compensation for such child, then the State Board of Children's  Guardians, as constituted by the provisions of chapter five, of Title  Institutions and Agencies (s. 30:5-1 et seq.), may be appointed as the  representative of such minor child.

     Amended by L.1947, c. 31, p. 85, s. 1.

34:15-49  Jurisdiction of division; salaries, qualifications, tenure of judges, etc.

	34:15-49. a. The Division of Workers' Compensation shall have the exclusive original jurisdiction of all claims for workers' compensation benefits under this chapter.  The judges of the Division of Workers' Compensation shall hereinafter be appointed on a bipartisan basis by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate, to initial terms of three years at an annual salary, for the first year, in an amount equal to 75% of the annual salary of a Judge of the Superior Court.  During the initial three-year term, each judge shall be subject to a program of evaluation developed by the Director of the Division of Workers' Compensation.  Upon receipt of a satisfactory annual evaluation from the director, the annual salary of a nontenured judge shall be increased to 78 2/3% of the annual salary of a Judge of the Superior Court after one year; 81 2/3% of the annual salary of a Judge of the Superior Court after two years; and, after three years and upon tenure as provided pursuant to the provisions of this section, the annual salary of a tenured judge of compensation shall be 85% of the annual salary of a Judge of the Superior Court. Reappointment of a judge shall be by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate.  The director's evaluations shall be made available to the Senate Judiciary Committee if the candidate has been renominated by the Governor.  Upon confirmation after the initial three-year term, a judge of the Division of Workers' Compensation shall have tenure, and shall serve during good behavior.  All judges of compensation appointed prior to the effective date of P.L.1991, c.513 shall continue to have tenure and shall continue to serve during good behavior.  The annual salary of the director shall be 89% of the annual salary of a Judge of the Superior Court.  The Chief Judge of Compensation shall be the Director of the Division of Workers' Compensation and may be known as the Director/Chief Judge of the division.

	In addition to salary, a judge of compensation regularly assigned as an administrative supervisory judge of compensation by the director shall receive additional compensation of $2,500 per annum during the period of such assignment; and a judge of compensation regularly assigned as a supervising judge of compensation by the director shall receive additional compensation of $1,500 per annum during the period of such assignment.

	Judges of compensation shall not engage in the practice of law, shall devote full time to their judicial duties, and shall have been licensed attorneys in the State of New Jersey for 10 years prior to their appointments.  The director of the division shall have the same qualifications for appointment and be subject to the same restrictions as a judge of compensation.

	All judges of compensation shall be retired upon attaining the age of 70 years, except that any judge of compensation who has retired on pension or retirement allowance may, with the judge's consent, be recalled by the Director /Chief Judge of the Division of Workers' Compensation for service as a recalled judge in the Division of Workers' Compensation. No recalled judge shall serve beyond his 80th birthday.

 	Upon such recall the retired judge shall have all the powers of a judge of compensation and shall be paid a per diem allowance fixed by the Director/Chief Judge of the Division of Workers' Compensation.  In addition the recalled judge shall be reimbursed for reasonable expenses actually incurred by him in connection with his assignment and shall be provided with such facilities as may be required in the performance of his duties. Such per diem compensation and expenses shall be paid by the State. Payment for services and expenses shall be made in the same manner as payment is made to the judges of the Division of Workers' Compensation from which he retired.

	b.	An increase in an annual salary of a judge or the director under subsection a. of this section that results due to the increase in the salary of a Judge of the Superior Court provided in N.J.S.2B:2-4 as amended in section 1 of P.L.1995, c.424 (N.J.S.2B:2-4) shall not be granted until July 1, 1996.

	Amended 1941, c.194; 1969, c.252, s.2; 1973, c.313; 1977, c.314; 1979, c.368; 1991, c.513, s.1; 1995, c.424, s.3; 1999, c.380, s.7; 2005, c.6, s.3.

34:15-49.1.  Referees designated judges of compensation 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of R.S. 34:15-49 to the contrary, referees of formal hearings in the Division of Workers' Compensation who have been so employed for a period of 10 years or more and who have been attorneys at law of this State for a period of 10 years or more, are hereby designated judges of compensation and shall commence service as judges of compensation upon the effective date of this act at the first step in salary range 39 of the appropriate compensation plan adopted by the Civil Service Commission in accordance with chapter 8 of Title 11 of the Revised Statutes. 

   L.1981, c. 353, s. 1, eff. Dec. 26, 1981. 

34:15-49.2  Inapplicability of mandatory retirement for worker's compensation judges, certain.

	18.	The mandatory retirement provisions implemented pursuant to this act, P.L.1999, c.380 (C.52:14-15.115 et al.), shall be inapplicable for three years after the effective date of this act to any judge of the Division of Workers' Compensation who is in service on the effective date of this act.


	L.1999,c.380,s.18.

34:15-49.3  Certain worker's compensation judges permitted to work beyond age 70.

	20.	Notwithstanding the provisions of this act, P.L.1999, c.380 (C.52:14-15.115 et al.), to the contrary, any judge of the Division of Workers' Compensation who is 60 years of age or older on the effective date of this act shall be permitted to continue service as a judge until attaining 10 years of service under the "Public Employees' Retirement System Act," P.L.1954, c.84 (C.43:15A-1et seq.).

	L.1999,c.380,s.20.

34:15-50.  Approval and filing of agreement
    Whenever an employer or his insurance carrier and an injured employee, or the dependents of a deceased employee, shall, by agreement, duly signed, settle  upon and determine the compensation due to the injured employee, or to the  dependents of a deceased employee, as provided by law, the employer or the  insurance carrier shall forthwith file with the bureau a true copy of the agreement.  The agreement shall not bind the employer or injured employee, or the dependents of a deceased employee, unless approved by the bureau.  If an agreement for lawful and adequate compensation, approved by the bureau, is not filed within twenty-one days after the date of the happening of the injury, the  bureau shall, so far as practicable, endeavor to bring about a settlement of  the pending claim.  If no petition is filed by the injured employee, or the  dependents of a deceased employee, the bureau may institute an inquiry on its  own motion, to determine the reasons for the failure to agree as to compensation, and may, either before or after the institution of the inquiry, with the consent of the injured employee, or the dependents of a deceased employee, file a petition for compensation.  When such petition is filed by said bureau, on its own initiative, the subsequent proceedings shall be the same as is hereinafter set forth in cases where the claimant files a petition.

34:15-51.  Filing of petition; two year limit
	34:15-51.  Every claimant for compensation under Article 2 of this chapter (R.S. 34:15-7 et seq.) shall, unless a settlement is effected or a petition filed under the provisions of R.S. 34:15-50, submit to the Division of Workers' Compensation a petition filed and verified in a manner prescribed by regulation, within two years after the date on which the accident occurred, or in case an agreement for compensation has been made between the employer and the claimant, then within two years after the failure of the employer to make payment pursuant to the terms of such agreement; or in case a part of the compensation has been paid by the employer, then within two years after the last payment of compensation except that repair or replacement of prosthetic devices shall not be construed to extend the time for filing of a claim petition.  A payment, or agreement to pay by the insurance carrier, shall for the purpose of this section be deemed payment or agreement by the employer.  The petition shall state the respective addresses of the petitioner and of the defendant, the facts relating to employment at the time of injury, the injury in its extent and character, the amount of wages received at the time of injury, the knowledge of the employer or notice of the occurrence of the accident, and such other facts as may be necessary and proper for the information of the division and shall state the matter or matters in dispute and the contention of the petitioner with reference thereto.  A paper copy of the petition shall be verified by the oath or affirmation of the petitioner.  Proceedings on behalf of an infant shall be instituted and prosecuted by a guardian, guardian ad litem, or next friend, and payment, if any, shall be made to the guardian, guardian ad litem, or next friend.  The division shall prepare and print forms of petitions and shall furnish assistance to claimants in the preparation of such petitions, when requested so to do.

	Amended 1979, c.283, s.14; 2001, c.94, s.1.

34:15-52.  Copy of petition forwarded to employer
	34:15-52.  Within five days after the filing of the petition or as soon thereafter as is practicable, the Division of Workers' Compensation shall cause a copy of the petition to be forwarded to the employer.  The copy shall include a notice directing the employer to file an answer thereto with the division within 30 days after the notice is forwarded, unless the division for good cause shall grant further time, which answer shall give the address of the respondent, and admit or deny the substantial averments of the petition, and shall state the contention of the defendant with reference to the matters in dispute as disclosed by the petition.  The answer shall be verified by the oath or affirmation of the respondent, and shall be filed in a manner prescribed by regulation.

	Amended 1979, c.283, s.15; 2001, c.94, s.2.

34:15-53.  Time, place and notice of hearing;  adjournment
    Within 20 days after the filing of an answer, or the expiration of the time  for filing an answer if no answer is filed, the secretary of the division shall  fix a time and place for hearing the petition, or shall send the petition and  answer or a transcript of the petition and answer to the director, a deputy  director or 1 of the referees, in which case such director, deputy director or  referee, within 20 days after the filing of the answer, shall fix a time and  place for the hearing of the petition. Such time shall be not less than 4  weeks nor more than 6 weeks after the filing of the petition, provided however,  that in cases where the extent of permanent disability, total or partial, is an  issue, the determination of such issue shall be deferred as provided in section  34:15-16 of this Title. The petition shall be heard either in the county in  which the injury occurred or in which the petitioner or respondent resides, or  in which the respondent's place of business is located, or in which the  respondent may be served with process. When a time and place has been fixed  for such hearing, the director, deputy director or the referee to whom the  cause has been referred shall give at least 10 days' notice to each party of  the time and place of hearing.  The director, deputy director or any referee to  whom a cause has been referred, shall have power to adjourn the hearing thereof from time to time in his discretion.

     Amended by L.1945, c. 74, p. 394, s. 14;  L.1956, c. 141, p. 578, s. 7.

34:15-54.  Dismissal of petition;  notice;  reinstatement
    No petition shall be dismissed for want of prosecution or for failure to formally adjourn the cause, until after notice shall be served by the respondent on the petitioner or his attorney that unless the cause is moved for  hearing within one month from the date of the service thereof, the claim will  be considered abandoned and the petition dismissed subject, however, to the  right to have the petition reinstated for good cause shown, upon application  made to the deputy commissioner before whom the matter was heard or to the  Commissioner of Labor within one year thereafter.  No claim heretofore made  shall be considered abandoned because the petition was dismissed under this  section, if such petition has been reinstated for good cause shown, and such  petition shall be deemed to have been dismissed without prejudice to further  proceedings upon said petition, and further proceedings thereon shall be as  effective as though said petition had not been dismissed.

     Amended by L.1947, c. 267, p. 968, s. 1.

34:15-54.1.  Referee's powers as to dismissal of petitions for want of prosecution and reinstatement;  discontinuances
    Any referee designated as a  "referee, formal hearings,"  shall have the same power as a deputy director in respect to the dismissal of formal petitions  for want of prosecution and reinstatement thereof in accordance with the  provisions of section 34:15-54 of the Revised Statutes, and the approval of  discontinuances of formal petitions.

     L.1952, c. 269, p. 921, s. 7.

34:15-55.  Service of papers
    It shall be sufficient service of any paper, except the original notice to the defendant, if the same is sent by registered mail, addressed to the petitioner at the address contained in the petition, or to the defendant at the  address contained in the answer.

34:15-55.1.  Secretary of workmen's compensation bureau as agent for service  of process on nonresidents;  method and effect of service; continuances
    Any employer, not a resident of this State, or any employer not licensed to  do business in this State, or any resident employer who becomes a nonresident  of this State after the occurrence of an injury to an employee, who shall  employ or who shall have employed any person to perform work, labor or services  within this State shall be deemed by the accepting of the privilege of engaging  in such work, labor and services by his or its employees to make, constitute  and appoint the secretary of the workmen's compensation bureau as his or its  agent for the acceptance of process in any proceeding by any such employee or  dependent or representative of such employee, under and by virtue of this  chapter;  and the acceptance of such privilege or the entering into this State  for the purpose of engaging in such employment shall be a signification of such  employer that any such process issued against him or it, which is so served,  shall be of the same legal force and validity as if served upon him or it  personally.

    Service of such process shall be made by leaving a copy of the petition with  the secretary of the bureau, or some one designated by him in his office, and  such service shall be sufficient service upon such nonresident employer;   provided, that notice of such service and a copy of the petition are forthwith  sent by registered mail to the respondent to the address stated in such  petition, by the secretary of the bureau, or such person acting for him in his  office, and the respondent's return receipt and the affidavit of the secretary  of the bureau, or such person in his office acting for him, of the compliance  therewith are appended to such petition and filed in the office of the  secretary of the bureau wherein such action may be pending; provided, also,  that the date of the mailing and the date of the receipt of the return card  aforesaid are properly indorsed on such petition and signed by the secretary of  the bureau, or some one acting for him.

    The workmen's compensation bureau in which such action is pending may order  such continuance as may be necessary to afford the respondent a reasonable  opportunity to defend the action.  The secretary of the bureau shall keep a  record of all such processes which shall show the day and hour of such  service.

    This section shall be construed to extend the right of service of process upon nonresidents and shall not be construed as limiting any provisions for the  service of process now or hereafter existing.

     Amended by L.1945, c. 74, p. 394, s. 15.

34:15-56.  Rules of evidence
    At such hearing evidence, exclusive of ex parte affidavits, may be produced  by both parties, but the official conducting the hearing shall not be bound by  the rules of evidence.

34:15-57.  Summary hearing;  power to modify and commute award, determination and rule for judgment or order approving settlement
    The commissioner, the director, and each deputy director, is hereby authorized to hear and determine the matters in dispute in a summary manner, and each shall have power to modify any award of compensation, determination and rule for judgment or order approving settlement and to provide for the commutation of any such award, determination and rule for judgment or order approving settlement.

     Amended by L.1952, c. 269, p. 919, s. 3.

34:15-57a.     Notice of unemployment compensation, conditions  
   3.     The Division of Workers' Compensation shall provide notice to each individual receiving compensation under the provisions of the workers' compensation law (chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes), explaining the conditions under which the individual may receive unemployment compensation pursuant to this 1991 amendatory and supplementary act.  

  L.1991,c.486,s.3  

34:15-57.1.  Reimbursement of benefits paid under Temporary Disability Benefits Law
    Whenever an employee becomes entitled to or is awarded compensation for temporary disability pursuant to chapter fifteen of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes for the same weeks or period with respect to which he has received disability benefits pursuant to the Temporary Disability Benefits Law (P.L.1948, c. 110), the Deputy Directors or Referees of the Division of Workmen's Compensation are authorized to incorporate in such award, order, or approval of settlement, an order requiring the employer or his insurance carrier to reimburse the Division of Employment Security of the New Jersey Department of Labor and Industry, the employer involved in the claim under chapter fifteen of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes, or his insurance carrier, as the case may be, the amount of any disability benefits it may have paid to such employee.

     L.1950, c. 174, p. 402, s. 1.

34:15-57.2.  Inquiry as to other payments received before paying compensation;  proof of amounts paid
    Whenever an employer or his insurance carrier involved in the claim under chapter fifteen of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes shall receive written notice from the Division of Employment Security of the New Jersey Department of  Labor and Industry that disability benefits have been paid to an employee as a  result of an accident or sickness for which the said employee may be entitled  to benefits under chapter fifteen of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes, such  employer or his insurance carrier, as the case may be, shall, before making any  payment on account of any pending award, order, or settlement under said  chapter fifteen of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes, inquire of the employee as  to whether or not he has received disability benefits by reason of the same  accident or sickness and advise the Division of Employment Security of the New  Jersey Department of Labor and Industry or the employer who made payment of the  disability benefits, or his insurance carrier, as the case may be, of the  result of such inquiry.

    In proceedings before the Division of Workmen's Compensation, it shall be the duty of the employer against whom claim is made under chapter fifteen of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes, and his insurance carrier, if any, to present, at any hearing involving a workmen's compensation claim affected by this act, sufficient proof as to the amounts paid under the Temporary Disability Benefits Law (P.L.1948, c. 110), for which reimbursement is allowable in pursuance of the provisions of the Temporary Disability Benefits Law (P.L.1948, c. 110), such proof to be furnished by the Division of Employment Security of the New Jersey Department of Labor and Industry, the employer who made payment of the disability benefits or his insurance carrier, as the case may be.

     L.1950, c. 174, p. 402, s. 2.

34:15-57.3.  Effective date
    This act shall take effect on the first day of July, one thousand nine hundred and fifty.

     L.1950, c. 174, p. 403, s. 3.

34:15-57.4  Workers' compensation fraud, crime of fourth degree; civil liability.

	1. a. A person shall be guilty of a crime of the fourth degree if the person purposely or knowingly:

	(1)	Makes, when making a claim for benefits pursuant to R.S.34:15-1 et seq., a false or misleading statement, representation or submission concerning any fact that is material to that claim for the purpose of wrongfully obtaining the benefits;

	(2)	Makes a false or misleading statement, representation or submission, including a misclassification of employees, or engages in a deceptive leasing practice, for the purpose of evading the full payment of benefits or premiums pursuant to R.S.34:15-1 et seq.; or

	(3)	Coerces, solicits or encourages, or employs or contracts with a person to coerce, solicit or encourage, any individual to make a false or misleading statement, representation or submission concerning any fact that is material to a claim for benefits, or the payment of benefits or premiums, pursuant to R.S.34:15-1 et seq. for the purpose of wrongfully obtaining the benefits or of evading the full payment of the benefits or premiums.

	b.	Any person who wrongfully obtains benefits or evades the full payment of benefits or premiums by means of a violation of the provisions of subsection a. of this section shall be civilly liable to any person injured by the violation for damages and all reasonable costs and attorney fees of the injured person.

	c. (1) If a person purposely or knowingly makes, when making a claim for benefits pursuant to R.S.34:15-1 et seq., a false or misleading statement, representation or submission concerning any fact which is material to that claim for the purpose of obtaining the benefits, the division may order the immediate termination or denial of benefits with respect to that claim and a forfeiture of all rights of compensation or payments sought with respect to the claim.

	(2)	Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and in addition to any other remedy available under law, if that person has received benefits pursuant to R.S.34:15-1 et seq. to which the person is not entitled, he is liable to repay that sum plus simple interest to the employer or the carrier or have the sum plus simple interest deducted from future benefits payable to that person, and the division shall issue an order providing for the repayment or deduction.

	(3)	Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and in addition to any other remedy available under law, a person who evades the full payment of premiums pursuant to R.S.34:15-1 et seq. or improperly denies or delays benefits pursuant to R.S.34:15-1 et seq. is liable to pay the sum due and owing plus simple interest.

	d.	Nothing in this section shall preclude, if the evidence so warrants, indictment and conviction for a violation of any provision of chapter 20, 21 or 28 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes or any other law. For the purpose of this section,"purposely," "knowingly" and "purposely or knowingly" have the same meaning as is provided in chapter 2 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes.

	L.1998,c.74,s.1.

34:15-58.    Judgment and settlement filed, receipts, bar of judgment  
     34:15-58. A statement containing the date and place of hearing, together with the decision, award, determination and rule for judgment or the order approving settlement, shall be legibly written in ink or typewritten and filed in the office of the secretary at Trenton, by the officer hearing such cause, which statement, together with the petition and answer, shall constitute the record of the cause. A copy of the decision, award, determination and rule for judgment or order approving settlement, if same results in an award to the petitioner, shall, as soon as practicable after the same is rendered, be filed in the office of the clerk of the county in which the hearing was held, and when so filed, shall have the same effect and may be collected and docketed in the same manner as judgments rendered in causes tried in the Superior Court. The employer may once every month file receipt of payment, verified by affidavit that the receipts are accurate and true, with the clerk of the court, which shall be entered in satisfaction of the award, determination and rule for judgment or order approving settlement, to the extent of such payments. The official conducting the hearing shall, within fifteen days after the rendering of the award, determination and rule for judgment or order approving settlement, mail to each of the parties a statement of the substance of the award, determination and rule for judgment or order approving settlement, or a copy of such award, determination and rule for judgment or order approving settlement. The decision, award, determination and rule for judgment or order approving settlement shall be final and conclusive between the parties and shall bar any subsequent action or proceeding, unless reopened by the Division of Workers' Compensation or appealed as hereinafter provided. 

    Amended 1952,c.269,s.4; 1991,c.91,s.362.  

34:15-59.  Docket;  records
    The secretary of the bureau shall keep a docket in which shall be entered the title of each cause, the date of the determination thereof, the date of appeal, if any, and the date on which the record in case of appeal was transmitted to the appellant.  The secretary shall also file the record of each  case left with him by the official conducting the hearing, and shall keep a  card index of such record in such manner as to afford ready reference thereto.   Such records shall be open to the inspection of the public.

34:15-60.    Subpoenas, fees, contempt  
     34:15-60. The director, each deputy director and each of the referees shall have the same power as the Superior Court to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers. The fees for the attendance of witnesses shall be such as are now provided for the attendance of witnesses in other civil cases, and shall be paid by the party arranging for the attendance of such witnesses. The subpoenas shall be authenticated by the seal of the department, and either party to any such proceeding may, without charge, secure subpoenas from the director, a deputy director or any referee. Misconduct on the part of any person attending a hearing, or the failure of any witness, when duly subpoenaed to attend or give testimony shall be punishable by the director, each deputy director and each of the referees, in the same manner as such failure is punishable by the Superior Court in a case therein pending.  

    Amended 1939,c.291; 1953,c.33,s.55; 1991,c.91,s.363.  

34:15-61.  Administering oaths;  perjury
    The commissioner, each deputy commissioner and each referee shall have power  to administer oaths.  Any person who, having been sworn as a witness in any  such proceeding, shall willfully give false testimony shall be guilty of perjury.

34:15-62.  Public hearings
    All hearings conducted under this chapter shall be open to the public.

34:15-63.  No filing fees
    Neither party shall pay any fees for filing any papers with the division or  with the secretary thereof, and the clerk of any county shall file any papers  required by this chapter to be filed with him without the payment of any fee.

     Amended by L.1941, c. 167, p. 531, s. 1;  L.1957, c. 100, p. 195, s. 1.

34:15-64  Rules, regulations, fees for witnesses, attorneys.
	34:15-64. a. The commissioner, director and the judges of compensation may make such rules and regulations for the conduct of the hearing not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as may, in the commissioner's judgment, be necessary.  The official conducting any hearing under this chapter may allow to the party in whose favor judgment is entered, costs of witness fees and a reasonable attorney fee, not exceeding 25 percent of the judgment; and a reasonable fee not exceeding $400 for any one witness, except that the following fees may be allowed for a medical witness:
 
	(1) (a) A fee of not more than $1,000 paid to an evaluating physician for an opinion regarding the need for medical treatment or for an estimation of permanent disability, if the physician provides the opinion or estimation in a written report; and
 
	(b) An additional fee of not more than $400 paid to the evaluating physician who makes a court appearance to give testimony; or
 
	(2) (a) A fee of not more than $450 paid to a treating physician for the preparation and submission of a report including the entire record of treatment, medical history, opinions regarding diagnosis, prognosis, causal relationships between the treated condition and the claim, the claimant's ability to return to work with or without restrictions, what, if any, restrictions are appropriate, and the anticipated date of return to work, and any recommendations for further treatment; and
 
	(b) (i) An additional fee of not more than $300 per hour, with the total amount not to exceed $2,500, paid to the treating physician who gives testimony concerning causal relationship, ability to work or the need for treatment; or
 
	(ii) An additional fee of not more than $300 per hour, with the total amount not to exceed $1,500, paid to the treating physician who gives a deposition concerning causal relationship, ability to work or the need for treatment.
 
	b. (1) No fee for an evaluating physician pursuant to this section shall be contingent on whether a judgment or award is or is not made in favor of the petitioner.
 
	(2) No evaluating or treating physician shall charge any fee for a report, testimony or deposition in excess of the amount permitted pursuant to the provisions of this section.
 
	(3) A psychologist, nurse practitioner, or licensed clinical social worker who provides psychological treatment may be paid a fee, as permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section, for a report or testimony concerning that provider's course of treatment of the injured worker in that provider's role as a provider of treatment.
 
	c.	A fee shall be allowed at the discretion of the judge of compensation when, in the official's judgment, the services of an attorney and medical witnesses are necessary for the proper presentation of the case.  In determining a reasonable fee for medical witnesses, the official shall consider (1) the time, personnel, and other cost factors required to conduct the examination; (2) the extent, adequacy and completeness of the medical evaluation; (3) the objective measurement of bodily function and the avoidance of the use of subjective complaints; and (4) the necessity of a court appearance of the medical witness.  When, however, at a reasonable time, prior to any hearing compensation has been offered and the amount then due has been tendered in good faith or paid within 26 weeks from the date of the notification to the employer of an accident or an occupational disease or the employee's final active medical treatment or within 26 weeks after the employee's return to work whichever is later or within 26 weeks after employer's notification of the employee's death, the reasonable allowance for an attorney fee shall be based upon the amount of compensation, theretofore offered, tendered in good faith or paid after the establishment of an attorney-client relationship pursuant to a written agreement, and the amount of the judgment or award in excess of the amount of compensation, theretofore offered.  When the amount of the judgment is less than $200, an attorney fee may be allowed not in excess of $50.
 
	d.	All counsel fees of claimants' attorneys for services performed in matters before the Division of Workers' Compensation, whether or not allowed as part of a judgment, shall be first approved by the judge of compensation before payment.  Whenever a judgment or award is made in favor of a petitioner, the judges of compensation or referees of formal hearings shall direct amounts to be deducted for the petitioner's expenses and to be paid directly to the persons entitled to the same, the remainder to be paid directly to the petitioner.
 
	amended 1945, c.74, s.16; 1952, c.318; 1979, c.283, s.16; 1981, c.414, s.1; 1995, c.303; 2002, c.112; 2015, c.216; 2018, c.105; 2023, c.114; 2024, c.55.

34:15-65.  Deposition of absent witness
    The deposition of a witness whose attendance before said bureau cannot be secured by reason of his absence from the State, or by reason of his physical inability to attend the hearing may be taken upon order of the official to whom  said cause has been referred.  In any such case the procedure for taking such  depositions shall conform as nearly as practicable with the procedure for  taking depositions in the Superior Court.

     Amended by L.1953, c. 33, p. 598, s. 56.

34:15-66.  Appeal;  costs
    Any party may appeal from the judgment of a judge of compensation to the Appellate Division of the Superior Court, which appeal shall be taken in accordance with the rules of court.  The judgment entered in any court on any such appeal shall be conclusive and binding, and proceedings thereon shall only  be for the recovery of moneys thereby determined to be due. Nothing herein  contained shall be construed as limiting the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.   Costs may be awarded in accordance with the rules of any court to which an  appeal is taken.

     Amended by L.1945, c. 74, p. 397, s. 17;  L.1953, c. 33, p. 598, s. 57; L.1956, c. 141, p. 579, s. 8;  L.1971, c. 463, s. 1, eff. March 2, 1972.

34:15-66.1.  Judgment docketed;  execution;  supplementary proceedings
    Any judgment entered in the Appellate Division of the Superior Court pursuant to the provisions of section 34:15-66 of this Title may be entered and  docketed in the Law Division of the Superior Court, and shall thenceforward  operate as a judgment recovered in that court as in any other case.  Upon  failure to comply with the original order for compensation the court may order  that the entire amount of compensation shall become due immediately, and  execution may issue upon proof of such failure for the entire amount of  compensation, without discount or commutation. Supplementary proceedings in  aid of execution may be resorted to upon a judgment so entered and docketed and  becoming due in whole, as in any other case.

     Amended by L.1971, c. 463, s. 2, eff. March 2, 1972.

34:15-68.  Physical examination of employee
    In all cases where it shall be necessary to make a physical examination of an employee in an inquiry to award compensation, the examination shall be made by a physician who is the same sex as the employee if so requested by the employee.

     Amended by L.1980, c. 90, s. 10.

34:15-69.  Copy of judgment to be filed with director
    Whenever any judgment is entered in the Appellate Division of the Superior Court upon any matter arising under the provisions of this chapter the clerk of  the Appellate Division of the Superior Court shall forthwith forward to the  director a copy of the judgment, which need not be certified and for which no  charge shall be made.

     Amended by L.1953, c. 33, p. 599, s. 60;  L.1971, c. 463, s. 3, eff. March 2,  1972.

34:15-69.1.  Discontinuance or sale of business;  discharge of employer from  further liability;  assumption of obligations by third party
    Whenever any employer has discontinued his business or sold or otherwise disposed of the greater part of his business or assets, the division may, upon application to the commissioner or any deputy director by any party to an award, upon 10 days' written notice to all other parties, and after hearing, order such employer discharged from further liability for such award, provided that said commissioner or deputy director finds that a third party has filed with the division a satisfactory undertaking in writing assuming all obligations of such award and the claim or claims upon which it is based in lieu of and in place of such employer and provided further that such third party either is an employer operating under section 34:15-77 of this Title or has filed with the division a certificate signed by the Commissioner of Banking  and Insurance certifying that such third party meets all requirements to become  an employer operating under said section, or is a stock company or mutual  association authorized to write workmen's compensation or employer's liability  insurance in this State.

     L.1956, c. 209, p. 749, s. 1.

34:15-69.2.  Order; filing; effect  
     2.   Such order shall by its terms discharge the employer from any and all claims, demands or liabilities whatsoever for or on account of such an award or the claim or claims upon which it is based and shall substitute such third party as the respondent, obligor and debtor of and on account of such award, the claim or claims upon which it is based and any and all claims, demands or liabilities whatsoever arising therefrom. The employee or the dependents of the employee or the personal representatives thereof shall have no further recourse whatsoever against such employer, but shall have and retain all their rights against such third party as though he were the employer against whom the award was originally entered. Such order shall be filed in the office of the secretary in Trenton in accordance with section 34:15-58 of this Title, and shall constitute part of the record in the cause, and a copy of such order shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the county in which the original award was filed, shall be indexed and cross-indexed by said clerk to said original award and, when so filed and indexed and cross-indexed to such award, shall have the same effect as to such third party and may be collected and docketed in the same manner as judgments rendered in causes tried in the Superior Court.  

    L.1956,c.209,s.2; amended 1991,c.91,s.364.  

34:15-69.3.  Applicability of provisions of Title to third party assuming obligations
    All provisions of this Title not inconsistent herewith shall thenceforth apply as against such third party with the same force and effect as though such  third party were the party against whom the original award was entered.

     L.1956, c. 209, p. 750, s. 3.

34:15-70.  Short title
    This article may be cited as the  "employers' liability insurance law" .

34:15-71.  Employer's obligation to injured employee
    Every employer, except the state or a municipality, county or school district, who is now or hereafter becomes subject to the provisions of article 2 of this chapter (s. 34:15-7 et seq.), as therein provided, shall forthwith make sufficient provision for the complete payment of any obligation which he may incur to an injured employee, or his dependents under the provisions of said article 2, by one of the methods hereinafter set forth in sections 34:15-77 and 34:15-78 of this title.

34:15-72.  Employers not electing benefits of compensation law required to insure
    In like manner every employer except the state or a municipality, county or  school district who is now or hereafter becomes subject to the provisions of  article 1 of this chapter (s. 34:15-1 et seq.) shall forthwith make sufficient  provision for the complete payment of any obligation which he may incur to an  injured employee or his administrators or next of kin under said article 1 of  this chapter.

34:15-73.  Proof of compliance
    On demand of the commissioner of banking and insurance personally or in writing mailed to the post-office address of the employer by registered mail, the employer shall file with such commissioner on forms prescribed by him proof  of compliance with the provisions of this article.

34:15-74.	Compensation insurance provided for certain volunteers by municipality or county
	34:15-74.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the governing body of every municipality and the committee of every fire district shall provide compensation insurance for special, reserve or auxiliary policemen doing volunteer public police duty, for volunteer firemen doing public fire duty and volunteer first aid and emergency squad workers doing public first aid and rescue duty under the control or supervision of any commission, council or other governing body of the municipality or any board of fire commissioners of such municipality or of any fire district, and the board of chosen freeholders shall provide compensation insurance for county fire marshals and assistant county fire marshals, within the meaning of R.S.34:15-43.  Such insurance shall provide compensation for every special, reserve or auxiliary policeman, and for every such fireman or authorized first aid or rescue squad worker or county fire marshal or assistant county fire marshal who shall be a member of any first aid or rescue squad created within the fire company of which he is a member or authorized first aid or rescue squad worker, or composed of members and authorized first aid or rescue squad workers of different fire companies in the same municipality for injuries received while acting in response to any call made upon such squad, for first aid or rescue work, whether such call be made because of a fire or otherwise.

	The provisions of this section shall not require the governing body of any municipality or the committee of any fire district which contributes to the support of a volunteer fire company or volunteer first aid or rescue squad serving said municipality or district but located, or its headquarters maintained, without said municipality or district to provide compensation insurance for the members of said company or squad who are covered by compensation insurance carried by the municipality or district within which said company or squad is located, or its headquarters maintained, whenever evidence of such insurance coverage is supplied to or otherwise obtained by said governing body or committee, nor shall the provisions of this section require the governing body of any municipality or the committee of any fire district to provide compensation insurance whenever evidence that a fire company has obtained its own insurance coverage is provided to the governing body or committee.

	Except as otherwise provided by this section, the governing body of a municipality or county shall provide compensation insurance for each emergency management volunteer registered with and doing emergency management service on behalf of that municipality or county pursuant to P.L.1942, c.251 (C.App. A:9-33 et seq.), unless the governing body provides workers' compensation coverage for each emergency management volunteer and has evidence of such coverage or the governing body has received or obtained proof that workers' compensation insurance coverage for each emergency management volunteer is provided by an emergency management council.

	The provisions of this section shall not require the governing body of a municipality to pay for compensation insurance or make reimbursement of any portion of the expense of medical, surgical or hospital treatment for an emergency management volunteer, if that insurance or reimbursement is being furnished by the United States Government or any agent thereof.

	Amended 1940,c.108; 1946,c.300,s.2; 1948,c.430,s.2; 1952,c.316,s.1; 1953,c.340,s.1; 1958,c.149,s.2; 1964,c.257,s.2; 1978,c.145,s.2; 1995,c.383,s.2.

34:15-74.1.  Compensation insurance by volunteer fire company for volunteer  firemen and volunteer first aid or rescue squad workers
    Any volunteer fire company may provide compensation insurance for member volunteer firemen doing public fire duty and volunteer first aid or rescue squad workers doing public first aid and rescue duty for a first aid or rescue squad organized within such a fire company.  Such insurance shall provide compensation under and by virtue of the article to which this section is a supplement and of article 2, of chapter 15, of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes  for every such fireman or authorized first aid or rescue squad worker who may  be injured in line of duty, as the same is defined in R.S. 34:15-43.

    Evidence of the insurance coverage authorized by this section shall be provided by the fire company to the governing body of any municipality or the committee of any fire district which contributes to the support and maintenance  of such fire company.

     L.1964, c. 257, s. 3, eff. Jan. 1, 1965.

34:15-74.2.  Compensation insurance by board of education for members of board
    Every board of education shall provide compensation insurance for its members covering the performance of their official duties as members of the board and also as members or officers of a county school board federation or of  the State Federation of District Boards of Education.  All payments of compensation to such board members shall be governed by and be subject to the provisions of this chapter.  The premiums therefor shall be paid by the board, and the insurance shall protect such persons from loss by reason of injury or death suffered while in the performance of duty as herein provided.

     L.1967, c. 297, s. 1, eff. Feb. 15, 1968.

34:15-75  Compensation for injury, death for certain volunteers.

	34:15-75.  Compensation for injury and death, either or both, of any volunteer fireman, county fire marshal, assistant county fire marshal, volunteer first aid or rescue squad worker, volunteer driver of any municipally-owned or operated ambulance, forest fire warden or forest fire fighter employed by the State of New Jersey, member of a board of education, special reserve or auxiliary policeman doing volunteer public police duty under the control or supervision of any commission, council or any other governing body of any municipality, emergency management volunteer doing emergency management service, health care workers, public health workers and support services personnel registered with the Emergency Health Care Provider Registry pursuant to section 6 of P.L.2005, c.222 (C.26:13-6) and doing emergency management service for the State, or any volunteer worker for the Division of Parks and Forestry, the Division of Fish and Wildlife, the New Jersey Natural Lands Trust or the New Jersey Historic Trust, shall:

	a.	Be based upon a weekly salary or compensation conclusively presumed to be received by such person in an amount sufficient to entitle him, or, in the event of his death, his dependents, to receive the maximum compensation by this chapter authorized; and

	b.	Not be subject to the seven-day waiting period provided in R.S.34:15-14.

	Amended 1945, c.74, s.18; 1951, c.276; 1952, c.316, s.2; 1953, c.340, s.2; 1967, c.297, s.2; 1978, c.145, s.3; 1995, c.383, s.3; 1997, c.199, s.3; 2001, c.328, s.2; 2005, c.222, s.34.

34:15-76.	Payments to certain volunteers
	34:15-76.  All payments of compensation to volunteer firemen, county fire marshals, assistant county fire marshals, volunteer first aid or rescue squad workers, volunteer drivers of any municipally-owned or operated ambulance, special, reserve or auxiliary policemen doing volunteer public police duty under the control or supervision of any commission, council or any other governing body of any municipality, or emergency management volunteers doing emergency management service, shall be governed by and be subject to the provisions of this chapter.  The premiums therefor shall be paid from the tax levy, and the insurance shall protect such persons from loss by reason of injury or death suffered while engaged in the performance of duty.

	Amended 1952,c.316,s.3; 1953,c.340,s.3; 1978,c.145,s.4; 1995,c.383, s.5.

34:15-77.  Employer carrying own insurance
    Any employer desiring to carry his own liability insurance may make application to the Commissioner of Insurance showing his financial ability to pay compensation.  The commissioner, if satisfied of the applicant's financial ability and the permanence of his business, shall by written order exempt the applicant from insuring the whole or any part of his compensation liability.

    The commissioner may from time to time require any employer exempted as herein provided to furnish further statements of financial ability and if at any time it appears to him that any such employer is no longer financially able  to carry the risk of compensation liability the commissioner shall revoke his  order granting exemption, whereupon the employer shall immediately insure his  liability under this chapter in a mutual association or other insurance company  authorized to engage in workers' compensation in this State.

    Whenever the commissioner is not satisfied with the financial ability and the permanence of the business of an employer exempted as herein provided, or of a new applicant for exemption, he may consider, and shall have the authority  to accept, as evidence of such ability to pay compensation, (a) a guaranty by  the parent corporation of such applicant that said parent corporation will  discharge the applicant's liability under this chapter;  (b) a separate account  or reserve fund, or any deposit thereupon, maintained by an applicant to  discharge his liability under this chapter;  (c) a surety bond executed by an  association or corporation licensed to do business in this State, provided the  surety on any such surety bond undertakes to discharge the applicant's  liability under this chapter;  or (d) a contract of an employer with an  insurance carrier covering liability for a portion of the compensation required  under article 2, chapter 15, Title 34 of the Revised Statutes.

    Any employer or group of employers exempted as herein provided may for its own protection insure its liability for the payment of any stated loss in excess of $100,000.00 by reason of any single accident or by reason of occupational diseases scheduled in this chapter;  provided, that any such contract of insurance shall operate only between the employer or group of employers and its insurance carrier and shall not be subject to any of the provisions of this chapter.

    An application pertaining only to a change of name of a presently exempt employer, without any change in the financial structure of said employer, shall  not be considered as a new application for exemption under this act.

    Pursuant to rules and regulations established by the Commissioner of Insurance, 10 or more employers licensed by the State as hospitals under the "Health Care Facilities Planning Act,"  P.L.1971, c. 136 (C. 26:2H-1 et seq.) may make application to the commissioner for permission to enter into agreements to pool their liabilities under this chapter for the purpose of qualifying as self-insurers.  An employer member of the approved group shall be  classified as a self-insurer.

     Amended by L.1968, c. 311, s. 1, eff. Sept. 26, 1968;  L.1983, c. 376, s. 1, eff. Nov. 10, 1983.

34:15-77.1.  Hospitals;  group self-insurance;  conditions
    With respect to any group of employers licensed by the State as hospitals who adopt a plan for self-insurance for the payment of compensation to their employees, at least the following conditions shall apply:

    a.  Under such group plan, the group shall assume the liability of all the employers within the group under the terms of a trust agreement approved by the  commissioner, and pay all compensation for which the employers are liable under  Title 34 of the Revised Statutes;

    b.  When making application to the commissioner for permission to establish  a group plan for self-insurance, the group shall present satisfactory proof to  the commissioner of its financial ability to pay such compensation for the  employers who are members of the group, including a statement of the group's  revenues, their source, and assurance for their continuance;

    c.  If required by the commissioner, the group shall deposit with the commissioner such types and amounts of securities or surety bonds as the commissioner deems necessary to provide assurance that such benefits as are payable by the group will continue to be paid and that the group will meet its statutory obligations;

    d.  The commissioner may require the group to file any and all agreements, contracts, and such other pertinent documents as he may deem necessary relating  to the organization of the employers in the group:

    e.  Each group self-insurer, in its application for self-insurance shall set  forth the names and addresses of each of its officers, directors, trustees, and  general manager.  No officer, director, trustee, or employee of the group  self-insurer may represent or participate directly or indirectly on behalf of  an injured worker or his dependents in any workers' compensation proceeding.

     L.1983, c. 376, s. 2, eff. Nov. 10, 1983.

34:15-77.2.  Liability for compensation prescribed by Title 34; bankruptcy of participating employer
    Any employer licensed by the State as a hospital who participates in group self-insurance shall not be relieved from the liability for compensation prescribed by Title 34 of the Revised Statutes except by the payment thereof by  the group self-insurer or by himself.  The insolvency or bankruptcy of a participating employer shall not relieve the group self-insurer from the payment of compensation for injuries or death sustained by an employee during the time the employer was a participant in such group self-insurance.

     L.1983, c. 376, s. 3, eff. Nov. 10, 1983.

34:15-77.3.  Addition or termination of participating employers; notice
    Such group self-insurer shall promptly notify the commissioner, on a form to  be prescribed by the commissioner, of the addition of any participating employer or employers.  Notice of termination of any participating employer in a group self-insurance plan shall be given to the commissioner at least 10 days  before the effective date of such termination of participation.  Such notice  shall also be sent by registered mail to all other members of the group  self-insurance plan.

     L.1983, c. 376, s. 4, eff. Nov. 10, 1983.

34:15-77.4.  Termination of plan;  surety bond;  insurance policy
    If such a group self-insurance plan is terminated, the securities or surety  bond on deposit with the commissioner shall remain in the custody of the  commissioner for a period of at least 26 months.  At the expiration of such  time or such further period as the commissioner may deem proper and necessary,  he may accept in lieu thereof, and for the additional purpose of securing such  further and future contingent liability as may arise from prior injuries to  workers and be incurred by reason of any change in the condition of such  workers which warrant awards for additional compensation, a policy of insurance  furnished by the group self-insurer, its successor, assigns, or others carrying  on or liquidating such self-insurance group.

     L.1983, c. 376, s. 5, eff. Nov. 10, 1983.

34:15-77.5.  Financial statement;  description of service organizations
    Every such group self-insurer shall, on an annual basis, or as often as the  commissioner deems it necessary, furnish to the commissioner:

    a.  A financial statement of the group's assets and liabilities, the claims  paid during the preceding 12 months, current reserves, incurred losses, and any  other information that the commissioner may require;  and

    b.  A description of the service organizations maintained by the employer or  group for the prevention of injuries and claims administration services.

     L.1983, c. 376, s. 6, eff. Nov. 10, 1983.

34:15-77.6.  Annual examination
    The commissioner may conduct such annual examinations of each such group self-insurer as he deems necessary and proper.

     L.1983, c. 376, s. 7, eff. Nov. 10, 1983.

34:15-77.7.  Denial of application or revocation of consent
    The commissioner shall have the authority to deny the application of any group of self-insurers to pay such benefits, or to revoke his consent for any group continuing to pay for good cause shown, including, but not limited to:

    a.  Failure to comply with regulations adopted by the commissioner or with any provisions of this act;

    b.  Failure to comply with a lawful order of the commissioner;

     c.  Deterioration of financial condition to such an extent that such deterioration would have an adverse affect on the ability of the self-insurance  group to pay expected losses.

     L.1983, c. 376, s. 8, eff. Nov. 10, 1983.

34:15-77.8.  Rules and regulations
    The Commissioner of Insurance shall promulgate such rules and regulations, including appropriate fee schedules, as he deems necessary to effectuate the provisions of this act.

     L.1983, c. 376, s. 9, eff. Nov. 10, 1983.

34:15-78.  Insurance in stock or mutual company;  notice filed by company; domestic help excepted
    Every employer not operating under section 34:15-77 of this title shall insure and keep insured his liability in any stock company or mutual association authorized to engage in workmen's compensation or employer's liability insurance in this State.  If insurance be effected by either method mentioned in this section, the insurance company or mutual association shall file with the commissioner of banking and insurance a notice setting forth the name of the insurance company, its principle office in this State, together with a copy of the policy of insurance and copies of all indorsements attached and such other data in relation thereto as the commissioner of banking and insurance may require except that no such filing shall be required in connection with insurance coverage for domestic servants or household employees  written pursuant to P.L.1979, c.380.

     Amended by L.1979, c. 380, s. 2.

34:15-79  Penalties for failure to carry insurance.
 
	34:15-79.  a.  An employer who fails to provide the protection prescribed in this article, who misrepresents one or more employees as independent contractors, or who provides false, incomplete or misleading information concerning the number of employees , shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense and, if the failure, misrepresentation or provision of false, incomplete or misleading information is knowing, shall be guilty of a crime of the fourth degree, and shall be subject to a stop-work order issued by the Director of the Division of Workers' Compensation pursuant to subsection e. of this section.  In cases where a workers' compensation award in the Division of Workers' Compensation of New Jersey against the defendant is not paid at the time of the sentence, the court may suspend sentence upon that defendant and place him on probation for any period with an order to pay the delinquent compensation award to the claimant through the probation office of the county.  Where the employer is a corporation, any officer who is actively engaged in the corporate business, including, but not limited to, the president, vice-president, secretary, and the treasurer thereof shall be liable for failure to secure the protection prescribed by this article.  Any contractor placing work with a subcontractor shall, in the event of the subcontractor's failing to carry workers' compensation insurance as required by this article, become liable for any compensation which may be due an employee or the dependents of a deceased employee of a subcontractor.  The contractor shall then have a right of action against the subcontractor for reimbursement.
 
	b.	A rebuttable presumption that an employer has established a successor firm, corporation or partnership shall arise if the two share at least three of the following capacities or characteristics: (1) perform similar work; (2) occupy the same premises; (3) have the same telephone or fax number; (4) have the same email address or  Internet website; (5) perform work in the same geographical area; (6) employ substantially the same work force; (7) utilize the same tools and equipment; (8) employ or engage the services of any person or persons involved in the direction or control of the other; or (9) list substantially the same work experience.  If it is determined that an employer has established a successor firm, corporation or partnership, the "uninsured employer's fund" shall have a subrogation right against the successor firm, corporation or partnership for any benefits paid pursuant to R.S.34:15-1 et seq. by the "uninsured employer's fund," the injured worker may seek benefits not otherwise paid or payable by the "uninsured employer's fund" from the successor firm, corporation or partnership, and the successor firm, corporation or partnership shall have all of the same responsibilities regarding workers' compensation required pursuant to R.S.34:15-1 et seq. as the original employer.
 
	c.	Failure to produce at the time of the trial or upon written request by the division proof of workers' compensation insurance coverage by a mutual association or stock company authorized to write coverage on such risks in this State or written authorization by the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance to self-insure for workers' compensation pursuant to R.S.34:15-77, which was in force for the time cited by the division, creates a rebuttable presumption that the employer was uninsured when charged with a violation of this section.
 
	d.	The Director of the Division of Workers' Compensation, or any officer or employee of the division designated by the director, upon finding that an employer has failed for a period of not less than 10 consecutive days to make the provisions for payment of compensation required by R.S.34:15-71 and R.S.34:15-72, shall impose upon that employer, in addition to all other penalties, fines or assessments provided for in chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes or in any supplement thereto, a penalty in the amount of up to $5,000 and when the period exceeds 10 days, an additional penalty of up to $5,000 for each period of 10 days thereafter.  All penalties under this act shall be enforced and collected in accordance with section 12 of P.L.1966, c.126 (C.34:15-120.3).  Failure or refusal to comply with a stop work order issued by the Director of the Division of Workers' Compensation pursuant to subsection e. of this section shall, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, result in the assessment of a penalty of not less than $1,000 and not more than $5,000 for each day found not to be in compliance.  All penalties collected under this section shall be paid into the "uninsured employer's fund."
 
	e.	If the Director of the Division of Workers' Compensation determines, after investigation, that an employer knowingly failed to provide the protection prescribed in this article, knowingly misrepresented one or more employees as independent contractors, or knowingly provided false, incomplete or misleading information concerning the number of employees , the director shall issue, not later than 72 hours after making the determination, a stop-work order requiring the cessation of all business operations of that employer at every site at which the violation occurred.  The order shall take effect when served upon the employer, or, for a particular employer worksite, when served at that worksite.  The order shall remain in effect until the director issues an order releasing the stop-work order upon finding that the employer has come into compliance with the requirements of this section and has paid any penalty assessed under this section.  A stop-work order issued pursuant to this section against an employer shall apply against any successor firm, corporation or partnership of the employer in the same manner that it applies to the employer.  An employer who is subject to a stop-work order shall have the right to apply to the director, not more than 10 days after the order is issued, for a hearing to contest whether the employer committed the violation on which the order was based, and the hearing shall be afforded and a decision rendered within 48 hours of the application.
 
	f.	The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), promulgate rules and regulations necessary to implement the provisions of this section.
 
	Amended 1938, c.130; 1966, c.126, s.8; 1988, c.25, s.13; 1995, c.393, s.1; 2008, c.94, s.1; 2009, c.87.

34:15-79.1  Proof of workers' compensation coverage required with certain annual reports of employers.
  
	1. a. Every corporation, limited partnership, limited liability company, limited liability partnership or other employer required by law to submit an annual report, shall also include valid proof of workers' compensation coverage, if applicable, as part of the annual report.  Without the inclusion of the valid proof of coverage, the annual report is not complete for purposes of filing, the requirement to submit the annual report is not fulfilled, and all requirements concerning the failure to submit the annual report shall apply.
 
	b.	For the purposes of this section, valid proof of current workers' compensation coverage shall be in the form of:
 
	(1)	Documentation of a current order from the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance authorizing the employer to be a self-insured employer pursuant to R.S.34:15-77; or
 
	(2)	A letter from an insurance carrier or verification from the employer which includes the name of the carrier, insurance policy number and date of commencement of coverage under the policy.
 
	L.2008, c.95, s.1.

34:15-80.  Notices of insurance posted
    Every employer who has complied with the provisions of this article shall post and maintain in a conspicuous place or places in and about his place of business, typewritten or printed notices in such form as the commissioner of banking and insurance may prescribe stating that he has secured the payment of compensation to his employees and their dependents in accordance with the provisions of this article and shall name the company or companies insuring his  liability, or shall state that the employer has qualified before the commissioner of banking and insurance for the carrying of his own liability.

34:15-81.  Cancellation of contract;  notice
    Any contract of insurance issued by a stock company or mutual association against liability arising under this chapter may be canceled by either the employer or the insurance carrier within the time limited by such contract for its expiration.

    No such policy shall be deemed to be canceled until:

     a.  At least ten days' notice in writing of the election to terminate such contract is given by registered mail by the party seeking cancellation thereof to the other party thereto;  and

    b.  Until like notice shall be filed in the office of the commissioner of banking and insurance, together with a certified statement that the notice provided for by paragraph  "a"  of this section has been given; and

    c.  Until ten days have elapsed after the filing required by paragraph "b" of this section has been made.

    The provisions  "b"  and  "c"  of this section shall not apply where the employer has replaced the contract to be canceled by other insurance, and notice of such replacement has been filed with the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance.  In such event the notice required by provision  "a"  may, if given by the insurance carrier, recite as the termination date the effective date of the other insurance, and the contract shall be terminated retroactively as of that date.  No notice of cancellation of any such contract need be filed in the  office of the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance where the employer is not  required by any law of this State to effect such insurance.

     Amended by L.1948, c. 58, p. 145, s. 1.

34:15-82.  Liability for injuries or death
    An employer securing the payment of compensation by any of the methods prescribed in section 34:15-78 of this title notwithstanding, shall be liable primarily for the payment of proper compensation for personal injuries or death  sustained by his employees.  The employer shall have recourse for the amount  thereof against his insurance carrier.  But the insurance carrier shall be  directly liable to the injured employee, or his dependents, in event of the  death, insolvency, bankruptcy or other proceedings, as a result of which the  conduct of the employer's business may be and continue to be in the charge of  an executor, administrator, receiver, trustee or assignee.

34:15-83.  Insurance contract for benefit of employees and dependents
    Every contract of insurance covering the liability of an employer for compensation to injured employees or their dependents, written by a stock company or a mutual association, shall provide, or be construed to provide, that it is made for the benefit of the several employees of the insured employer and their dependents, and that such contract may be enforced by any of  such employees or their dependents, suing thereon in his or their names as though distinctly made party thereto.

34:15-84.    Enforcement of provisions  
     34:15-84. Every such contract shall further provide, or be construed to provide, that any injured employee or his dependents may enforce the provisions thereof to his or their benefit, either by agreement with the employer and the insurance carrier, in event that compensation be settled by agreement, or by joining the insurance carrier with the employer in his petition filed for the purpose of enforcing his claim for compensation, or by subsequent application to the Superior Court, upon the failure of the employer, for any reason, to make adequate and continuous compensation payments.  

    Amended 1953,c.33,s.61; 1991,c.91,s.365.  

34:15-85.  Knowledge of injury;  jurisdiction
    Every such contract shall provide, or be construed to provide, that, as between the employee and the insurance carrier, the notice to or knowledge of the occurrence of the injury on the part of the employer shall be deemed notice  or knowledge, as the case may be, on the part of the insurance carrier;  that  jurisdiction of the employer shall, for the purpose of this article, be  jurisdiction of the insurance carrier, and that the insurance carrier shall in  all things be bound by and subject to the orders, findings, decisions or awards  rendered against the employer for the payment of compensation.

34:15-86.  Insurance carrier directly liable
    Every such contract shall provide, or be construed to provide, that, upon the death, insolvency or bankruptcy of the insured employer, or upon his assignment for the benefit of creditors, the insurance carrier shall immediately become directly liable for all compensation payments due to any injured employee or his dependents by virtue of prior agreement or award until completion thereof, or that may thereafter become due during the period for which the requisite premiums have been paid by the employer.

34:15-87.  Limitations and restrictions on liability
    No policy of insurance against liability arising under this chapter shall contain any limitation of the liability of the insurer to an amount less than that payable by the assured on account of his entire liability under this chapter, and no provision of such policy shall be construed to restrict the liability of the insurer to any stated business, plant, location, or employment  carried on by an assured unless the business, plant, location, or employment  excluded by such restriction shall be concurrently separately insured or  exempted as provided for in this article.

    No such policy of insurance or any indorsement thereon shall insure against  any liability whatsoever other than the liability of the employer for compensation under this chapter and for damages imposed by law because of personal injuries, including death at any time resulting therefrom, sustained by his employees.

    No action shall be maintained for the collection of premiums on any policy violating any provision of this article.  Any policy issued contrary to the provisions of this section shall be construed as incorporating the provisions herein contained.  No insurer shall, in action brought upon such policy, plead in defense of such action any provision of such policy which violates any provision of this section.

     Amended by L.1939, c. 68, p. 112, s. 1.

34:15-88.  Classification of risks, rates, schedules and rules; approval by  insurance commissioner
    Every insurance company or mutual association which insures employers against liability either under this chapter or for damages imposed by law arising out of any other liability to employees because of personal injuries including death at any time resulting therefrom, or both, shall file with the commissioner of banking and insurance its classification of risks and premiums and rules pertaining thereto, together with the basis rates and system of merit  or schedule rating applicable to such insurance which system of merit or  schedule rating shall be applied as hereinafter provided.  Neither classifications of risks, rules pertaining thereto, basis rates, nor system of merit or schedule rating shall take effect until the commissioner of banking and insurance shall have approved the classifications, rules, basis rates, and system of merit or schedule rating, as reasonable and adequate for the risks to  which they respectively apply.  The commissioner of banking and insurance may  withdraw his approval of any classification, rule, basis rate, or system of  merit or schedule rating if he shall find that such classification, rule, rate,  or system of merit or schedule rating is unreasonable or inadequate for the  risks to which they respectively apply.  To secure the impartial application of  such approved classifications, rules, rates, or system of merit or schedule rating, the commissioner of banking and insurance is hereby authorized to create, organize and supervise such rating and inspection bureau with such jurisdiction under his supervision as hereinafter provided.  No insurance company or mutual association writing workmen's compensation or employer's liability insurance in this state shall issue, renew, or carry any insurance against the liability of an employer either for compensation or for damages imposed by law, because of personal injuries, including death at any time resulting therefrom, sustained by his employees, or for both, except in accordance with the classifications, rules, basis rates, and system of merit or  schedule rating approved by the commissioner of banking and insurance as aforesaid and applied by the rating and inspection bureau;  provided, however, that any departure from the basis rate filed with and approved by the commissioner of banking and insurance on account of the application of a system  of merit or schedule rating approved by the commissioner of banking and  insurance shall be clearly set forth in the insurance contract or indorsements  attached thereto.  If any insurance company or mutual association authorized to  write workmen's compensation or employer's liability insurance in this state  shall violate any of the provisions of this act, the commissioner of banking  and insurance, may, in his discretion, after public hearing, suspend the  authority of said insurance company or mutual association to transact workmen's  compensation or employer's liability insurance in this state for such period as  said commissioner shall fix.

34:15-89.1  Notification to mutual associations, stock companies of requirements of employer ID numbers.
  
	2. a. On or before March 1, 1996 and thereafter, the Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau shall notify all mutual associations and stock companies authorized to write workers' compensation or employer's liability insurance on risks located in this State of the requirements of subsections b. and c. of this section.
 
	b.	On and after July 1, 1996, all mutual associations and stock companies authorized to write workers' compensation or employer's liability policies on risks located in this State shall, upon application for new policies or renewal of any existing policies, require submission of the employer identification number as assigned by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to the provisions of the "unemployment compensation law," R.S.43:21-1 et seq., by each employer and shall maintain the identification number in their records and shall include the identification number on policies of insurance to be filed with the Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau.
 
	If the employer has been exempted from or is otherwise not subject to the provisions of the "unemployment compensation law," the mutual association or stock company writing workers' compensation insurance or employer's liability insurance coverage on risks of that employer shall, in a form and manner prescribed by the division, assign an identification number to that employer.
 
	If an employer fails or refuses to comply with the reporting requirements of this subsection, the mutual association or stock company shall immediately notify the Division of Workers' Compensation of such failure or refusal.  Failure or refusal without reasonable cause shall result in the assessment of a penalty of up to $1,000 for each failure or refusal which shall be enforceable on a petition filed by the "uninsured employer's fund" in a summary proceeding before a judge of compensation upon notice to the employer and the proceeds of which shall be paid into the "uninsured employer's fund."  Likewise, if a mutual association or stock company fails or refuses without reasonable cause to comply with the reporting requirements of this subsection and its insured employer has complied with those reporting requirements, a penalty of up to $1,000 for each such failure or refusal shall be enforceable on a petition filed by the "uninsured employer's fund" in a summary proceeding before a judge of compensation upon notice to the mutual association or stock company and any proceeds of the penalty shall be paid into the "uninsured employer's fund."
 
	c.	On and after July 1, 1996 the Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau shall record and maintain the employer identification numbers received from mutual associations and stock companies pursuant to subsection b. of this section.  The bureau shall, upon request of the Division of Workers' Compensation, provide to the division information, in a form and manner as prescribed by the division, with respect to the workers' compensation or employer's liability insurance coverage status of employers in this State, including the employer identification numbers.
 
	d.	On or before March 1, 1996 the Department of Banking and Insurance shall provide to the Division of Workers' Compensation a complete list of all employers engaged in business in this State who have been authorized, pursuant to the provisions of R.S.34:15-77 et seq., to self-insure for the payment of compensation.  After that date, the department shall continue to provide notification to the division, in a form and manner as prescribed by the division, of any newly approved self-insured employer or the rescission of the authority for any previously approved employer to self-insure.  On or before July 1, 2008 and thereafter, as may be requested by the division and in a form and manner as prescribed by the division, the Department of Banking and Insurance shall provide to the division a complete list of all mutual associations and stock companies authorized to write workers' compensation or employer's liability insurance coverage on risks in the State.
 
	L.1995, c.393, s.2; amended 2008, c.94, s.2.

34:15-90.1  Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau continued; directors, appointment, terms.
 	1. a. The Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau, established and continued by R.S.34:15-89, consisting of all insurers authorized to write workers' compensation or employers' liability insurance within this State as provided under R.S.34:15-90, is continued as provided by this act.  No insurer shall write workers' compensation or employers' liability insurance in this State unless it is a member of the Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau.  Each member of the Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau shall have one representative entitled to one vote in the administration of the Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau's affairs.
 
	b.	The Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau shall be governed by a committee of 10 directors.  The Commissioner of Banking and Insurance or his designee shall serve as an ex-officio, non-voting director.  Six directors of the governing committee shall be elected by the insurer members as provided in the approved plan of operation.  Three directors shall be appointed by the commissioner:  one of whom shall be an individual appointed from a list or lists of nominees provided by one or more recognized Statewide organizations representing licensed insurance producers; one of whom shall be an individual appointed from a list or lists of nominees provided by one or more recognized Statewide business organizations; and one of whom shall be an individual appointed from a list or lists of nominees provided by one or more recognized Statewide labor organizations.
 
	Initially, two of the elected directors and one of the appointed directors shall serve for a term of three years; two of the elected directors and one of the appointed directors shall serve for a term of two years; and two of the elected directors and one of the appointed directors shall serve for a term of one year.  Thereafter, all board members shall serve for a term of three years.  Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original selection.
 
	L.2008, c.97, s.1.

34:15-90.2  Authority of Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau.
 
	2.	The Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau shall have authority to:

	a.	Enter into contracts as are necessary or proper to carry out the provisions and purposes of this act;
 
	b.	Sue or be sued, including taking any legal actions as may be necessary for recovery of any assessments;
 
	c.	Establish rules, conditions, and procedures for assessment of its members;
 
	d.	Assess members in accordance with chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes;
 
	e.	Appoint from among its members appropriate legal, actuarial, and other subcommittees of the governing committee as necessary to provide technical assistance in the operation of the bureau;
 
	f.	Establish and maintain rules, regulations and premium rates for workers' compensation and employers' liability insurance and equitably adjust the same, as far as practical, to the hazard of individual risks, by inspection by the bureau;
 
	g.	Adopt means for assuring uniform and accurate audit of payrolls as they relate to policies of workers' compensation and employers' liability insurance by auditors, appointed by the bureau, or by such other means as the bureau may, with the approval of the commissioner, establish;
 
	h.	Furnish upon request to any of its members or to any employer upon whose risks a rating has been promulgated by it, information as to such rating, including the method of its computation, and shall encourage employers to reduce the number and severity of accidents by adjusting premiums and rates through the use of credits and debits or other proper factors, under such uniform system of experience or other forms of merit rating as may be approved by the commissioner;
 
	i.	Prepare and file, for the approval of the commissioner, and for the use by all of its members, any amendments to its policy forms and its system of classification of risks and premiums thereto, together with the basis rates and system of merit or schedule rating applicable to such insurance, as currently set forth in the New Jersey Workers' Compensation and Employers' Liability Insurance Manual;
 
	j.	Develop and submit, for the approval of the commissioner, any amendments to its rules of procedure as currently set forth in the New Jersey Workers' Compensation and Employers' Liability Insurance Manual;
 
	k.	Resolve disputes concerning the application of its rating system to specific cases, in accordance with the workers' compensation and employers' liability insurance policy and the bureau's rules of procedure, subject to appeal to the commissioner; and
 
	l.	Take such other actions as may be reasonable and necessary to carry out its functions as provided in its approved rules of procedures, or as directed by the commissioner.
 
	L.2008, c.97, s.2.

34:15-90.3  Effective date.
  
	4.	This act shall take effect July 1, 2009, except that the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance may take such anticipatory administrative action in advance as shall be necessary for the orderly transition of the new Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau and proper implementation of this act.
 
	L.2008, c.97, s.4.

34:15-91.  Actuary and additional assistants in insurance department
    The commissioner of banking and insurance is authorized to employ an actuary  and necessary assistants and to fix their compensation, subject to the  provisions of Title 11, Civil Service, except where otherwise provided by statute;  to compel the production of all books, data, papers and records necessary for the actuary to compile statistics for determining the pure cost of workmen's compensation and employers' liability insurance; and to examine, either personally or through any person appointed by him, the pay roll records and workmen's compensation or employers' liability policies and all data relating to such records and policies of any employer subject to the provisions  of this article in order to determine whether such provisions are being  complied with.

    The information in the possession of the actuary shall be available to the compensation rating and inspection bureau in fixing rates.

34:15-92.  Domestic help excepted
	34:15-92.	Employers of domestic workers and every stock company or mutual association affording insurance for the liability of such employers by reason of that employment shall be exempted from the provisions of R.S. 34:15-80 and R.S. 34:15-81, but employers of domestic workers are required to provide written notice of insurance coverage and cancellation of a policy.

     Amended by L.1969, c. 212, s. 1;  L.1979, c. 380, s. 3; amended 2023, c.262, s.11.

34:15-92.1.  Other exceptions
    If and when any class or classes of employers or employees shall be excepted  from the provisions of article 2 of this chapter (s. 34:15-7 et seq.) by an act  or acts of the legislature, such employers as may be thereby excepted shall,  from the date when such act or acts shall become effective, be likewise  excepted from the provisions of this article.

34:15-93.  Expense of enforcement;  payments by insurers
    To defray the expenses of the commissioner of banking and insurance in carrying out the provisions of this article, each mutual association and each stock company writing workmen's compensation or employers' liability insurance in this state shall annually on or before the first day of June of each year pay to the state tax commissioner for the use of the state a sum equal to one-quarter of one per cent of the net premiums received by it for workmen's compensation and employers' liability insurance written or renewed by it on risks within the state as reported to the commissioner of banking and insurance  for the calendar year next preceding the due date of such payment.

    The commissioner of banking and insurance shall annually on or before June first of each year ascertain and report to the state tax commissioner all facts  necessary to enable the latter to determine, fix and collect all sums payable  under this section.

34:15-94  Annual surcharge for Second Injury Fund.

	34:15-94. a. (Deleted by amendment, P.L.1999, c.408).

	b.	Commencing January 1, 1989 and on the first day of each year thereafter, the Commissioner of Labor shall levy an annual surcharge upon all policyholders and self-insured employers for the purpose of providing moneys to the Second Injury Fund.  Each policyholder and self-insured employer shall be liable for payment of the annual surcharge in accordance with the provisions of this section and all regulations promulgated pursuant hereto.  The annual surcharge levied under this section shall be applied to all workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance policies providing coverage on or after January 1, 1989 and, in the case of self-insured employers, to coverage provided on or after January 1, 1989.  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the surcharge levied pursuant to this section shall not apply: to any reinsurance or retrocessional transaction; to the State or any political subdivision thereof which acts as a self-insured employer; or to any workers' compensation endorsement required pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1979, c.380 (C.17:36-5.29).

	c.	On or before July 31 of 1988 and of each year thereafter:

	(1)	Each insurer and self-insured employer shall submit to the Commissioner of Labor, in a form and manner prescribed by the Commissioner of Labor, a report of the total compensation payments made by the insurer or self-insured employer during the 12-month period ending on the immediately preceding June 30th;

	(2)	Each insurer shall submit to the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance, in a form and manner prescribed by the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance, a report of the total earned premiums collected by the insurer on all workers' compensation or employer's liability policies written on risks located in this State pursuant to the provisions of R.S.17:17-1 et seq., during the 12-month period ending on the immediately preceding June 30th;

	(3)	The Commissioner of Labor shall estimate the amount of special adjustment and supplemental benefits payable by each insurer writing workers' compensation or employer's liability insurance in the State and by each self-insured employer pursuant to R.S.34:15-95 during the then current fiscal year;

	(4)	The Commissioner of Labor shall make a determination of the aggregate annual surcharge to be levied upon policyholders and self-insured employers during the next following calendar year, which shall be an amount equal to (a) 150%, in the case of any calendar year commencing prior to January 1, 2000, and (b) 125%, in the case of any calendar year commencing after December 31, 1999, of the compensation and benefits estimated by the Commissioner of Labor to be payable from the Second Injury Fund during the next following calendar year plus 100% of the amount estimated by the Commissioner of Labor to be necessary for the cost of administration of the Division of Workers' Compensation in the Department of Labor, less the estimated amount of net assets exceeding $5,000,000.00 which will remain in the Second Injury Fund on December 31st of the then current calendar year, and the Commissioner of Labor shall submit an informational copy to the Joint Budget Oversight Committee.  For the purpose of determining the annual surcharge to be levied upon policyholders and self-insured employers as prescribed herein, any amount transferred from the Second Injury Fund to the General Fund pursuant to P.L.2002, c.12 and pursuant to P.L.2002, c.38 shall be added back to the Second Injury Fund for computational purposes only;

	(5)	The Commissioner of Labor shall apportion the aggregate annual surcharge calculated pursuant to paragraph (4) of this subsection among policyholders as a group and self-insured employers as a separate group. Policyholders shall be liable to pay that portion of the aggregate annual surcharge that is equal to the proportion that the compensation payments made by all policyholders during the 12-month period ending on the immediately preceding June 30th bear to the total compensation payments made by all policyholders and self-insured employers during the 12-month period ending on the immediately preceding June 30th.  Self-insured employers shall be liable to pay that portion of the aggregate annual surcharge that is equal to the proportion that the compensation payments made by all self-insured employers during the 12-month period ending on the immediately preceding June 30th bear to the total compensation payments made by all policyholders and self-insured employers during the 12-month period ending on the immediately preceding June 30th; and

	(6)	The Commissioner of Labor shall notify the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance of the aggregate annual surcharge amount applicable to policyholders during the next following calendar year.

	d.	On or before September 15 of 1988 and of each year thereafter:

	(1)	In consultation with the Commissioner of Labor, the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance shall determine the annual policyholder surcharge rate to be applied to each workers' compensation and employer's liability policy during the next following calendar year, and shall notify insurers of the annual policyholder surcharge rate to be applied to policy premiums during the next following calendar year.  The annual policyholder surcharge rate shall be established as a percentage, which shall be equal to the percentage relationship that the annual surcharge amount which is applicable to all policyholders bears to the total earned premiums for workers' compensation and employer's liability coverage written on risks located in this State for the 12-month period ending on the immediately preceding June 30th.

	(2)	The Commissioner of Labor shall notify each self-insured employer of the amount of the annual surcharge applicable to that self-insured employer during the next following calendar year.  The net annual surcharge for each self-insured employer shall be established as a pro rata portion of the annual surcharge applicable to all self-insured employers, which shall be chargeable to the self-insured employer in the proportion that the self-insured employer's compensation payments during the 12-month period ending on the immediately preceding June 30th bear to the total compensation payments made by all self-insured employers during the 12-month period ending on the immediately preceding June 30th, less the estimated amount of special adjustment and supplemental benefits payable by that self-insured employer pursuant to R.S.34:15-95 during the then current fiscal year.

	e. (1) Every insurer providing workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance shall collect from each of its policyholders, on behalf of the Commissioner of Labor and in accordance with subsections b., c. and d. of this section, an amount equal to the annual policyholder surcharge rate established by the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance pursuant to subsection d. of this section, multiplied by the amount of the policyholder's premium. The surcharge to be collected from the policyholder shall be stated separately on the policy or billing statement and be collected at the same time and in the same manner that the premium or other charges for the coverage are collected. On or before the 30th day after the end of the calendar quarter commencing January 1, 1989, and on or before the 30th day following the end of each calendar quarter thereafter, each insurer shall report to the Commissioner of Labor, on forms as the commissioner may require, the total amount of its workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance earned premiums for the preceding quarterly accounting period, and remit the surcharge collected from policyholders on those premiums, less special adjustment and supplemental benefits paid during the preceding calendar quarter by the insurer pursuant to the workers' compensation law, R.S.34:15-1 et seq.  No insurer or its agent shall be entitled to any portion of any surcharge imposed pursuant to this section as a fee or commission for its collection nor shall that surcharge be subject to any taxes, licenses or fees.

	(2)	On or before the 30th day after the end of each calendar quarter commencing January 1, 1989, and on or before the 30th day following the end of each calendar quarter thereafter, each self-insured employer shall remit to the Commissioner of Labor an amount equal to one-fourth of the effective net annual surcharge as established for that self-insured employer during the then current calendar year pursuant to subsection d. of this section, less special adjustment and supplemental benefits paid during the preceding calendar quarter by the self-insured employer pursuant to the workers' compensation law, R.S.34:15-1 et seq.

	f.	The Commissioner of Labor shall promulgate within 180 days of the effective date of this act and in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), any rules and regulations as may be necessary for the apportionment and collection of annual surcharges from policyholders and self-insured employers covered by this section.

	g.	The Commissioner of Banking and Insurance shall promulgate within 180 days of the effective date of this act and in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), any rules and regulations as may be necessary for the collection, and provision to the Commissioner of Labor, of information with respect to earned premiums of insurers and the establishment of the annual surcharge rate for policyholders.

	h.	For each 30-day period or part thereof during which a policyholder, self-insured employer, or insurer fails to make a payment or transfer of payment as required by this section or regulations promulgated pursuant hereto, a penalty of one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the amount of delinquent payment or transfer of payment shall be assessed against the delinquent policyholder, self-insured employer or insurer.  In no case of single failure, however, shall penalties assessed under this section exceed five percent (5.0%) of the amount of surcharge unpaid or untransferred.  Penalties assessed under this subsection shall be collected in a civil action by a summary proceeding brought by the Commissioner of Labor pursuant to "The Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.), and shall be deposited by the commissioner in the Second Injury Fund.

	i.	For each 30-day period during which an insurer or self-insured employer fails to file a report as required by this section, the Commissioner of Labor shall assess a penalty of $100.00 against the insurer or self-insured employer and, upon collection thereof, shall deposit those moneys in the "uninsured employer's fund."  As a result of any single failure, however, no such penalty shall exceed a total of $500.00.  During the period of any such failure to file this report, the estimate by the Department of Labor of the amounts of such compensation payments or earned premiums shall be used for the purposes cited in the workers' compensation law, R.S.34:15-1 et seq.

	j.	The Commissioner of Labor may, with the authorization of and appropriation by the Legislature, transfer from the Second Injury Fund an amount necessary for the cost of administration of the Division of Workers' Compensation in the Department of Labor.

	k.	As used in this section, "policyholder" means a holder of a policy of workers' compensation or employer's liability insurance issued by an insurer.  "Insurer" means a domestic, foreign or alien mutual association or stock company writing workers' compensation or employer's liability insurance on risks located in this State and subject to premium taxes pursuant to P.L.1945, c.132 (C.54:18A-1 et seq.).  "Self-insured employer" means an employer which self-insures for workers' compensation or employer's liability insurance pursuant to the provisions of R.S.34:15-77.

	Amended 1938, c.198, s.1; 1945, c.10, s.1; 1950, c.89, s.1; 1952, c.80; 1966, c.65; 1968, c.319; 1980, c.83, s.3; 1986, c.82, s.1; 1988, c.26, s.1; 1990, c.46; 1999, c. 408; 2002, c.5. 2003, c.111.

34:15-95.      Second Injury Fund 
   The sums collected under R.S. 34:15-94 shall constitute a fund, to be known as the Second Injury Fund, out of which a sum shall be set aside each year by the Commissioner of Labor from which compensation payments in accordance with the  provisions of paragraph (b) of R.S. 34:15-12 shall be made to persons totally disabled, as a result of experiencing a subsequent permanent injury under conditions entitling such persons to compensation therefor, when such persons had previously been permanently and partially disabled from some other cause; provided, however, that, notwithstanding the time limit fixed therein, the provisions of paragraph (b) of R.S. 34:15-12 relative to extension of compensation payments beyond 400 or 450 weeks, as the case may be, shall, with respect to payments from the Second Injury Fund, apply to any accident occurring since June 27, 1923, and in no case shall be less than $5.00 per week; provided further, however, that no person shall be eligible to receive payments from the Second Injury Fund: 

  (a)    If the disability resulting from the injury caused by the person's last compensable accident in itself and irrespective of any previous condition or disability constitutes total and permanent disability within the meaning of this Title. 

  (b)    (Deleted by amendment.) 

  (c)    If the disease or condition existing prior to the last compensable accident is progressive and by reason of such progression subsequent to the last compensable accident renders the person totally disabled within the meaning of this Title. 

  (d)    If a person who is rendered permanently partially disabled by the last compensable injury subsequently becomes permanently totally disabled by reason of progressive physical deterioration or preexisting condition or disease. 

  Nothing in the provisions of said paragraphs (a), (c) and (d), however, shall be construed to deny the benefits provided by this section to any person who has been previously disabled by reason of total loss of, or total and permanent loss of use of, a hand or arm or foot or leg or eye, when the total disability is due to the total loss of, or total and permanent loss of use of, two or more of said major members of the body, or to any person who in successive accidents has suffered compensable injuries, each of which, severally, causes permanent partial disability, but which in conjunction result in permanent total disability.  Nor shall anything in paragraphs (a), (c) and (d), aforesaid apply to the case of any person who is now receiving or who has heretofore received  payments from the Second Injury Fund. 

  Upon the approval of an application for benefits, the compensation payable from the Second Injury Fund shall be made from the date when the final payment of compensation by the employer is or was payable for the injury or injuries sustained in the employment wherein the employee became totally and permanently disabled; provided, that no payment from the Second Injury Fund shall be made for any  period prior to the date of filing of application therefor; provided, however, that a person who has received compensation payments from the Second Injury Fund and who is reinstated or ordered placed on said fund shall receive payments from the date of last payment from the Second Injury Fund, save only in the case of a person to whom payments have been made and then discontinued or suspended because of the rehabilitation of such person in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (b) of R.S. 34:15-12, or actual employment for any reason whatsoever, in which case payments from the Second Injury Fund shall be made from the date of filing application for reinstatement. Payments to such totally disabled employees shall be made from said fund by the State Treasurer upon warrants of the Commissioner of Labor.  This section shall be applicable to  any accident occurring since June 27, 1923, insofar as the eligibility of and  benefits payable to such employees of this class is concerned; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall limit or deprive those persons now  receiving or who have received the benefits under this section from participating in the Second Injury Fund.  All payments from the Second Injury Fund shall be made by biweekly installment payments. From the fund herein created the Commissioner of Labor may use in any one fiscal year a sum not to exceed the sum of $12,500.00 for the cost of administration of the fund including personnel, printing, professional fees, and expenses incurred by the Commissioner of Labor in the prosecution of defenses in the Division of Workers' Compensation, and of appeals and proceedings for review of decisions on applications for benefits from the Second Injury Fund.  No costs or counsel fee for the applicant shall be allowed against the fund. 

  The Commissioner of Labor shall annually submit an accounting of the fund to the State Treasurer. 

  All payments into the Second Injury Fund which may have heretofore been made or required at any time or times are hereby validated and confirmed, notwithstanding that at the time of such payment or payments the fund may have equaled or exceeded the sum of $200,000.00. 

  Amended 1938,c.198,s.2; 1940,c.133,s.1; 1945,c.10,s.2; 1945, c.74,s.19; 1950,c.89,s.2; 1965,c.124; 1979,c.283,s.17; 1988, c.26,s.2. 

34:15-95.1.  Application for benefits;  decision;  review;  Commissioner of  Labor as party
    Applications for benefits under this act shall be made by a verified petition filed in duplicate within 2 years after the date of the last payment of compensation by the employer or the insurance carrier addressed to the Commissioner of Labor who shall refer it to a judge of Compensation to hear testimony and for a decision as to whether the petitioner shall or shall not be  admitted to the benefits provided under this act;  provided, however, that the  limitation herein shall not apply to those persons now receiving or who have  received compensation payments from said fund and whose accident occurred since  June 27, 1923.   Review of said decision shall be in accordance with R.S.  34:15-66.  In all proceedings affecting the fund under this act the  Commissioner of Labor shall be a necessary party.

     L.1938, c. 198, p. 476, s. 3.  Amended by L.1940, c. 133, p. 291, s. 2; L.1983, c. 421, s. 1, eff. Jan. 5, 1984.

34:15-95.2.  Vested rights
    No person shall be deemed to acquire or to have acquired any vested rights,  under the provisions of this section.

     L.1940, c. 133, p. 291, s. 3.

34:15-95.3.  Application of chapter;  exemption of mutual agricultural insurance companies
    Nothing in this article (s. 34:15-70 et seq.) shall apply to any mutual agricultural insurance company incorporated under chapter 252 of the laws of 1905, being  "A supplement to an act entitled "An act to provide for the regulation and incorporation of insurance companies and to regulate the transaction of insurance business in this State,' approved April 3, 1902," so long as any such company continues to confine the issuance of its policies of insurance to persons engaged in agricultural pursuits.

     L.1954, c. 191, p. 721, s. 1.

34:15-95.4.    Special adjustment benefit payment 
   Any employee or dependent receiving weekly benefits as provided under R.S. 34:15-95, R.S. 34:15-12(b) or R.S. 34:15-13 at a rate applicable prior to January 1, 1980, and whose payment is less than the maximum compensation rate in effect for the year 1980, shall be entitled to receive a special adjustment benefit payment from the Second Injury Fund and from those sources as provided for by this 1980 amendatory and supplementary act. 

  Any dependent, as defined in R.S. 34:15-13, of a person totally disabled who dies while receiving compensation from the Second Injury Fund, shall become entitled to dependent benefits under this chapter which are comparable to payments made to other dependents under the workers' compensation law, R.S. 34:15-1 et seq., on or after the effective date of this 1980 amendatory and supplementary act. 

  All compensation payments made under this chapter to a dependent, as defined under R.S. 34:15-13, of an individual who dies while receiving such compensation, shall be payable only where the compensable occupational injury or disease of the decedent is a material contributing factor to his death. 

  The payment of these adjustment benefits shall be paid to an employee or dependent as long as the employee or dependent is eligible to receive payments under R.S. 34:15-95, R.S. 34:15-12(b), R.S. 34:15-13, or this section. 

  The amount of the special adjustment benefit payment shall be such that when added to the workers' compensation rate awarded pursuant to R.S. 34:15-95, R.S. 34:15-12(b), R.S. 34:15-13 or this section as a result of injury or death, the total shall bear the same percentage relationship to the 1980 maximum workers' compensation rate that the worker's own compensation rate awarded as a result  of the injury or death bears to the then effective maximum workers' compensation rate.  The amount of the special adjustment benefit shall be payable at a rate of 35% of the adjustment during the fiscal year 1981 commencing July 1, 1980; 75% of the adjustment during the fiscal year 1982;  and 100% of the adjustment during the fiscal year 1983 and thereafter.  The special adjustment benefit payment provided herein shall be reduced by an amount equal to the individual's benefit payable under the Federal Old-Age, Survivors' and Disability Insurance Act (not including increases in such benefits due to any federal statutory increases after May 31, 1980), Black Lung benefits, or the employer's share of disability pension payments received from or on account of an employer.  Where any person refuses to authorize the release of information concerning the amount of benefits payable under the aforementioned benefits, the division's estimate of that amount shall be deemed to be correct unless and until the actual amount is established and no adjustment shall be made for any period of time covered by any such refusal. 

  Payments of the adjustment shall be made from the Second Injury Fund in the manner hereinafter provided.  The Commissioner of Labor shall make payments from Second Injury Fund directly to the persons who are now receiving benefits under R.S. 34:15-95 and to their dependents becoming eligible for dependents' benefits under this 1980 amendatory and supplementary act by increasing or, as the case may be, setting the biweekly compensation payments to include the biweekly special adjustment.  In the case of persons who are entitled to compensation under R.S. 34:15-12(b) or R.S. 34:15-13, the insurance carrier or self-insured employer in the second and subsequent fiscal years after enactment shall increase the weekly compensation payments to include the weekly special adjustment.  For such special adjustment payments and supplements to special adjustment payments paid during the period July 1, 1981 and December 31, 1988, insurance carriers and self-insured employers  shall credit the payments against the assessments payable by the insurance carrier or self-insurer under R.S. 34:15-94.  The insurance carrier  or self-insurer claiming such credit shall submit vouchers upon forms prescribed by the Commissioner of Labor, identifying each case and indicating the weekly benefit adjustment applicable thereto on or before June 30, 1989. 

  Beginning in the fiscal year 1984 and in every fiscal year thereafter, a supplement to the special adjustment benefit payment shall be paid to all employees or dependents entitled to the special adjustment benefit payment. The supplement to the special adjustment benefit payment shall be paid in an amount, in combination with income from all sources referred to in this section, which bears the same percentage relationship to the then current maximum workers' compensation rate that the worker's own compensation rate awarded as a result of the injury or death bears to the then effective maximum workers' compensation rate.  Beginning in fiscal year 1986 and in every fiscal year thereafter, payment of supplements to the special adjustment benefits shall be made from the Second Injury Fund. Payment of supplements to the special adjustment benefits for fiscal years 1984 and 1985 shall be from interest earned and accrued upon moneys belonging to "the stock workers' compensation security fund" and "the mutual workers' compensation security fund" during fiscal years 1981 through 1985, and from special assessments upon self-insured employers in the same proportions as provided under R.S. 34:15-94. 

  P.L. 1980, c. 83, s. 1; amended 1981,c.149,s.1; 1986,c.82,s.2; 1988,c.26,s.3. 

34:15-95.5.  Reduction of disability benefits for persons under age sixty-two;  exception
    For persons under the age of 62 receiving benefits as provided under R.S. 34:15-95, or R.S. 34:15-12(b), and whose period of disability began after December 31, 1979, such compensation benefits shall be reduced by an amount equal to the disability benefits payable under the Federal Old-Age, Survivors' and Disability Insurance Act, as now or hereafter amended, not to exceed the amount of the reduction established pursuant to 42 U.S.C. s. 424a.  However, such reduction shall not apply when the combined disability benefits provided under R.S. 34:15-95, or R.S. 34:15-12(b), and the Federal Old-Age, Survivors' and Disability Insurance Act is less than the total benefits to which the Federal reduction would apply, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. s. 424a.  Where any person refuses to authorize the release of information concerning the amount of benefits payable under said Federal act, the division's estimate of said amount  shall be deemed to be correct unless and until the actual amount is established, and no adjustment shall be made for any period of time covered by any such refusal.

     L.1980, c. 83, s. 9, eff. August 21, 1980.  Amended by L.1983, c. 97, s. 1, eff. March 11, 1983.

34:15-95.6  Entitlement to receive weekly supplemental benefits from Second Injury Fund, certain circumstances.
 	1. a. Beginning on January 1, 2020, and in each fiscal year thereafter, a dependent of a public safety worker, who is receiving weekly benefits pursuant to R.S.34:15-13 for a death that occurred after December 31, 1979, and who is not entitled to receive special adjustment benefits pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1980, c.83 (C.34:15-95.4), shall be entitled to receive weekly supplemental benefits from the Second Injury Fund during the period in which the dependent is eligible to receive the initially-awarded weekly benefits, whenever the amount of the initially-awarded weekly benefits is less than the total amount of weekly benefits that would be payable to the dependent if that total amount included weekly supplemental benefits calculated in the manner indicated in subsection b. of this section.  In making the determination of the aggregate annual surcharge for the Second Injury Fund to be levied pursuant to paragraph (4) of subsection c. of R.S.34:15-94 for calendar year 2020 and each subsequent calendar year, the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall include the anticipated additional amounts, including administrative costs, required for payment of supplemental benefits pursuant to this section during the fiscal year which begins on July 1 of the respective calendar year.
 
	b.	The base amount of the weekly supplemental benefits to be paid pursuant to this section during each fiscal year shall be calculated in a manner so that when it is added to the workers' compensation weekly death benefits initially awarded, the sum of the initial award and the base weekly supplemental benefits shall bear the same percentage relationship to the maximum workers' compensation death benefit rate for the current fiscal year that the dependent's initial weekly death benefits bore to the maximum workers' compensation death benefit rate in effect at the time of the death, except that:
 
	(1)	The actual amount of the supplemental benefits paid pursuant to this section to any dependent shall be reduced by an amount equal to the dependent's benefit payable under the Federal Old-Age, Survivors' and Disability Insurance Act, excluding any disability benefits paid to that dependent under that act and any cost of living increases in benefits paid to that dependent under that act, or Black Lung benefits ;
 
	(2)	A supplemental benefit shall not be paid if the actual amount of the benefit to be paid is calculated to be less than $5 per week, and
 
	(3)	A supplemental benefit shall not be paid to a dependent who elects to not receive benefits under the Federal Old Age, Survivors and Disability Insurance Act for which the dependent is eligible.
 
	c.	Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, weekly supplemental benefits paid pursuant to this section shall not be paid in a manner which in any way changes or modifies the provisions of section 1 or 9 of P.L.1980, c.83 (C.34:15-95.4 or 34:15-95.5).
 
	d.	An insurance carrier or self-insured employer responsible for the payment of workers' compensation death benefits to a dependent shall notify the Division of Workers' Compensation of the need to have the Second Injury Fund make supplemental benefit payments to the dependent pursuant to this section not later than the 60th day after the date on which it is determined that the payment of supplemental benefits is required pursuant to this section.  If the insurance carrier or self-insured employer fails to notify the division and that failure results in the payment of an incorrect amount of benefits, the liability for the payment of the supplemental benefits shall be transferred from the Second Injury Fund to the employer until the time at which the insurance carrier or self-insured employer provides the required notice.
 
	e.	For the purposes of this section, "public safety worker" means a member, employee, or officer of a paid, partially-paid, or volunteer fire or police department, force, company or district, including the State Police or a first aid or rescue squad.
 
	L.2019, c.127, s.1.

34:15-95.7  Determination of aggregate annual surcharge.
 	2.	In making the determination of the aggregate annual surcharge for the Second Injury Fund to be levied pursuant to paragraph (4) of subsection c. of R.S.34:15-94 for calendar year 2020, the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall include the anticipated additional amounts, including administrative costs, required for the payment of supplemental benefits which shall begin on January 1, 2020 pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2019, c.127 (C.34:15-95.6).
 
	L.2019, c.127, s.2.

34:15-95.8  Worker's compensation benefits for certain surviving dependents of employees deemed essential during coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic.
 	1. a. Beginning on January 1, 2020, and in each fiscal year thereafter, a dependent of an essential employee, who is receiving weekly benefits pursuant to R.S.34:15-13 for a death that occurred after March 1, 2020 due to the contraction of coronavirus disease 2019 in the course of employment, and who is not entitled to receive special adjustment benefits pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1980, c.83 (C.34:15-95.4), shall be entitled to receive weekly supplemental benefits from the Second Injury Fund during the period in which the dependent is eligible to receive the initially-awarded weekly benefits, whenever the amount of the initially-awarded weekly benefits is less than the total amount of weekly benefits that would be payable to the dependent if that total amount included weekly supplemental benefits calculated in the manner indicated in subsection b. of this section.  In making the determination of the aggregate annual surcharge for the Second Injury Fund to be levied pursuant to paragraph (4) of subsection c. of R.S.34:15-94 for calendar year 2020 and each subsequent calendar year, the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall include the anticipated additional amounts, including administrative costs, required for payment of supplemental benefits pursuant to this section during the fiscal year which begins on July 1 of the respective calendar year.
 
	b.	The base amount of the weekly supplemental benefits to be paid pursuant to this section during each fiscal year shall be calculated in a manner so that when it is added to the workers' compensation weekly death benefits initially awarded, the sum of the initial award and the base weekly supplemental benefits shall bear the same percentage relationship to the maximum workers' compensation death benefit rate for the current fiscal year that the dependent's initial weekly death benefits bore to the maximum workers' compensation death benefit rate in effect at the time of the death, except that:
 
	(1)	The actual amount of the supplemental benefits paid pursuant to this section to any dependent shall be reduced by an amount equal to the dependent's benefit payable under the Federal Old-Age, Survivors' and Disability Insurance Act, excluding any disability benefits paid to that dependent under that act and any cost of living increases in benefits paid to that dependent under that act, or Black Lung benefits;
 
	(2)	A supplemental benefit shall not be paid if the actual amount of the benefit to be paid is calculated to be less than $5 per week; and
 
	(3)	A supplemental benefit shall not be paid to a dependent who elects to not receive benefits under the Federal Old Age, Survivors and Disability Insurance Act for which the dependent is eligible.
 
	c.	Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, weekly supplemental benefits paid pursuant to this section shall not be paid in a manner which in any way changes or modifies the provisions of section 1 or 9 of P.L.1980, c.83 (C.34:15-95.4 or 34:15-95.5).
 
	d.	An insurance carrier or self-insured employer responsible for the payment of workers' compensation death benefits to a dependent shall notify the Division of Workers' Compensation of the need to have the Second Injury Fund make supplemental benefit payments to the dependent pursuant to this section not later than the 60th day after the date on which it is determined that the payment of supplemental benefits is required pursuant to this section.  If the insurance carrier or self-insured employer fails to notify the division and that failure results in the payment of an incorrect amount of benefits, the liability for the payment of the supplemental benefits shall be transferred from the Second Injury Fund to the employer until the time at which the insurance carrier or self-insured employer provides the required notice.
 
	e.	For the purposes of this section, "essential employee" means an employee in the public or private sector who, during a state of emergency:
 
	(1)	is a public safety worker or first responder, including any fire, police or other emergency responders;
 
	(2)	is involved in providing medical and other healthcare services, emergency transportation, social services, and other care services, including services provided in health care facilities, residential facilities, or homes;
 
	(3)	performs functions which involve physical proximity to members of the public and are essential to the public's health, safety, and welfare, including transportation services, financial services, and the production, preparation, storage, sale, and distribution of essential goods such as food, beverages, medicine, fuel, and supplies for conducting essential business and work at home; or
 
	(4)	is any other employee deemed an essential employee by the public authority declaring the state of emergency.
 
	If the state of emergency does not apply to the entire State, an employee shall be regarded as an essential employee only if the employee is working in the area subject to the state of emergency.
 
	f.	The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall promulgate rules and regulations as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act.
 
	L.2021, c.55.

34:15-96  First report of accident.

	34:15-96.  First report of accident.  Every employer who has made provisions for payment of obligations to an injured employee as required by article 5 of this chapter (R.S.34:15-70 et seq.) shall, upon the happening of any accident or the occurrence of any compensable occupational disease in its establishment, promptly furnish the insurance carrier, or the third party administrator, if applicable, with information necessary to enable it to carry out the intent of this chapter.   Within three weeks after learning of an accident, or obtaining knowledge of the occurrence of a compensable occupational disease, every insurance carrier, third party administrator, statutory non-insured employer, including the State, county, municipality or school district, and duly authorized self-insured employer not utilizing a third party administrator shall file a report designated as "first notice of accident" in electronic data interchange media with the Division of Workers' Compensation through the Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau in a format prescribed by the Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau with a report sent to the employer.  The reports, if filed through interim vendors, shall not be used for any purpose other than formatting and transmitting this information to the Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau and the Division of Workers' Compensation.  For purposes of this section, "interim vendor" means a software supplier, network service provider, programming consultants or an insurance support organization, except that an insurance support organization may disclose the information to prevent the misrepresentation or nondisclosure of information which is material to an insurance claim.

	If the employer disagrees with the report, the employer may prepare and sign an amended report and file it with the insurance carrier, or third party administrator, if applicable.  Any resultant change shall be filed by the insurance carrier, or third party administrator, if applicable, with the Division of Workers' Compensation through the Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau as provided for in this section.

	The Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau shall make provisions to insure that information received pursuant to this section shall be readily available to the Division of Workers' Compensation or any person authorized by the Commissioner of Labor pursuant to R.S.34:15-99.

	Amended 2001, c.326, s.1.

34:15-98  Final report of accident.

	34:15-98.  Final report of accident.  Not more than 26 weeks after an insurance carrier, third party administrator, self-insured employer or statutory non-insured employer learns that an employee has recovered so as to be able to resume work or has reached maximum medical improvement prior to resumption of work, the insurance carrier, third party administrator, self-insured employer or statutory non-insured employer shall prepare a final report, and take the steps necessary to have it copied to the employee.  The report shall be transmitted to the Division of Workers' Compensation through the Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau in the manner prescribed in R.S.34:15-96.  This report shall be fully prepared before presentation to the employee.  It shall be unlawful to present any injured employee with a blank report to be later filled out and filed with the Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau.

	If the employee disagrees with the report, the employee may forward written objections directly to the Division of Workers' Compensation with a copy to the insurance carrier, third party administrator, self-insured employer or statutory non-insured employer, if applicable.  Any resultant change to the final report shall be filed by the insurance carrier, third party administrator, self-insured employer or statutory non-insured employer with the Division of Workers' Compensation through the Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau in the manner prescribed in R.S.34:15-96.

	The report shall be retained by the insurance carrier, third party administrator, self-insured employer or statutory non-insured employer for 10 years.  Any written objections forwarded by an employee to the Division of Workers' Compensation pursuant to this section shall be retained by the division for 10 years.

	The Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau shall insure that information received pursuant to this section shall be readily available to the Division of Workers' Compensation or any person authorized by the Commissioner of Labor pursuant to R.S.34:15-99.

	Amended 2001, c.326, s.2.

34:15-99  Report not public.

	34:15-99.  Report not public.  The reports of accidents filed with, or transmitted or forwarded to, the Division of Workers' Compensation or the Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau, shall not be made public, and shall not be open to inspection unless, in the opinion of the Commissioner of Labor, some public interest shall so require, and such reports shall not be used as evidence against any employer in any suit or action at law brought by an employee for the recovery of damages.

	Amended 2001, c.326, s.3.

34:15-100.  Medical reports
    As a part of the necessary medical service required by the compensation law,  the employer or insurance carrier shall, when directed so to do, file with the  workmen's compensation bureau copies of such medical certificates or reports as  it may have on file.

34:15-101.  Penalty for noncompliance
    Every employer, insurer or other person failing to comply with the terms of  this article shall, for each offense, be liable to a penalty of not less than  ten nor more than fifty dollars, the amount thereof to be determined by and  paid to the commissioner of labor.  Upon refusal to pay such fine, the same  shall be recovered in an action at law by the commissioner of labor in the name  of the state of New Jersey.

34:15-102.  Rules and regulations;  agreements filed
    The workmen's compensation bureau is authorized to make such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this article and the bureau is hereby directed to keep on file the agreements filed with it for a period of eight years.  Any agreement, however, covering a period greater than eight years shall be kept on file for the full term of the agreement.

34:15-103.  Short title
    This article may be cited as the workers' compensation security fund act.

     Amended by L.1980, c. 83, s. 4, eff. Aug. 21, 1980.

34:15-104  Definitions.

	34:15-104.  As used in this article, unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires:

	"Fund" means the workers' compensation security fund created by R.S.34:15-105. 

	"Fund year" means the calendar year. 

	"Carrier" means any stock corporation, reciprocal or association organized and operating on the mutual plan, authorized to transact the business of workers' compensation insurance in this State, except an insolvent carrier. 

	"Insolvent carrier" means a carrier which has been determined to be insolvent, or for which or for the assets of which a receiver has been appointed by a court or public officer of competent jurisdiction and authority. 

	"Covered claims" means "compensation," "benefits," "death benefits," and "payments of losses" with respect to the injury or death of workers under this chapter, R.S. 34:15-1 et seq., or the federal "Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act," 44 Stat. 1424 (33 U.S.C. s.901 et seq.), arising from coverage of risks located or resident in this State.

	"Compensation rate" means the rate of compensation provided by the workers' compensation act, R.S.34:15-1 et seq. 

	Amended 1987, c.250, s.1; 2004, c.179, s.1.

34:15-105  Workers' compensation security fund.
 
	34:15-105. There is hereby created a fund to be known as "the workers' compensation security fund," for the purpose of assuring to persons entitled thereto the compensation provided by this chapter, R.S.34:15-1 et seq., or the federal "Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act," 44 Stat. 1424 (33 U.S.C. s. 901 et seq.), or both, for employments insured in insolvent carriers and for the purpose of providing money for first year annual adjustments for benefit payments and supplemental payments during fiscal years 1984 and 1985 provided for by P.L.1980, c.83 (C.34:15-95.4 et al.). Such fund shall be applicable to the payment of valid claims for compensation or death benefits arising from a standard, primary workers' compensation policy heretofore or hereafter made pursuant to this chapter or the federal "Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act," 44 Stat. 1424 (33 U.S.C. s. 901 et seq.), and remaining unpaid, in whole or in part, by reason of the default, after March 26, 1935, of an insolvent carrier.  Expenses of administration also shall be paid from the fund as herein provided.  Such fund shall consist of all contributions received and paid into the fund by carriers, as herein defined, all property and securities acquired by and through the use of moneys belonging to the fund, and of interest earned upon moneys deposited or invested as herein provided. The fund shall be administered by the New Jersey Property-Liability Guaranty Association in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
 
	Compensation pursuant to the federal "Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act," 44 Stat. 1424 (33 U.S.C. s.901 et seq.), shall be payable under this article only with respect to coverage or risks located or resident in this State.  The insolvency, bankruptcy, or dissolution of the insured shall effect a termination of compensation provided under this article for claims arising under the federal "Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act," 44 Stat. 1424 (33 U.S.C. s.901 et seq.). 
 
	amended 1980, c.83, s.5; 1986, c.82, s.3; 1987, c.250, s.2; 2004, c.179, s.2; 2009, c.327, s.2.

34:15-105.1  Workers' compensation security fund transferred.
 
	1.	The workers' compensation security fund created pursuant to R.S.34:15-105, along with all its functions, powers and duties and all its assets, liabilities and balances, is hereby transferred to the New Jersey Property-Liability Insurance Guaranty Association, established pursuant to P.L.1974, c.17 (C.17:30A-1 et seq.).  
 
	L.2009, c.327, s.1.

34:15-106  Annual returns by carriers; "net written premiums" defined.
 
	34:15-106. Every carrier shall annually file with the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance returns, under oath, on a form to be prescribed and furnished by the commissioner, stating the amount of net written premiums on policies issued, renewed or extended by such carrier, to insure payment of compensation pursuant to this chapter or the federal "Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act," 44 Stat. 1424 (33 U.S.C. s.901 et seq.), as authorized by this article.  For the purposes of this article "net written premiums" shall mean gross written premiums less return premiums on policies returned not taken, and on policies canceled.  
 
	amended 1987, c.250, s.3; 2004, c.179, s.3; 2009, c.327, s.3.

34:15-107  Contributions to the fund.
 
	34:15-107.  For the privilege of carrying on the business of workers' compensation insurance in this State, every carrier shall pay into the fund a sum equal to one per cent of its net written premiums as shown by the return hereinbefore prescribed for the period covered by such return.
 
	amended 2004, c.179, s.4; 2009, c.327, s.4.

34:15-108  Contributions, when ceased; resumption of contributions.

	34:15-108.  When the aggregate amount of all such payments into the fund, together with accumulated interest thereon, less all its expenditures and known liabilities, becomes equal to 5% of the loss reserves of all carriers for the payment of benefits under this chapter or the federal "Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act," 44 Stat. 1424 (33 U.S.C. s. 901 et seq.), as authorized by this article, as of December 31, next preceding, no further contributions to the fund shall be required to be made.  But whenever thereafter, the amount of the fund shall be reduced below 5% of such loss reserves as of said date by reason of payments from and known liabilities of the fund, then contributions to the fund may be resumed forthwith pursuant to regulations of the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance, and may continue until the fund, over and above its known liabilities, shall be equal to not less than 3% nor more than 5% of such reserves. 

	The Commissioner of Banking and Insurance may by regulation provide that the amount of the fund may fluctuate between 3% and 5% of loss reserves of all carriers whenever he finds it to be in the best interest of the fund or advisable for its proper administration. 

	Amended 1980, c.83, s.6; 1987, c.250, s.4; 2004, c.179, s.5.

34:15-111  Payment of claims; application; recovery.
 
	34:15-111. A valid claim for compensation or death benefits, or installments thereof, heretofore or hereafter made pursuant to this chapter or the federal "Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act," 44 Stat. 1424 (33 U.S.C. s.901 et seq.), as authorized by this article, which has remained or shall remain due and unpaid for 60 days, by reason of default by an insolvent carrier, shall be paid from the fund in the manner provided in this section.  Any person in interest may file with the New Jersey Property-Liability Insurance Guaranty Association an application for payment of compensation or death benefits from the fund on a form to be prescribed and furnished by the New Jersey Property-Liability Insurance Guaranty Association.  If there has been an award, final or otherwise, a certified copy thereof shall accompany the application.  
 
	Any person recovering under R.S.34:15-103 et seq. shall be deemed to have assigned his rights under the policy to the fund to the extent of his recovery from the fund.  Every insured or claimant seeking the protection of R.S.34:15-103 et seq. shall cooperate with the fund to the same extent as that person would have been required to cooperate with the insolvent carrier.  The fund shall have no cause of action against the insured employer or the insolvent carrier for any sums it has paid out, except those causes of action that the insolvent carrier would have had if those sums had been paid by the insolvent carrier, including, but not limited to, the right to receive the benefit of, and to enforce any and all obligations on the part of the insured, to either fund directly (or indirectly through a third party administrator), or secure the payment of, compensation due under the policies of the insolvent carrier, to the extent of claims paid.  The foregoing vests the fund with an exclusive cause of action against the insured and includes the right to enforce against the insured the rights of the carrier with respect to any obligation of the insured to reimburse the carrier for deductibles or pay claims within a deductible.  Further, the fund is vested with a first lien in any collateral provided by the insured to the carrier to secure the insured's performance, to the extent of claims paid by the fund, which lien can be perfected by notice to the liquidator. In the case of an insolvent insurer operating on a plan with an assessment liability, payments of claims of the fund shall not operate to reduce the liability of insureds to the receiver, liquidator or statutory successor for unpaid assessments.
 
	The receiver, liquidator, or statutory successor of an insolvent insurer shall be bound by settlements of covered claims by the fund or its representatives.  The court having jurisdiction shall grant a claim priority equal to that to which the claimant would have been entitled in the absence of R.S.34:15-103 et seq. against the assets of the insolvent carrier.  The expenses of the fund or similar organization in handling claims shall be accorded the same priority as the liquidator's expenses. 
 
	Except as otherwise provided in this section, an employer may pay such award or part thereof in advance of payment from the fund and shall thereupon be subrogated to the rights of the employee or other party in interest against the fund to the extent of the amount so paid. 
 
	The New Jersey Property-Liability Insurance Guaranty Association shall be entitled to recover the sum of all liabilities of such insolvent carrier assumed by such fund from such carrier, its receiver, liquidator, rehabilitator or trustee in bankruptcy and may prosecute an action or other proceedings therefor. All moneys recovered in any such action or proceedings shall forthwith be placed to the credit of the fund to reimburse the fund to the extent of the moneys so recovered and paid. 
 
	amended 1987, c.250, s.5; 2004, c.179, s.8; 2009, c.327, s.5.

34:15-117  Insolvency of carrier; notice to Division of Workers' Compensation; report of conditions.

	34:15-117.  Forthwith upon any carrier becoming insolvent, the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance shall so notify the Division of Workers' Compensation, and the division shall immediately advise the commissioner:  (a) of all claims for compensation pending or thereafter made against an employer insured by such insolvent carrier, or against such insolvent carrier; (b) of all unpaid or continuing agreements, awards or decisions made upon claims prior to or after the date of such notice from such commissioner; and (c) of all appeals from or applications for modifications or recision or review of such agreements, awards or decisions.

	Amended 2004, c.179, s.9.



34:15-120.1.   Uninsured employer's fund 
   a.     There is hereby created a fund which shall be known as the "uninsured employer's fund" to provide for the payment of awards against uninsured defaulting employers who fail to provide compensation to employees or their beneficiaries in accordance with the provisions of the workers' compensation law, R.S. 34:15-1 et seq. 

  The fund shall be administered, maintained, and disbursed by the Commissioner of Labor as hereinafter provided. 

  b. (1) For the purpose of establishing and maintaining this fund, the Commissioner of Labor shall impose on January 1, 1989 and on the first day of each year thereafter, except as provided below, an annual surcharge upon each workers' compensation policyholder and employer's liability insurance policyholder and each self-insured employer insured pursuant to R.S. 34:15-77. Each workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance policyholder and self-insured employer shall be liable for payment of the annual surcharge in accordance with the provisions of this section and all regulations promulgated pursuant thereto.  The annual surcharge imposed under this section shall apply to all workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance policies written or renewed or, in the case of self-insured employers, to coverage provided on or after January 1, 1989. However, the surcharge shall not apply: to any reinsurance or retrocessional transaction; to the State or any political subdivision thereof which acts as a self-insured employer; or to any workers' compensation endorsement required pursuant to section 1 of P.L. 1979, c. 380 (C. 17:36-5.29). 

  If the Commissioner of Labor determines, pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection b., that the "uninsured employer's fund" will have to its credit a sum in excess of $500,000.00 at the end of any calendar year, the annual surcharge shall be suspended for the next following year and its collection not resumed until the calendar year immediately following any calendar year in which the balance in the fund is reduced below $500,000.00. 

  (2)    For the calendar year 1989, the total amount of the surcharge levied by the commissioner shall be $500,000.00.  On September 1 of 1989 and of each year thereafter, the Commissioner of Labor shall estimate the amount of benefits that have been paid and will be paid from the "uninsured employer's fund" during that calendar year, and shall calculate in consultation with the Commissioner of Insurance, the total amount of the annual surcharge for the "uninsured employer's fund" to be levied during the next following calendar year upon all workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance policyholders and self-insured employers pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection b.  The total amount of the annual surcharge shall equal 150% of the moneys estimated by the Commissioner of Labor to be payable from the "uninsured employer's fund" during the calendar year preceding the year during which the annual surcharge will be imposed. 

  (3)    The total amount of the annual surcharge calculated pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection b. shall be added to the aggregate annual surcharge amount to be levied upon and apportioned among all workers' compensation and employer's liability policyholders and self-insured employers pursuant to R.S. 34:15-94, and be levied and apportioned in the same manner as the annual surcharge for the Second Injury Fund as provided in R.S. 34:15-94. The surcharge to be collected from policyholders and self-insured employers pursuant to this section shall, however, be stated separately on the policy or billing statement and the amount of the surcharge as applied pursuant to this section shall not be subject to reduction for special adjustment and supplemental benefits paid or payable under the workers' compensation law, R.S. 34:15-1 et seq. 

  (4)    As used in this subsection, "policyholder" means a holder of a workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance policy issued by an insurer that is a domestic, foreign or alien mutual association or stock company writing workers' compensation or employer's liability insurance on risks located in this State and subject to premium taxes pursuant to P.L. 1945, c. 132 (C. 54:18A-1).  "Self-insured employer" means an employer which self-insures for workers' compensation or employer's liability insurance pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 34:15-77. 

  (5)    All moneys collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the "uninsured employer's fund."  Collection of the annual surcharge shall be under the authority of the Commissioner of Labor as defined in R.S. 34:15-94. 

  c.     The Director of the Division of Workers' Compensation upon rendering a decision with respect to any claim for compensation under chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes that the employer liable therefor has failed to secure the payment of compensation with respect to a claim in accordance with R.S. 34:15-71 or R.S. 34:15-72, shall impose a penalty of $1,000.00 against the employer and direct its payment into the "uninsured employer's fund" in connection with each such claim.  The director shall also impose an additional assessment of 15% of the award or awards made in each claim.  This additional assessment shall not exceed, however, the sum of $5,000.00 on any one claim, and shall be paid into the "uninsured employer's fund." 

  If the employer fails to pay these assessments into the fund within 10 days after date of mailing of notice thereof to him, this shall constitute a default in payment of compensation due pursuant to the provisions of the workers' compensation law, R.S. 34:15-1 et seq., and judgment therefor shall be entered in accordance therewith. 

  All sums collected from an uninsured defaulting employer with respect to any claim for compensation referred to in this section but not payable from the fund, whether such collection is made prior or subsequent to entry of judgment against the employer, shall be deemed in payment of and applicable first in satisfaction of any compensation and benefits due from the employer with respect to the claim and security demand, if any, in connection therewith and only when the obligations are satisfied in full shall the balance of said sums collected, if any, be deemed payment in satisfaction of and applicable to the assessments above prescribed in this section. 

  All sums recovered from uninsured defaulting employers on judgments entered for failure to pay assessments as hereinafter provided and for failure to pay compensation and benefits which were paid from the "uninsured employer's fund," shall upon recovery be paid into that fund. 

  P.L. 1966, c. 126, s. 10; amended 1988,c.25,s.1. 

34:15-120.2.   Benefit payments 
   a.     In any case in which a claim for compensation is filed pursuant to the provisions of the workers' compensation law, R.S. 34:15-1 et seq., and the employer has failed to secure the payment of compensation as required by R.S. 34:15-71 or R.S. 34:15-72 and to make payment of compensation according to the terms of any award within 45 days thereafter and fails or refuses to deposit with the director within 10 days after demand the commuted or estimated value of the compensation payable under the award as security for prompt and convenient payment of compensation periodically as it accrues, then, unless a notice of appeal has been timely filed, the award shall be payable out of the "uninsured employer's fund." 

  b.     Benefit payments from the "uninsured employer's fund" may include: 

  (1)    Compensation for reasonable medical expenses covered by the workers' compensation law, R.S. 34:15-1 et seq.; and 

  (2)    Compensation for temporary disability as provided in subsection a. of R.S. 34:15-12. 

  c.     Benefit payments from the "uninsured employer's fund" shall not include: 

  (1)    Any compensation not included in the award or judgment upon which a claim against the fund is made; 

  (2)    Extra compensation or death benefits pursuant to R.S. 34:15-10. 

  d.     Temporary disability benefits paid from the "uninsured employer's fund" shall be offset or reduced by an amount equal to the amount of disability benefits received by the claimant pursuant to the federal "Old-Age, Survivors' and Disability Insurance Act" (42 U.S.C. s. 401 et al.). 

  e.     Benefits shall be paid to a claimant from the "uninsured employer's fund" only if the claimant: (1) was, at the time of the injury or death, an employee performing service for an employer outside of casual employment as defined in R.S. 34:15-36; and (2) did not recover full compensation for reasonable medical expenses and temporary disability benefits from the uninsured defaulting employer. 

  P.L. 1966, c. 126, s. 11; amended 1988,c.25,s.2. 

34:15-120.3  Default by uninsured employer; judgment.
 
	12. The director, in any  case  in which an award of compensation payable by an uninsured employer or an assessment has been ordered by the director, shall file with the Clerk of the Superior Court, (1) a statement containing the findings of fact, conclusions of law, award and judgment of the  judge making the award, or (2) a certified copy of the director's order imposing, and the demand for payment of, the assessment, and, the filing of that statement or order, as the case may be, shall have the same effect and may be collected and docketed in the same manner as judgments rendered in causes tried in the Superior Court.  The court shall vacate or modify such judgment to conform to any later award or decision by any authorized officer of the division upon presentation of a statement thereof as provided for above.  The award may be compromised by the Commissioner of Labor and  Workforce Development as in his discretion may best serve the interest of the persons entitled to receive the  compensation or benefits.
 
	L.1966, c.126, s.12; amended 2009, c.291.

34:15-120.4.   Application for compensation 
   a.     After an award has been entered against an employer for compensation under any provision of the workers' compensation law, R.S. 34:15-1 et seq., and the Director of the Division of Workers' Compensation has filed an order for payment of compensation and assessments with the Clerk of the Superior Court pursuant to section 12 of P.L. 1966, c. 126 (C. 34:15-120.3) as a result of the employer's failure to provide lawful compensation, the claimant may apply to the Commissioner of Labor for compensation from the "uninsured employer's fund" in accordance with the procedures established by the Commissioner of Labor pursuant to section 16 of P.L. 1966, c. 126 (C. 34:15-120.7). 

  b.     The Commissioner of Labor is charged with the conservation of the assets of the "uninsured employer's fund."  Notwithstanding the provisions of any other section of this act, no payments shall be made from the fund except upon application to and approval by the commissioner.  Review of any decision by the commissioner shall be in accordance with R.S. 34:15-66. 

  c.     The Commissioner of Labor shall have the authority to establish rules for the review of claims against the "uninsured employer's fund" and hire and reimburse medical and other expert witnesses that are necessary to a proper conservation and defense of the moneys in the fund. 

  d.     Upon being notified by the Commissioner of Labor that a decision of the commissioner regarding claims against the "uninsured employer's fund" is being appealed pursuant to R.S. 34:15-66, the Attorney General, or his designee, shall defend the fund. 

  e.     The Commissioner of Labor may also employ such employees as may be required to maintain and conserve the "uninsured employer's fund," and may also employ legal counsel to represent the fund and conduct investigations on behalf of the fund. 

  P.L. 1966, c. 126, s. 13; amended 1988,c.25,s.3. 

34:15-120.5.  Subrogation;  right of fund against employer
    To the extent of the compensation and benefits paid or payable to an employee or his dependents from the uninsured employers' fund, the fund, by subrogation, shall be entitled to all the rights, powers and benefits of the employee or his dependents against the employer arising under the provisions of  chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes;  and in any case or situation  contemplated by section 34:15-40 of the Revised Statutes, the fund, shall have  the same rights as the employer.

     L.1966, c. 126, s. 14.

34:15-120.6.   Annual accounting 
   The commissioner shall annually submit an accounting of the "uninsured employer's fund" to the State Treasurer and to the appropriations and labor committees of both houses of the State Legislature.  The report to the Legislature shall include the following information:  an estimate of the total amount of benefits paid from the fund in the preceding calendar year; an estimate of the benefits that may be paid from the fund in the current calendar year; a determination of the average cost to employers in the State, on a per employee basis, of providing benefits through the "uninsured employer's fund;" and a determination of the amount of money drawn from the fund during the preceding calendar year for administrative purposes pursuant to section 8 of P.L. 1988, c. 25 (C. 34:15-120.10).  Payments to applicants from the fund shall be made by the State Treasurer upon warrants of the Commissioner of Labor. 

  P.L. 1966, c. 126, s. 15; amended 1988,c.25,s.4. 

34:15-120.7.   Rules, regulations 
   The commissioner may make all rules and regulations necessary for the processing and payment of compensation out of the "uninsured employer's fund."

  The commissioner shall promulgate, in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L. 1968, c. 410 (C. 52:14B-1 et seq.), regulations to establish and administer an application and review process for claims made against the fund. 

  P.L. 1966, c. 126, s. 16; amended 1988,c.25,s.5. 

34:15-120.8.   Limitation on liability 
   The liability of the "uninsured employer's fund" and the State with respect to payment of any compensation, benefits, expenses, fees for disbursements properly chargeable against the fund shall be limited to the assets in the fund as exceed $50,000.00, and the fund and the State shall not otherwise in any way or manner be liable for the making of any such payment. 

  P.L. 1966, c. 126, s. 17; amended 1988,c.25,s.6. 

34:15-120.9.   Action against employer 
   If an employer fails to provide compensation to an employee or his beneficiaries as required by chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes, the employee, who has sustained a compensable injury or died as a result of his employment, or his beneficiaries may bring an action against the employer to recover all or part of any damages and costs sustained by the employee for any injury or death which has been deemed compensable under the workers' compensation law, R.S. 34:15-1 et seq., and for which the employee or his estate has not received compensation from the "uninsured employer's fund." 

  P.L. 1988, c. 25, s. 7. 

34:15-120.10.  Administrative expenses; $10,000 limit 
   In any fiscal year during which benefit payments are made from the "uninsured employer's fund," the Commissioner of Labor shall apply an amount equal to $100.00 for each employee to whom such benefits have been paid from the fund toward the expenses of the Department of Labor arising from the administration of those benefit payments and the fund.  However, the total amount withdrawn from the fund to cover administrative expenses shall not exceed $10,000.00 during any fiscal year. 

  P.L. 1988, c. 25, s. 8. 

34:15-120.11.  Duties of Division of Workers' Compensation 
   Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, the Division of Workers' Compensation shall use every available administrative means to ensure that benefit payments from the "uninsured employer's fund" are paid only to individuals who meet the eligibility requirements of the workers' compensation law, R.S. 34:15-1 et seq., and that persons who are required to make payments pursuant to the workers' compensation law have provided lawful compensation and paid any penalty, fine, or assessment imposed pursuant to that law. 

  P.L. 1988, c. 25, s. 9. 

34:15-120.12.  Notification of change in income 
   The burden shall be upon the claimant to immediately notify in writing the Director of the Division of Workers' Compensation of any increase or decrease in his income that may affect his eligibility for benefits payable from the "uninsured employer's fund."  Ten days after notice has been given to the claimant and the Attorney General, the director may modify or terminate an award payable from the fund as conditions may require.  Any payment to a claimant pursuant to this 1988 amendatory and supplementary act which is later determined by the Commissioner of Labor to have been procured by fraud, mistake, or an unreported change in condition, shall be recovered from the claimant and deposited in the fund. 

  P.L. 1988, c. 25, s. 10. 

34:15-120.13.  Exhaustion of remedies 
   The Commissioner of Labor shall, on behalf of the "uninsured employer's fund," exhaust all remedies at law against the uninsured delinquent employer of the claimant to collect the amount of any award to the claimant paid by the fund. 

  P.L. 1988, c. 25, s. 11. 

34:15-120.14.  Other obligations unaffected 
   Nothing in this act, P.L. 1988, c. 25 (C. 34:15-120.9 et seq.), shall affect the obligations of insurance carriers or self-insured employers imposed by any other section of the workers' compensation law, R.S. 34:15-1 et seq. 

  P.L. 1988, c. 25, s. 12. 

34:15-120.15.  Definitions  
    1.   As used in this act:

  

   "Association" means the New Jersey Self-Insurers Guaranty Association created in subsection a. of section 2 of this act.  

   "Board of directors" or "board" means the board of directors of the association established under section 3 of this act.  

   "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Insurance.

  

   "Department" means the Department of Insurance.

  

   "Fund" means the Insolvency Fund created pursuant to section 5 of this act.  

   "Injured worker" or "employee" means an employee of an employer or a dependent of the employee to whom the employer is obligated to pay compensation pursuant to chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes.  

   "Insolvent member" means a member employer:  (1) (a) which files for relief in bankruptcy under Title 11 of the United States Code, 11 U.S.C. s.101 et seq.; (b) against which involuntary bankruptcy proceedings are filed under that title; or (c) for which a receiver has been appointed by a court of competent jurisdiction; and (2) which is determined to be insolvent by the board as provided in its plan of operation, based upon the member employer's ability to pay compensation pursuant to R.S.34:15-77.  

   "Member employer" or "member" means a self-insurer which is a member of the association.  

   "Self-insurer" means an employer, other than a governmental entity, which self-insures for the purposes of workers' compensation as permitted by R.S.34:15-77.  

   L.1993,c.107,s.1.  

34:15-120.16. "New Jersey Self-Insurers Guaranty Association"  
    2.  a.  There is created a nonprofit entity to be known as the "New Jersey Self-Insurers Guaranty Association."  All self-insurers shall be members of the association as a condition of their authority to self-insure in this State.  The association shall perform its functions under a plan of operation as established and approved under section 6 of this act and shall exercise its powers and duties through a board of directors as established under section 3 of this act.  

   b.   A member may voluntarily withdraw from the association when the member voluntarily terminates the self-insurance privilege and pays all assessments due to the date of that termination.  However, the withdrawing member shall continue to be bound by the provisions of this act relating to the period of its membership and any claims charged pursuant thereto.  A withdrawing member shall also be required to provide to the department upon withdrawal, and at 12-month intervals thereafter, satisfactory proof that it continues to meet the standards of R.S.34:15-77 in relation to claims incurred while the withdrawing member exercised the privilege of self-insurance.  Such reporting shall continue until the withdrawing member satisfies the department that there is no remaining value to claims incurred while the withdrawing member was self-insured.  If during this reporting period the withdrawing member fails to meet the standards of R.S.34:15-77, the withdrawing member shall thereupon, and at six-month intervals thereafter, provide to the department and the association the certified opinion of an independent actuary who is a member of the American Society of Actuaries of the actuarial present value of the determined and estimated future compensation payments of the withdrawing member for claims incurred while it was a self-insurer, using a discount rate of four percent.  With each such opinion, the withdrawing member shall deposit with the department security in an amount equal to the value certified by the actuary and of a type that is acceptable for the purposes of R.S.34:15-77.  The withdrawing member shall continue to provide such opinions and to provide such security until such time as the latest opinion shows no remaining value of claims.  The association has a cause of action against a withdrawing member, and against any successor of a withdrawing member, who fails to timely provide the required opinion or who fails to maintain the required deposit with the department.  The association shall be entitled to recover a judgment in the amount of the actuarial present value of the determined and estimated future compensation payments of the withdrawing member for claims incurred during the time that the withdrawing member exercised the privilege of self-insurance, together with reasonable attorney's fees.  For purposes of this section, the "successor of a withdrawing member" means any person, business entity, or group of persons or business entities, which holds or acquires legal or beneficial title to the majority of the assets or the majority of the shares of the withdrawing member.  

   L.1993,c.107,s.2.  

34:15-120.17.  Board of directors  
    3.   The board of directors of the association shall consist of five persons and shall be organized as established in the plan of operation.  With respect to initial appointments, the commissioner shall, within 180 days of the effective date of this act, approve and appoint to the board persons who are employed or who have been employed by a self-insurer in this State required to become a member of the association pursuant to the provisions of section 2 of this act and are, or were, as the case may be, responsible for the administration of workers' compensation for that self-insurer for at least five years and who are recommended by the self-insurers in this State required to become members of the association pursuant to the provisions of section 2 of this act.  If the commissioner finds that any person so recommended does not have the necessary qualifications for service on the board and a majority of the board has been appointed, the commissioner shall request the directors thus far approved and appointed to recommend another person for appointment to the board.  Each director shall serve for a four-year term and may be reappointed.  Appointments other than initial appointments shall be made by the commissioner upon recommendation of members of the association.  Any vacancy on the board shall be filled for the remaining period of the term in the same manner as appointments other than initial appointments are made. Each director may be reimbursed from assets of the association for expenses incurred in carrying out the duties of the board on behalf of the association.

   L.1993,c.107,s.3.  

34:15-120.18.  Association obligated for payment of compensation; powers; assessments  
    4.  a.  Upon creation of the Insolvency Fund pursuant to the provisions of section 5 of this act, the association is obligated for payment of compensation under chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes to insolvent members' employees resulting from: (1) incidents and injuries existing prior to the member becoming an insolvent member; and (2) incidents and injuries occurring after the member has become an insolvent member, if the employee makes timely claim for those payments according to procedures set forth by a court of competent jurisdiction over the delinquency or bankruptcy proceedings of the insolvent member.  Such obligation includes only that amount due the injured worker or workers of the insolvent member under chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes.  In no event is the association obligated to a claimant in an amount in excess of the obligation of the insolvent member. The association shall be deemed the insolvent member for purposes of chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes to the extent of its obligation on the covered claims and, to that extent, shall have all rights, duties and obligations of the insolvent member as if the member had not become insolvent. However, in no event shall the association be liable for any penalties or interest or for compensation payments which were due before the member became an insolvent member.  

   b.   The association may:

  

   (1)  Employ or retain those persons necessary to handle claims and perform other duties of the association.  

   (2)  Borrow funds necessary to effect the purposes of this act in accordance with the plan of operation.  

   (3)  Sue or be sued.

  

   (4)  Negotiate and become a party to those contracts as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this act.  

   (5)  Purchase reinsurance as it determines necessary pursuant to the plan of operation.  

   (6)  Review all applicants for membership in the association. Prior to a final determination by the department as to whether or not to approve any applicant for membership in the association, the association may issue opinions to the department concerning any applicant, which opinions shall be considered by the department prior to any final determination.  

   (7)  Charge fees to any member of the association to cover the actual costs of examining the financial condition of that member.  

   (8)  Charge an applicant for membership in the association a fee sufficient to cover the actual costs of examining the financial condition of the applicant.  

   c.  (1)  To the extent necessary to secure funds for the payment of covered claims and also to pay the reasonable costs to administer them, the association shall levy assessments on its members.  The assessment charged to each member shall be in the proportion that the member's compensation payments during the 12-month period ending on the June 30th immediately preceding the date of the assessment bear to the total compensation payments made by all members during that period.  The assessment levied against any member in any one year shall be in an amount not exceeding 1.5 percent of the total compensation paid by the member during the 12-month period ending on the June 30th immediately preceding the date of the assessment, except that the association shall increase the assessment to not more than two percent each year as needed to establish and sustain a prefunded reserve of $1,000,000. Assessments shall be administered by the board of directors in the manner specified by the plan of operation.  Each member so assessed shall have at least 30 days' written notice as to the date the assessment is due and payable. The association shall levy assessments against any newly admitted member of the association so that the basis of contribution of any newly admitted member is the same as previously admitted members, provision for which shall be contained in the plan of operation.  

   (2)  If, in any one year, funds available from such assessments, together with funds previously raised, are not sufficient to make all the payments or reimbursements then owing, the funds available shall be prorated, and the unpaid portion shall be paid as soon thereafter as sufficient additional funds become available.  

   (3)  No State funds of any kind shall be allocated or paid to the association or any of its accounts.  

   d.   The association shall make every reasonable effort and undertake all appropriate actions to obtain from an insolvent member whatever funds are needed to pay compensation due to employees of the insolvent member.  

   L.1993,c.107,s.4.  

34:15-120.19.  Insolvency Fund  
    5.   Upon the adoption of a plan of operation or the adoption of rules by the commissioner pursuant to subsection a. of section 6 of this act, there shall be created an Insolvency Fund to be managed by the association.  

   a.   The Insolvency Fund is created for purposes of meeting the obligations of insolvent members incurred while members of the association and other insolvent self-insurers as provided in section 15 of this act and after the exhaustion of any bond, as required under chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes.  However, if the bond, surety, or reinsurance policy is payable to the association, the association shall commence to provide benefits out of the fund and be reimbursed from the bond, surety, or reinsurance policy.  The method of operation of the fund shall be defined in the plan of operation pursuant to section 6 of this act.  

   b.   The department shall have the authority to audit the financial soundness of the fund annually.  

   c.   The commissioner may offer certain amendments to the plan of operation to the board of directors for purposes of assuring the ongoing financial soundness of the fund and its ability to meet the obligations of this act.  

   d.   The department actuary may make recommendations to improve the orderly payment of claims.  

   L.1993,c.107,s.5.  

34:15-120.20.  Plan of operation  
    6.  a.  (1)  Within one year of the effective date of this act, the board of directors shall submit to the commissioner a proposed plan of operation for the fair, reasonable and equitable administration of the association and the fund.  The plan of operation, and any amendments thereto, shall take effect upon approval in writing by the commissioner.  

   (2)  If the board of directors fails to submit a plan within one year of the effective date of this act, or thereafter fails to submit any acceptable amendments to the plan, the commissioner shall promulgate the rules necessary to effectuate the provisions of this section.  The rules shall continue in force until modified by the commissioner or superseded by a plan submitted by the board of directors and approved by the commissioner.  

   b.   The plan of operation shall establish the programs necessary to protect against the insolvency of a member of the association and shall provide that the members of the association shall be responsible for maintaining an adequate fund to meet the obligations of insolvent members and other insolvent self-insurers provided for under this act and the board of directors is authorized to contract and employ those persons with the necessary expertise to carry out these stated purposes.  

   c.   All member employers shall comply with the plan of operation.  

   d.   The plan of operation shall:

  

   (1)  Establish the procedures whereby all the powers and duties of the association under sections 4 and 15 of this act will be performed.  

   (2)  Establish procedures for handling assets of the association.  

   (3)  Establish the amount and method of reimbursing members of the board of directors under section 3 of this act.  

   (4)  Establish procedures and standards for determining the insolvency of member employers pursuant to the provisions of this act.  

   (5)  Establish procedures by which claims may be filed with the association and establish acceptable forms of proof of covered claims.  Notice of claims to the receiver or liquidator of the insolvent member shall be deemed notice to the association or its agent, and a list of those claims shall be submitted periodically to the association or similar organization in another state by the receiver or liquidator.  

   (6)  Establish regular places and times for meetings of the board of directors.  

   (7)  Establish procedures for records to be kept of all financial transactions of the association and its agents and the board of directors.  

   (8)  Provide that any member employer aggrieved by any final action or decision of the association may appeal to the department within 30 days after the action or decision.  

   (9)  Establish the procedures whereby recommendations of candidates for the board of directors shall be submitted to the commissioner.  

   (10)  Contain additional provisions necessary or proper for the execution of the powers and duties of the association.  

   e.   The plan of operation may provide that any or all of the powers and duties of the association, except those specified under paragraphs (1), (2) and (4) of subsection d. of this section, be delegated to a corporation, association, or other organization which performs or will perform functions similar to those of this association or its equivalent in two or more states. Such a corporation, association, or organization shall be reimbursed as a servicing facility would be reimbursed and shall be paid for its performance of any other functions of the association.  A delegation of powers or duties under this subsection shall take effect only with the approval of both the board of directors and the commissioner and may be made only to a corporation, association, or organization which extends protection which is not substantially less favorable and effective than the protection provided by this act.  

   L.1993,c.107,s.6.  

34:15-120.21. Written notice of bankruptcy proceedings, determination of insolvency  
    7.  a.  A member employer which files for relief in bankruptcy under Title 11 of the United States Code, 11 U.S.C. s.101 et seq.; or against which involuntary bankruptcy proceedings are filed under that title; or for which a receiver is appointed by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall file written notice of that fact with the commissioner and the board of directors of the association within 30 days of the occurrence of such an event.  

   b.   Upon receipt of the notice required by subsection a. of this section, the board shall review the member employer's ability to pay compensation pursuant to R.S.34:15-77 and make a determination as to insolvency.  If the board determines at any time that the member employer is insolvent, it shall notify the commissioner and the members of the association not later than three business days after the determination of insolvency.  

   L.1993,c.107,s.7.  

34:15-120.22.  Powers of department  
    8.   The department may:

  

   a.   Require that the association notify other interested parties of the determination of insolvency and of their rights under this act.  Notification shall be by mail at the last known address thereof when available; but, if sufficient information for notification by mail is not available, notice by publication in a newspaper of general circulation shall be sufficient.  

   b.   Suspend or revoke the authority of any member employer failing to pay an assessment when due or failing to comply with the plan of operation to self-insure in this State.  As an alternative, the department may levy a fine on any member employer failing to pay an assessment when due.  Such fine shall not exceed five percent of the unpaid assessment per month, except that no fine shall be less than $100 per month.  

   L.1993,c.107,s.8.  

34:15-120.23.  Assignment of rights to association  
    9.  a.  Any person who recovers from the association under this act shall be deemed to have assigned his rights to the association to the extent of that recovery.  Every claimant seeking the protection of this act shall cooperate with the association to the same extent as that person would have been required to cooperate with the insolvent member.  The association shall have no cause of action against the employee of the insolvent member for any sums the association has paid out, except those causes of action which the insolvent member would have had if the sums had been paid by the insolvent member.  In the case of an insolvent member operating with assessment liability, payments of claims by the association shall not operate to reduce the liability of the insolvent member to the receiver, liquidator, or statutory successor for unpaid assessments.  

   b.   The receiver, liquidator, or statutory successor of an insolvent member shall be bound by settlements of covered claims by the association or a similar organization in another state.  The court having jurisdiction shall grant those claims priority against the assets of the insolvent member equal to that to which the claimant would have been entitled in the absence of this act.  The expense of the association or similar organization in handling claims shall be accorded the same priority as the expenses of the liquidator. 

   c.   The association shall file periodically with the receiver or liquidator of the insolvent member statements of the covered claims paid by the association and estimates of anticipated claims on the association, which shall preserve the rights of the association against the assets of the insolvent member.  

   L.1993,c.107,s.9.  

34:15-120.24.  Detection, prevention of employer insolvencies  
    10.  To aid in the detection and prevention of employer insolvencies:  

   a.   Upon determination by majority vote of the membership of the board that any member employer may be insolvent or in a financial condition hazardous to the employees thereof or to the public, it shall be the duty of the board of directors to notify the department of any information indicating that condition.  

   b.   The board of directors may, upon majority vote of the membership of the board, request that the department determine the condition of any member employer which the board in good faith believes may no longer be qualified to be a member of the association.  Within 30 days of the receipt of that request or, for good cause shown, within a reasonable time thereafter, the department shall make such determination and shall forthwith advise the board of its findings.  Each request for a determination shall be kept on file by the department, but the request shall not be open to public inspection prior to the release of the determination to the public.  

   c.   It shall also be the duty of the department to report to the board of directors when it has reasonable cause to believe that a member employer may be in such a financial condition as to be no longer qualified to be a member of the association.  

   d.   The board of directors may, upon majority vote of the membership of the board, make reports and recommendations to the department upon any matter which is germane to the solvency, liquidation, rehabilitation, or conservation of any member employer.  Such reports and recommendations shall not be considered public documents.  

   e.   The board of directors may, upon majority vote of the membership of the board, make recommendations to the department for the detection and prevention of employer insolvencies.  

   f.   The board of directors shall, at the conclusion of any member's insolvency in which the association was obligated to pay covered claims, prepare a report on the history and cause of that insolvency, based on the information available to the association, and shall submit that report to the department.  

   L.1993,c.107,s.10.  

34:15-120.25.  Examination, regulation of association  
    11.  The association shall be subject to examination and regulation by the department.  No later than March 30 of each year, the board of directors shall submit a financial report for the preceding calendar year in a form approved by the department.  

   L.1993,c.107,s.11.  

34:15-120.26.  Immunity from liability  
    12.  There shall be no liability on the part of, and no cause of action of any nature shall arise against, any member employer, the association or its agents or employees, the board of directors, or the department or its representatives for any action or omission by them in the performance of their powers and duties under this act.  

   L.1993,c.107,s.12.  

34:15-120.27.  Stay of proceedings  
    13. a.  All proceedings in which an insolvent member is a party, or is obligated to defend a party, in any court or before any quasi-judicial body or administrative board in this State shall be stayed for up to six months, or for such additional period from the date the member becomes insolvent, as is deemed necessary by a court of competent jurisdiction to permit proper defense by the association of all pending causes of action as to any covered claims arising from a judgment under any decision, verdict, or finding based on the default of the insolvent member.  The association, either on its own behalf or on behalf of the insolvent member, may apply to have that judgment, order, decision, verdict or finding set aside by the same court or administrator that made that judgment, order, decision, verdict or finding and shall be permitted to defend against that claim on the merits.  If requested by the association, the stay of proceedings may be shortened or waived.  

   b.   In any proceeding in bankruptcy in which the payment of benefits has been stayed, the association shall appear and move to lift the stay so that the orderly administration of claims can proceed.  

   L.1993,c.107,s.13.  

34:15-120.28.  Deadline for filing claims  
    14.  Notwithstanding any other provision of chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes, a covered claim, as defined therein, with respect to which settlement is not effected and pursuant to which suit is not instituted against the insured of an insolvent member or the association within one year after the deadline for filing claims with the receiver of the insolvent member, or any extension of the deadline, shall thenceforth be barred as a claim against the association.  

   L.1993,c.107,s.14.  

34:15-120.29.  Additional obligations of association  
    15.  In addition to its obligation to pay compensation to the employees of insolvent members pursuant to section 4 of this act, the association shall be obligated for payment of compensation under chapter 15 of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes to the employees of any self-insurer declared to be insolvent by a court of competent jurisdiction on or after October 1, 1990, but prior to the effective date of this act, as if that self-insurer were an insolvent member subject to the provisions of this act.  

   L.1993,c.107,s.15.  

34:15-120.30.  Construction of act  
    16.  This act shall not be construed as reducing, to any degree or in any way, the responsibility of the commissioner to exercise caution in authorizing any employer to become a self-insured employer, or the commissioner's responsibility to require guarantees, reserve funds, surety bonds or partial insurance as needed to provide adequate assurance of the employer's ability to pay compensation pursuant to R.S.34:15-77.  The purpose of the association is to provide an assurance of the payment of workers' compensation to the employees of insolvent members, not to exempt any employer, even an insolvent employer, from the responsibility to provide workers' compensation to victims of workplace injury or illness, or to reduce, to any degree or in any way, the responsibility of a self-insured employer to provide appropriate guarantees, funds, bonds or other assurances that compensation will be available pursuant to R.S.34:15-77.  

   L.1993,c.107,s.16.  

34:15-121.  Workers' compensation formal cases; records, destruction

	1.  Any records of, or pertaining to, workers' compensation formal cases, wherein original claim petitions have been on file for 45 or more years, may be destroyed by the Division of  Workers' Compensation in the State Department of Labor; provided, the Commissioner of Labor  shall approve such destruction.

	L.1953,c.94,s.1; amended 1997, c.9, s.1.

34:15-122.  Records of workmen's compensation of kind specified in article six
    Any records of, or pertaining to, workmen's compensation of the kind and character specified in article six of chapter fifteen of Title 34 of the Revised Statutes, which have been or shall have been on file for eight or more years, may be destroyed by the Division of Workmen's Compensation; provided, the Commissioner of Labor and Industry shall approve such destruction.

     L.1953, c. 94, p. 1022, s. 2.

34:15-123.  Agreements for payment of workmen's compensation
    Agreements for the payment of workmen's compensation, which have been or shall have been on file for eight or more years, may be destroyed by the Division of Workmen's Compensation;  provided, the Commissioner of Labor and Industry shall approve such destruction.  Any agreement, however, covering a period greater than eight years shall be kept on file for the full term of the agreement.

     L.1953, c. 94, p. 1022, s. 3.

34:15-124.  Records and papers not part of record of workmen's compensation  formal cases
    Records and papers of, or pertaining to, workmen's compensation cases, on file in the Division of Workmen's Compensation and its predecessor, Workmen's Compensation Bureau, which do not constitute a part of the record of any workmen's compensation formal case, may be destroyed by the Division of Workmen's Compensation;  provided, the Commissioner of Labor and Industry and the Bureau of Archives and History in the State Department of Education shall approve such destruction.

     L.1953, c. 94, p. 1023, s. 4.

34:15-125.  Records on microfilm or other media, destruction

	5.  Any records of, or pertaining to, workers' compensation formal cases, which have not been on file for 45 or more years but which have been microfilmed or retained in full in other media, provided such microfilms or information retained in other media shall be preserved in full and arranged for convenient examination, may be destroyed by the Division of Workers' Compensation; provided, the Commissioner of Labor shall approve such destruction.

	L.1953,c.94,s.5; amended 1997, c.9, s.2.

34:15-126.  Force, effect of microfilm or other media

	6.  Any microfilm made or information retained in other media by the Division of  Workers' Compensation pursuant to law, or a certified copy of such microfilm or information retained in other media, shall have the same force and effect as the original in any court or public proceeding and shall be evidential in like manner and to the same effect as though the original record had been there produced and proved.

	L.1953,c.94,s.6;  amended 1997, c.9, s.3.

34:15-127.  Liability for destruction of records
    No official, or member of the Department of Labor and Industry, shall be held liable on his bond, or in the way of damages, for loss, or in any other manner, because of the destruction of any records or papers pursuant to this act.

     L.1953, c. 94, p. 1023, s. 7.

34:15-128  Limited right to inspect, copy records.

	1. a. Notwithstanding any other provision of the chapter to which this act is a supplement or of any other law, no records maintained by the Division of Workers' Compensation or the Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau shall be disclosed to any person who seeks disclosure of the records for the purpose of selling or furnishing for a consideration to others information from those records or reports or abstracts of workers' compensation records or work-injury records pertaining to any claimant.  No information shall be disclosed from those records to any person not in the division, unless:

	(1)	The information is provided in a manner which makes it impossible to identify any claimant;

	(2)	The records are opened for the exclusive purpose of permitting a claimant, employer, insurance carrier or authorized agent of the claimant, employer or insurance carrier to conduct an investigation by or on behalf of the claimant, employer or insurance carrier in connection with any pending workers' compensation case to which the claimant, employer or insurance carrier is a party, and the party seeking access to the records certifies to the division that the information from the records will be used only for purposes directly related to the case;

	(3)	The records are opened for the exclusive purpose of permitting a third party directly involved in a workers' compensation case, including any workers' compensation lienholders, or an authorized agent of the third party, to conduct an investigation by or on behalf of the third party in connection with the case, and the party seeking access to the records certifies to the division that the information from the records will be used only for purposes directly related to the case;

	(4)	The records are subpoenaed by the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance pursuant to section 10 of P.L.1983, c.320 (C.17:33A-10) or by a court of competent jurisdiction in a civil or criminal proceeding;

	(5)	The division provides the information to another governmental agency pursuant to law, for a duly recognized purpose of that agency, which agency shall not subsequently disclose any of the information to any person, organization, entity or governmental agency not entitled to receive the information from the Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau or the Division of Workers' Compensation pursuant to the workers' compensation law, R.S. 34:15-1 et seq.; or

	(6)	The information is information about the claimant requested by the claimant, in which case the division shall disclose the information and the claimant shall not be charged fees in excess of the cost of providing copies of the information.

	b.	Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no information from records maintained by the Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau pertaining to any work injury or illness or workers' compensation claim shall be disclosed to any business or other member of the public unless the bureau discloses the information in a manner which makes it impossible to identify the claimant.

	c.	Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no information provided by the division to any other governmental agency pursuant to subsection a. of this section shall be disclosed by the agency to any business or other member of the public unless the information is disclosed to the business or other member of the public in a manner which makes it impossible to identify the claimant.

	d.	Notwithstanding the restrictions on disclosure set forth under subsections a. through c. of this section, a claimant may authorize the release of records of the claimant to a specific person not otherwise authorized to receive the records, by submitting written authorization for the release to the division specifically directing the division to release workers' compensation records to that person.  However, no such authorization directing disclosure of records to a prospective employer shall be valid, nor shall an authorization permitting disclosure of records in connection with assessing fitness or capability for employment be valid, and no disclosure of records shall be made with respect thereto, unless requested pursuant to and consistent with the federal "Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990," 42 U.S.C. s.12101 et seq. and the "Law Against Discrimination," P.L.1945, c.169 (C.10:5-1 et seq.).  It shall be unlawful for any person to consider for the purpose of assessing eligibility for a benefit, or as the basis for an employment-related action, an individual's failure to provide authorization under this subsection.

	L.1966,c.164,s.1; amended 2001, c.326, s.4.

34:15-128.1  Short title.

	5.	Sections 6 through 9 of this act shall be known and may be cited as the "Workers' Compensation Medical Information Confidentiality Act."

	L.2001,c.326,s.5.

34:15-128.2  Definitions relative to "Workers' Compensation Medical Information Confidentiality Act."

	6.	For the purposes of section 1 of P.L.1966, c.164 (C.34:15-128) and sections 6 through 9 of this amendatory and supplementary act:

	"Disclose" means to release, transfer, open for inspection, make available for copying or otherwise divulge information to any person other than the individual who is the subject of the information.

	"Division" means the Division of Workers' Compensation.

	"Medical information" means information, whether oral or recorded in any form or medium, that is created or received by a health care provider regarding an individual which is or may be used in connection with a workers' compensation case, or that is provided to the employer or its workers' compensation insurer or their agents in connection with the case, and relates to an individual's past, present or future physical or mental health or condition, the provision of health care to an individual, or the past, present or future payment for the provision of health care to an individual.

	"Workers' compensation case" or "case" means any case in which an individual seeks workers' compensation benefits, whether or not the individual files a formal claim with the division.

	L.2001,c.326,s.6.

34:15-128.3  Disclosure of medical information.

	7. a. In any case of an individual seeking workers' compensation from an employer, it shall be unlawful for the employer, the workers' compensation insurance carrier of the employer, a health care provider treating or evaluating the individual in connection with the case, or a third party in the case, or their agents, to disclose any medical information regarding the individual to any person other than a participant in that workers' compensation case, a reinsurer, the health care provider, medical and non-medical experts retained in connection with the case, the division, or the Compensation Rating and Inspection Bureau, except under the following circumstances:

	(1)	The information is disclosed in a manner that makes it impossible to ascertain the identity of the individual;

	(2)	The information is collected, used or disclosed to or from an insurance support organization, provided that the information is used only to perform the insurance functions of claims settlement, detection and prevention of fraud, or detection and prevention of a misrepresentation or nondisclosure which is material to an insurance claim;

	(3)	Records containing the information are subpoenaed by the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance pursuant to section 10 of P.L.1983, c.320 (C.17:33A-10) or by a court of competent jurisdiction in a civil or criminal proceeding; or

	(4)	The information is disclosed to another employer or insurance carrier of that employer for the sole purpose of determining the credit to be given to the other employer or carrier pursuant to subsection d. of R.S.34:15-12 if the individual seeks compensation from the other employer or insurance carrier.

	b.	The Commissioner of Banking and Insurance shall have the power to examine and investigate the affairs of every insurance support organization that receives information pursuant to this section in order to determine whether the insurance support organization has been or is engaged in any conduct in violation of sections 6 through 9 of this amendatory and supplementary act.

	L.2001,c.326,s.7.

34:15-128.4  Withholding information unlawful; certain circumstances.

	8.	Except for medical or non-medical evaluations performed for the purposes of evaluating the permanency of an employee's disability requested by the employer or its insurance carrier, in any case of an individual seeking workers' compensation from an employer, it shall be unlawful for the employer, the workers' compensation insurance carrier of the employer, a health care provider treating or evaluating the individual in connection with the case, or a third party in the case, or their agents, to withhold from the individual any medical information they have regarding that individual which is requested by the individual, and if an individual requests the medical information, the individual shall not be charged fees in excess of the cost of providing copies of the information.

	L.2001,c.326,s.8.

34:15-128.5  Violations, fine, penalty.

	9.	Any person who violates any provision of section 7 or 8 of this amendatory and supplementary act shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 60 days or both.

	L.2001,c.326,s.9.

34:15-129.	Short title
	1. 	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Horse Racing Injury Compensation Board Act."

	L.1995,c.329,s.1.

34:15-130  Findings, declarations.
 
	2.	The Legislature finds and declares that, whereas current law already requires virtually all employers to provide for the payment of workers' compensation benefits to injured employees, because of the unique nature of the horse racing industry, difficulties have arisen in ensuring that coverage is provided to employees.  For example, out-of-State horse owners are sometimes unaware of their obligation to provide such coverage, or because a jockey may ride the horses of more than one owner, there may be confusion as to who the responsible employer is.  As a result, serious injuries have been sustained for which there is no coverage.
 
	It is, therefore, in the public interest to ensure that workers' compensation coverage is available to persons employed in the thoroughbred and standardbred horse racing industries in New Jersey by collectively securing workers' compensation insurance coverage for certain designated horse racing industry employees who are eligible to receive that coverage pursuant to the provisions of this act, the costs of which shall be funded by the horse racing industry, and the assessments for funding that coverage shall be calculated separately for the thoroughbred and standardbred industries, based on their respective experience.
 
	It is also in the public interest for the Legislature to provide, through this act, sufficient guidance and clarity regarding which horse racing industry employees are eligible for coverage secured by the New Jersey Horse Racing Injury Compensation Board pursuant to this act, and the circumstances that must exist for that coverage to be applicable. 
 
	L.1995, c.329, s.2; amended 2008, c.11, s.1.

34:15-131  Definitions relative to the New Jersey Horse Racing Injury Compensation Board.
 
	3.	As used in this act:

	"Board" means the New Jersey Horse Racing Injury Compensation Board established by section 4 of P.L.1995, c.329 (C.34:15-132).
 
	"Commission" means the New Jersey Racing Commission established pursuant to section 1 of P.L.1940, c.17 (C.5:5-22).
 
	"Horse racing industry employee" means:
 
	a.	the driver of a standardbred horse, who is licensed or is required to be licensed by the commission, while that driver is engaged in performing those services for which that driver is or is required to be licensed at a permitted New Jersey racetrack in connection with the racing of a horse.  That standardbred driver shall be considered to be the horse racing industry employee of a standardbred owner for the purposes of calculating, allocating and assessing the cost of workers' compensation insurance coverage;
 
	b.	the jockey, jockey apprentice or exercise rider of a thoroughbred horse, who is licensed or is required to be licensed by the commission, while engaged in performing those services for which that jockey, jockey apprentice or exercise rider is or is required to be licensed at a permitted New Jersey racetrack in connection with the racing or exercising of a horse.  That jockey, jockey apprentice or exercise rider shall be considered to be the horse racing industry employee of a thoroughbred owner for the purposes of calculating, allocating and assessing the cost of workers' compensation insurance coverage; and
 
	c.	the stable employees of a thoroughbred trainer, who are licensed or are required to be licensed by the commission, while those stable employees are engaged in performing those services for which those stable employees are licensed or are required to be licensed at a permitted New Jersey racetrack, during the period of time the trainer's horses are stabled at the permitted New Jersey racetrack.  Stable employees as defined herein shall include assistant trainers, grooms, and hot walkers.
 
	A "horse racing industry employee" shall not mean a standardbred owner, standardbred trainer, thoroughbred owner, or thoroughbred trainer.
 
	"Permitted New Jersey racetrack" means a New Jersey racetrack that has been approved by the commission to hold a horse race meeting as evidenced by a valid permit issued pursuant to section 18 of P.L.1940, c.17 (C.5:5-38) for the year in which the race meeting is held.
 
	"Stabled" means the long-term placement of horses in assigned stalls in barns located on the grounds of a permitted New Jersey racetrack, in which stalls the horses reside continuously for the purpose of racing at any permitted racetrack in New Jersey, or the short-term placement of those horses in stalls located on the grounds of an out-of-State racetrack in connection with the pre-race detention requirements of that out-of-State racetrack, provided the horses are returned to their permanent stabled location at the permitted New Jersey racetrack within a maximum of 48 hours after that out-of-State race.
 
	L.1995, c.329, s.3; amended 1998, c.11, s.1; 1999, c.378, s.1; 2004, c.119; 2008, c.11, s.2.

34:15-132.  "New Jersey Horse Racing Injury Compensation Board" established

	4.  There is hereby established the "New Jersey Horse Racing Injury Compensation Board," which shall be in, but not of, the Department of Law and Public Safety.

	a.  The board shall consist of seven members as follows:  the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance, or his designee; the Attorney General, or his designee; one member of the New Jersey Racing Commission elected by the members of the commission, or his designee; and four members of the horse racing industry appointed by the Governor, one of whom shall represent the thoroughbred industry, one of whom shall represent the standardbred industry, one of whom shall represent the racetrack owners and one of whom shall represent jockeys regularly riding at New Jersey racetracks.  In making these appointments, the Governor shall take into consideration the recommendations of the thoroughbred and standardbred industries, the racetrack owners and the organization which represents the largest number of jockeys regularly riding at New Jersey racetracks, respectively.

	b.  Members of the board shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for their expenses out of the administrative funds of the board.

	c.  The affirmative vote of at least four members shall constitute a majority for the transaction of any business and a quorum shall consist of a simple majority.

	L.1995,c.329,s.4; amended 1997,c.103,s.1.

34:15-133.	Powers of board
	5. 	The board shall have the power to:

	a.	purchase and serve as the master policyholder for any insurance, or self-insure pursuant to R.S.34:15-77, for the purposes of this act;

	b.	enter into contracts with other persons, entities or public bodies for any professional, administrative or other services, including legal counsel if approved by the Attorney General, as may be necessary to carry out the duties of the board and the purposes of this act;

	c.	assess, collect and disburse all money due or payable to or by the board, or authorize such collection and disbursement;

	d.	invest moneys held in trust under any fund in investments which are approved by the State Investment Council for the investment of surplus moneys of the State;

	e.	approve assessments, surplus, limits of coverage, limits of excess or reinsurance, coverage documents and other financial and operating policies of the board;

	f.	promulgate rules and regulations, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act; and

	g.	take all actions necessary to carry out the provisions of this act.

	L.1995,c.329,s.5.

34:15-134  Insurance coverage; assessments.
 
	6. a. The board shall secure workers' compensation insurance coverage for horse racing industry employees.
 
	b.	The board shall assess and collect sufficient funds to pay the costs of the insurance or self insurance coverage required by this act and by the workers' compensation laws of this State and to pay any additional costs necessary to carry out its other duties.  The board shall ascertain the total funding necessary, establish the sums that are to be paid and establish by regulation the method of assessing and collecting these moneys.  Assessments shall include, but shall not be limited to, deductions from gross overnight purses paid to owners, so long as such deductions do not exceed 3% of standardbred purses or 4% of thoroughbred purses, as applicable, and additional assessments may be collected as needed from standardbred owners, thoroughbred owners and thoroughbred trainers who are licensed or are required to be licensed by the commission.  Track owners shall not be assessed for such costs.
 
	c.	Assessments for workers' compensation insurance coverage pursuant to this act shall be calculated and allocated separately for the thoroughbred and standardbred industries, based on their respective loss experience, and any assessments pursuant to subsection b. of this section shall be allocated accordingly.  No public funds, other than the moneys collected pursuant to subsection b. of this section, shall be used for the purpose of self insurance or for paying the costs of workers' compensation insurance or workers' compensation benefits pursuant to this act.
 
	L.1995, c.329, s.6; amended 1998, c.11, s.2; 1999, c.378, s.3; 2008, c.11, s.3.

34:15-134.1  Trainer to carry compensation insurance for employees, eligibility for coverage.
 
	2.	Notwithstanding any provision of P.L.1995, c.329 (C.34:15-129 et seq.), as amended: 
 
	a.	A standardbred trainer who is licensed or is required to be licensed by the commission shall carry compensation insurance covering the standardbred trainer's employees as required by R.S.34:15-1 et seq., regardless of where the standardbred trainer's horses are stabled;
 
	b.	With respect to the stable employees of a thoroughbred trainer, the workers' compensation policy secured by the board shall cover only those stable employees who are licensed or are required to be licensed by the commission when they are employed to work at a permitted New Jersey racetrack to care for the horses located there.  To be eligible for coverage and benefits under the workers' compensation policy secured by the board, those stable employees shall be injured at a permitted New Jersey racetrack while they are engaged in performing services for which they are licensed or are required to be licensed.  Those thoroughbred trainer's stable employees shall remain eligible for coverage under the workers' compensation policy secured by the board, if the trainer requires them to accompany a horse that is transported from the permitted New Jersey racetrack where it is stabled to compete in a race at an out-of-State racetrack.  Those stable employees shall remain eligible for coverage under the board's policy for that period of time in which the out-of-State racetrack requires the horse to be present prior to the race, provided that the horse is returned to stabling at a permitted New Jersey racetrack within a maximum of 48 hours after the race.  The workers' compensation policy of the board shall not cover those stable employees who are licensed or are required to be licensed by the commission who work with horses that the trainer has stabled at a location other than a permitted New Jersey racetrack; 
 
	c.	A thoroughbred trainer who is licensed or is required to be licensed by the commission shall carry compensation insurance covering the thoroughbred trainer's employees as required by R.S.34:15-1 et seq. when the trainer's horses are not stabled at a permitted New Jersey racetrack.  A thoroughbred trainer whose horses are stabled at a permitted New Jersey racetrack and whose stable employees receive workers' compensation coverage through the policy secured by the board shall immediately obtain compensation insurance covering these stable employees as required by R.S.34:15-1 et seq. if and when that trainer's horses are no longer stabled at a permitted New Jersey racetrack; and
 
	d.	A thoroughbred trainer whose stable employees receive workers' compensation coverage through the policy secured by the board shall ascertain and comply with the workers' compensation requirements of any other state to which that thoroughbred trainer is subject to jurisdiction.  In such cases when a state other than New Jersey requires a thoroughbred trainer to obtain workers' compensation insurance coverage pursuant to the terms and conditions of its laws, any workers' compensation coverage provided through the policy secured by the board shall be secondary to the coverage required by the other state.
 
	L.1999, c.378, s.2; amended 2008, c.11, s.4.

34:15-135  Employee, employer relationship under the act.
 
	7. a. For the purposes of this act and R.S.34:15-36, a horse racing industry employee shall be deemed to be in the employment of the New Jersey Horse Racing Injury Compensation Board and in the employment of all standardbred owners, thoroughbred owners, or thoroughbred trainers, as the case may be, who are licensed or are required to be licensed by the commission and whose horses are stabled at a permitted New Jersey racetrack at the time of any occurrence for which workers' compensation benefits are payable pursuant to R.S.34:15-1 et seq. as supplemented by this act, and not solely in the employment of a particular owner or trainer.  A horse racing industry employee shall not be deemed to be in the employment of the New Jersey Horse Racing Injury Compensation Board for any other purpose.
 
	b.	For the purposes of this act and R.S.34:15-36, the New Jersey Horse Racing Injury Compensation Board and all standardbred owners, thoroughbred owners, or thoroughbred trainers who are licensed or are required to be licensed by the commission and whose horses are stabled at a permitted New Jersey racetrack shall be deemed the employer of a horse racing industry employee at the time of any event for which workers' compensation benefits are payable pursuant to R.S.34:15-1 et seq., as supplemented by this act.  The New Jersey Racing Injury Compensation Board shall not be deemed the employer of a horse racing industry employee for any other purpose.
 
	c.	With respect to horse racing industry employees, the requirements of R.S.34:15-1 et seq. regarding the provision of workers' compensation insurance by employers are satisfied in full by compliance with the requirements imposed upon standardbred owners, thoroughbred owners, and thoroughbred trainers by this act and any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder.  If the responsible owner or trainer fails to comply with the requirements of this act or any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder and if the board is still required to pay the award on behalf of that owner or trainer who has been found to have violated this act or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, then the board is hereby authorized to impose a penalty on that owner or trainer in an amount not to exceed $10,000 per violation.
 
	d.	The provisions of this act shall not apply to employees of an owner or trainer who are not horse racing industry employees. 
 
	L.1995, c.329, s.7; amended 1998, c.11, s.3; 1999, c.378, s.4; 2008, c.11, s.5.

34:15-136.	Computing wages
	8. 	Notwithstanding the provision of any other law, in determining workers' compensation benefits pursuant to R.S.34:15-1 et seq., the wages of a horse racing industry employee shall be computed in the manner provided under R.S.34:15-37.

	L.1995,c.329,s.8.

34:15-136.1  Documentation, maintenance of complete and accurate records of wages paid.
 
	6. a. A thoroughbred trainer shall document and maintain complete and accurate records of all wages paid, whether by check or in cash, to stable employees and, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection b. of the definition of "Horse racing industry employee" in section 3 of P.L.1995, c.329 (C.34:15-131), to exercise riders who are hired in connection with the exercising or racing of a horse the trainer trains, who receive workers' compensation coverage through the policy secured by the board.  A thoroughbred trainer shall produce these records within five days when directed to do so by the board or a designated agent of the board.  The board is hereby authorized to impose a penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000 per violation on any trainer who fails to produce complete and accurate records within the time period allotted by this subsection.
 
	b.	The appropriate horseman's bookkeeper, consistent with regulations promulgated by the New Jersey Racing Commission, shall document and maintain complete and accurate records of all wages paid, whether by check or in cash, to a jockey or jockey apprentice or driver who receives workers' compensation coverage through the policy secured by the board.
 
	L.2008, c.11, s.6.

34:15-137.	Act as supplemental to other arrangements 
	9. 	Nothing in this act shall affect any existing contract or policy of employers' liability insurance or the liability of any insurance company or provider, or any arrangement now existing between employers and employees, providing for the payment to such employees, their families, dependents or representatives of sick, accident or death benefits in addition to the workers' compensation coverage provided pursuant to this act; but the liability for such compensation shall not be reduced or affected by any insurance, contribution or other benefit whatsoever, due to or received by the person entitled to such compensation, and the person so entitled shall, irrespective of any such insurance or other contract, have the right to recover the compensation directly from the employer under an existing contract or policy of employers' liability insurance.  The board shall have the same rights provided other employers under R.S.34:15-40.

	L.1995,c.329,s.9.

34:15-138.	Plan of operation
	10.  a. The board shall create a plan of operation to ensure fair, reasonable, and equitable administration.  The plan of operation and any amendments thereto shall become effective upon approval in writing by the board.

	b.	The plan of operation shall constitute the bylaws of the board and shall in addition to the requirements enumerated elsewhere in this act:

	(1)	establish procedures for handling the assets of the board;

	(2)	establish regular places and times for meetings of the board;

	(3)	establish procedures for records to be kept of all financial transactions of the board and its agents;

	(4)	contain such additional provisions as the board may designate necessary or proper for the execution of the powers and duties of the board.

	L.1995,c.329,s.10.

34:15-139.	Commission examination, financial report 
	11. 	The board shall be subject to examination by the commission.  The board shall submit to the commission no later than March 31 of each year, a financial report for the preceding calendar year in a form approved by the commission, and a report of its activities during the preceding calendar year.

	L.1995,c.329,s.11.

34:15-140.	Tax exemption
	12. 	The board shall be exempt from payment of all fees and all taxes levied by this State or any of its subdivisions.

	L.1995,c.329,s.12.

34:15-141.	Liability limited
	13.  a. The liability of the board and the State with respect to payment of any compensation, benefits, expenses, fees or disbursements properly chargeable against the board shall be limited to the assets held by the board and the board and the State shall not otherwise in any way or manner be liable for the making of any such payment.

	b.	The liability of the board under this act is limited to the provision of workers' compensation insurance coverage and any sanctions resulting from the failure to so provide.  The board may purchase such insurance as necessary to protect any director, officer, agent or other representative from liability.

	L.1995,c.329,s.13.

34:15-142.	Applicability of R.S.34:15-1 et seq.
	14. 	The provisions of R.S.34:15-1 et seq. shall apply to the provision of workers' compensation insurance under this act in all respects, except as otherwise specifically provided herein.

	L.1995,c.329,s.14.

34:15-143  Definitions relative to electronic medical bills for workers' compensation claims.
	1.	As used in this act:

	"Complete electronic medical bill" means a medical bill that meets all of the following criteria: (1) it is submitted in the correct uniform billing format, with the correct uniform billing code sets, transmitted in compliance with the guidelines; (2) the bill and electronic attachments provide all information required pursuant to this act; and (3) the health care provider, its billing representative, or any company that has purchased the rights to pursue its bill has provided all information that the employer, employer's insurance carrier, or workers' compensation third party administrator requested.
 
	"Electronic bill" means a communication between computerized data exchange systems that complies with the guidelines enumerated.
 
	"Guidelines" means the format established by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development in consultation with the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance pursuant to this act, which shall be based upon the International Association of Industrial Accident Boards and Commissions (IAIABC) Workers' Compensation Electronic Medical Billing Rule and Companion Guide.
 
	L.2016, c.64, s.1.

34:15-144  Rules, regulations.
	2.	The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall adopt rules and regulations which:
 
	a.	require that all healthcare providers, their billing representative, or any company that has purchased the rights to pursue their bill submit complete electronic medical bills for payment on standardized electronic forms following the guidelines established pursuant to this act;
 
	b.	require employers, workers' compensation insurance carriers of employers, or workers' compensation third-party administrators to comply with the guidelines and accept electronic bills for the payment of medical services;
 
	c.	ensure confidentiality of medical information submitted on electronic bills for payment of medical services pursuant to the "Workers' Compensation Medical Information Confidentiality Act," sections 5 through 9 of P.L.2001, c.326 (C.34:15-128.1 et seq.);
 
	d.	require that employers, workers' compensation insurance carriers of employers, or workers' compensation third party administrators acknowledge receipt of a complete electronic medical bill to the party that sent the complete electronic medical bill in compliance with the guidelines;
 
	e.	provide that payment for a complete electronic medical bill deemed by the employer, workers' compensation insurance carrier, or the workers' compensation third-party administrator to be compensable shall be paid within 60 days or less; and
 
	f.	ensure that employers, workers' compensation insurance carriers for the employer, and their third party administrators may exchange electronic data and establish payment deadlines through PPO or IPA contracts or agreements with health care providers or their billing representatives in a non-prescribed format or timeline, independent of the guidelines.
 
	L.2016, c.64, s.2.

34:15-145  Jurisdiction vested in division.
 	3.	Exclusive jurisdiction for failure to comply with this act shall be vested in the division pursuant to R.S.34:15-15.
 
	L.2016, c.64, s.3.

34:15-146  Inapplicability of act.
 	4.	This act shall not apply to any provider that:

	a.	submits less than 25 medical bills per month to employers, workers' compensation insurance carriers, or the workers' compensation third-party administrators;
 
	b.	furnishes services only outside of the United States;
 
	c.	experiences a disruption in electricity and communication connections that are beyond its control; or
 
	d.	demonstrates that a specific and unusual circumstance exists that precludes submission of electronic bills.  The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development may enumerate or provide examples of unusual circumstances that may preclude electronic submission.
 
	L.2016, c.64, s.4.

34:15-147  Offering of hiring preference to employee unable to return to previous position due to returning from a work-related injury.
	1. a. Following a work-related injury, an employer shall provide a hiring preference to an employee who has reached maximum medical improvement and is unable to return to the position at which the employee was previously employed for any existing, unfilled position offered by the employer for which the employee can perform the essential duties of the position.
 
	b.	For purposes of this section, "employer" means an employer who employs at least 50 persons, but shall not include a contractor as defined in section 3 of P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.50).
 
	c.	Nothing in this section requires an employer to create a new position to accommodate an employee who cannot return to the employee's former position following a work-related injury despite reaching maximum medical improvement or requires an employer to remove another employee from an existing and filled position that would be suitable for the injured employee.
 
	d.	This act shall not apply to athletes employed by professional sports teams.
 
	e.	Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or affect any right of an individual with a disability to a reasonable accommodation under the "Law Against Discrimination," P.L.1945, c.169 (C.10:5-1 et seq.).

	L.2021, c.228.

34:15B-35  Definitions relative to job training.

	1.	As used in this act:

	"Approved community-based or faith-based organization" means an organization which is an approved service provider, a nonprofit organization exempt from federal taxation under section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. s.501), and approved by the commissioner as demonstrating expertise and effectiveness in the field of workforce investment and being representative of a community or a significant segment of a community where the organization provides services.

	"Approved service provider" or "approved training provider" means a service provider which is on the State Eligible Training Provider List.

	"Apprenticeship Policy Committee" means the New Jersey Apprenticeship Policy Committee established by an agreement between the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training in the United States Department of Labor, the State Department of Labor and Workforce Development and the State Department of Education and consisting of a representative of the Commissioner of the State Department of Education, a representative of the Commissioner of the State Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Director of Region II of the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training in the United States Department of Labor, and a representative of the New Jersey State AFL-CIO.

	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.

	"Credential" means a credential recognized by the Department of Education or the Commission on Higher Education, or approved by the Credentials Review Board established by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to section 25 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:1A-1.10).

	"Department" means the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.

	"Employment and training services" means:

	a.	Counseling provided pursuant to section 4 of this act;

	b.	Occupational training; or

	c.	Remedial instruction.

	"Federal job training funds" means any moneys expended to obtain employment and training services, pursuant to the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, Pub.L.105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2801 et seq.) or any other federal law pursuant to which moneys may be expended to obtain employment and training services or other employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities, except that, to the extent that the application of any specific provision of this act would cause the amount of federal job training funds provided to the State to be reduced, that provision shall not apply.

	"Labor demand occupation" means an occupation which:

	a.	The Center for Occupational Employment Information has, pursuant to subsection d. of section 27 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:1A-86), determined is or will be, on a regional basis, subject to a significant excess of demand over supply for trained workers, based on a comparison of the total need or anticipated need for trained workers with the total number being trained; or 

	b.	The Center for Occupational Employment Information, in conjunction with a Workforce Investment Board, has, pursuant to subsection d. of section 27 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:1A-86), determined is or will be, in the region for which the board is responsible, subject to a significant excess of demand over supply for adequately trained workers, based on a comparison of total need or anticipated need for trained workers with the total number being trained.

	"Office of Customized Training" means the Office of Customized Training established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-5).

	"One Stop Career Center" means any of the facilities established, sponsored or designated by the State, a political subdivision of the State and a Workforce Investment Board in a local area to coordinate or make available State and local programs providing employment and training services or other employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities, including job placement services, and any other similar facility as may be established, sponsored or designated at any later time to coordinate or make available any of those programs, services or activities.

	"Permanent employment" means full-time employment unsubsidized by government training funds which provides a significant opportunity for career advancement and long-term job security.

	"Poverty level" means the official poverty level based on family size, established and adjusted under section 673 (2) of Subtitle B of the "Community Services Block Grant Act," Pub.L.97-35 (42 U.S.C. s.9902 (2)).

	"Qualified job counselor" means a job counselor whose qualifications meet standards established by the commissioner.

	"Qualified staff" means staff whose qualifications meet standards set by regulations adopted by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.

	"Remedial education" or "remedial instruction" means any literacy or other basic skills training or instruction which may not be directly related to a particular occupation but is needed to facilitate success in occupational training or work performance, including training or instruction in basic mathematics, reading comprehension, basic computer literacy, English proficiency and work-readiness skills.

	"Self-sufficiency" for an individual means a level of earnings from employment not lower than 250% of the poverty level for an individual, taking into account the size of the individual's family.

	"Service provider," "training provider" or "provider" means a provider of employment and training services including but not limited to a private or public school or institution of higher education, a business, a labor organization or a community-based organization.

	"State Eligible Training Provider List" means the Statewide list of eligible training providers maintained pursuant to section 14 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:15C-10.2).

	"Vocational training" or "occupational training" means training or instruction which is related to an occupation and is designed to enhance the marketable skills and earning power of a worker or job seeker.

	"Workforce investment services" means core, intensive, and training services as defined by the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, Pub.L.105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2801 et seq.).

	L.1992, c.48, s.1; amended 2001, c.152, s.4; 2004, c.39, s.6; 2005, c.354, s.1.

34:15B-36  Funding of vocational training.
	2.  a.  All vocational training funded with federal job training funds shall be training which is likely to substantially enhance the trainee's marketable skills and earning power and is for a labor demand occupation.

	b.	Federal job training funds shall not be used for job training or any related activities which induce, encourage or assist: any displacement or partial displacement of currently employed workers by trainees by means such as reduced hours of currently employed workers; any replacement of laid off workers by trainees; or any relocation of operations resulting in a loss of employment at a previous workplace, except in cases of multi-establishment employers consolidating establishments.  No federal job training funds shall be used for job training in any case in which an employer relocates within the State and does not offer each affected employee the equivalent benefits, pay and working conditions if the employee moves to the new location and into a job or position involving comparable skills, responsibilities, experience and seniority to the prior job or position.

	c.	Federal job training funds shall not be used for job training or any related activities which impair existing contracts for services or collective bargaining agreements, except that job training or any related activities which are inconsistent with the terms of a collective bargaining agreement may be undertaken with the written concurrence of the collective bargaining unit and employer who are parties to the agreement.

	d.	Any federal job training funds which are provided directly to an employer or indirectly to an employer through a consortium shall be regarded as customized training grants and be administered by the Office of Customized Training and the employer and any consortium shall comply with all requirements of section 5 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-5), except that federal job training funds provided directly or indirectly to an employer for use in connection with any program which includes apprenticeship training or activities shall be exempt from the requirement of this subsection d. to be administered by the Office of Customized Training and be subject to the requirements of section 5 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-5), but the funds shall be exempt only if approved by the Apprenticeship Policy Committee, as defined in section 3 of P.L.1993, c.268 (C.34:15E-3) and the employer complies with the provisions of subsection e. of section 5 of P.L.1993, c.268 (C.34:15E-5).  Employment and training services funded by federal job training funds shall not replace, supplant, compete with or duplicate any approved apprenticeship program.

	e.	All staff who are hired and supported by any federal job training funds, including any of those staff located at any One Stop Career Center, but not including any staff of a service provider providing training services funded by a customized training grant pursuant to subsection d. of this section or an individual training grant pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1992, c.48 (C.34:15B-38), shall be hired and employed by the State pursuant to Title 11A, Civil Service, of the New Jersey Statutes, be hired and employed by a political subdivision of the State, or be qualified staff hired and employed by a non-profit organization which began functioning as the One Stop Career Center operator with the written consent of the chief elected official and the commissioner prior to the effective date of P.L.2004,c.39 (C.34:1A-1.2 et al.), or be qualified staff hired and employed by an approved community-based or faith-based organization to provide services at the level of staffing provided in an agreement entered into by the organization before the effective date of P.L.2004,c.39 (C.34:1A-1.2 et al.).

	L.1992,c.48,s.2; amended 2001, c.152, s.5; 2004, c.39, s.7.

34:15B-37  Funding of on the job training.

	3. a. On the job training shall not be paid for with federal job training funds for any employment found by the commissioner to be of a level of skill and complexity too low to merit training.

	b.	The duration of on the job training for any individual shall not exceed the duration indicated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Occupational Information Network, or "O*NET," for the occupation for which the training is provided and shall in no case exceed 26 weeks.  The department shall set the duration of on the job training for an individual for less than the indicated maximum, when training for the maximum duration is not warranted because of the level of the individual's previous training, education or work experience.

	c.	On the job training shall not be paid for with federal job training funds unless it is accompanied, concurrently or otherwise, by whatever amount of classroom-based or equivalent occupational training, remedial instruction or both, is deemed appropriate for the worker by the commissioner.

	d.	Each employer receiving federal job training funds for on the job training shall retain or place in permanent employment each trainee who successfully completes the training.  The commissioner may, for a time period he deems appropriate, provide for the withholding of whatever portion he deems appropriate of the funding as a final payment for training, contingent upon the retention of a program completer as required pursuant to this section.  

	e.	On the job training shall not be paid for with federal job training funds unless the trainee is provided benefits, pay and working conditions at a level and extent not less than the benefits and working conditions of other trainees or employees of the trainee's employer with comparable skills, responsibilities, experience and seniority.

	L.1992,c.48,s.3; amended 2001, c.152, s.6; 2005, c.354, s.2.

34:15B-38  Counseling requirement.
	4. a. No individual shall receive employment and training services paid for with federal job training funds other than counseling unless the individual first receives counseling pursuant to this section.  The counseling shall be provided by a job counselor hired and employed by the State pursuant to Title 11A, Civil Service, of the New Jersey Statutes, or hired and employed by a political subdivision of the State, or be provided by a qualified job counselor hired and employed by a non-profit organization which began functioning as the One Stop Career Center operator with the written consent of the chief elected official and the commissioner prior to the effective date of P.L.2004, c.39 (C.34:1A-1.2 et al.), or be provided by a qualified job counselor hired and employed by an approved community-based or faith-based organization to provide counseling which the organization entered into an agreement to provide before the effective date of P.L.2004, c.39 (C.34:1A-1.2 et al.), or be provided by a qualified business counselor hired and employed by an approved community-based or faith-based organization to provide counseling for individuals seeking to embark upon a microenterprise self-employment venture.  The purpose of any job counseling provided pursuant to this section is to assist each individual in obtaining the employment and training services most likely to enable the individual to obtain employment providing self-sufficiency for the individual and also to provide the individual with the greatest opportunity for long-range career advancement with high levels of productivity and earning power.  The purpose of any business counseling provided pursuant to this section is to assist each individual seeking to embark upon a microenterprise self-employment venture with counseling by qualified business counselors determined to be necessary and appropriate for the success of the microenterprise self-employment venture.  The counseling shall include:
 
	(1)	Testing and assessment of the individual's job skills and aptitudes, including the individual's literacy skills and other basic skills.  Basic skills testing and assessment shall be provided to the individual unless information is provided regarding the individual's educational background and occupational or professional experience which clearly demonstrates that the individual's basic skill level meets the standards established pursuant to section 14 of P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-11) or unless the individual is already participating in a remedial instruction program which meets those standards;
 
	(2)	An evaluation by a qualified job counselor of what remedial instruction, or by a qualified business counselor of what microenterprise self-employment training, if any, is determined to be necessary for the individual to advance in his current career or occupation, or microenterprise self-employment venture, or to succeed in any particular occupational training which the individual would undertake under the program, provided that the remedial instruction shall be at a level not lower than that needed to meet the standards established pursuant to section 14 of P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-11);
 
	(3)	The provision of information to the individual regarding the labor demand occupations, including the information about the wage levels in those occupations, the profitability of self-employed microentrepreneurs in those occupations, and information regarding the effectiveness of approved service providers of occupational training or microenterprise training in labor demand occupations which the individual is considering, including a consumer report card on service providers showing the long-term success of former trainees of each provider in obtaining permanent employment, or establishing a microenterprise self-employed business and increasing earnings over one or more time periods following the completion or other termination of training, including a period of two years following the completion or other termination of training;
 
	(4)	The timely provision of information to the individual regarding the services and benefits available to the individual, and all actions required of the individual to obtain the services and benefits, under programs supported by federal job training funds or the provisions of P.L.1992, c.47 (C.43:21-57 et al.), and the provision to the individual of a written statement of the individual's rights and responsibilities with respect to programs for which the individual is eligible, which includes a full disclosure to the individual of his right to obtain the services most likely to enable the individual to obtain employment providing self-sufficiency and the individual's right not to be denied employment and training services for any of the reasons indicated in section 5 of P.L.1992, c.48 (C.34:15B-39), including the individual's right not to be denied training services because the individual already has identifiable vocational skills, if those existing skills are for employment with a level of earnings lower than the level of self-sufficiency;
 
	(5)	Discussion with the counselor of the results of the testing and evaluation; and
 
	(6)	The development of a written Employability Development Plan identifying the training and employment services or other workforce investment services, including any needed remedial instruction, to be provided to the individual.
 
	b.	Federal job training funds shall be used to provide training and employment services, microenterprise self-employment training, or other workforce investment services to an individual identified in an Employability Development Plan developed pursuant to this section only if the counselor who evaluates the individual pursuant to this section determines that the individual can reasonably be expected to successfully complete the training and instruction identified in the plan.
 
	c.	All information regarding an individual applicant or trainee which is obtained or compiled in connection with the testing, assessment and evaluation and which may be identified with the individual shall be confidential and shall not be released to an entity other than the individual, the counselor, the department, the commission or partners of the One-Stop system as necessary for them to provide training and employment services or other workforce investment services to the individual, unless the individual provides written permission to the department for the release of the information or the information is used solely for program evaluation.
 
	L.1992, c.48, s.4; amended 2004, c.39, s.8; 2005, c.354, s.3; 2017, c.25, s.1.

34:15B-39  Eligibility for employment, training services.

	5.	An otherwise qualified individual shall not be denied employment and training services or other workforce investment services included in the Employability Development Plan developed for the individual pursuant to section 4 of this act for any of the following reasons: the services include remedial instruction needed by the individual to advance in the individual's current employment or occupation or to succeed in the occupational component of the training; the qualified displaced worker or other individual has identifiable occupational skills but the training services are needed to enable the individual to develop skills necessary to attain at least the level of self-sufficiency; the training is part of a program under which the individual may obtain a college degree enhancing the individual's marketable skills and earning power; the individual has previously received a training grant; the length of the training period under the program; or the lack of a prior guarantee of employment upon completion of the training, except for on the job training.  This section shall not be construed as requiring that federal job training funds be used to pay for employment and training services or other workforce investment services for which other assistance, such as State or federal student financial aid, is provided.

	L.1992,c.48,s.5; amended 2001, c.152, s.7; 2005, c.354, s.4.

34:15B-40  Approval, evaluation of service provider.

	6. a. No federal job training funds shall be used to obtain employment and training services from a service provider unless the provider is an approved service provider and the provider agrees to provide, on a first-come, first-served basis, the services it offers to any trainee who is referred to it to obtain the offered services, if included in the individual's Employability Development Plan developed pursuant to section 4 of this act, up to the total number of trainees that the provider agrees to serve.

	b.	Each service provider shall maintain, make available and submit appropriate records and data for monitoring and evaluation purposes, as required by the State Employment and Training Commission.  The records and data shall include, but not be limited to:

	(1)	A record for each trainee enrolled, including the trainee's name, Social Security number, gender, date of birth, date of enrollment, and any date of completion, termination, start in a job or application for a license, any licensing examination result, date of issue of a license or credential issued, and any other information specified by the State Employment and Training Commission or the Center for Occupational Employment Information.  For any individual who does not have a Social Security number, the service provider may substitute an alternate method of identification, except that, at the time of start into employment, the alternate code shall be cross-referenced with the individual's valid Social Security number;

	(2)	A record of all administrative and overhead expenses of the provider related to the providing of employment and training services funded by the program and the provider's direct expenses of providing the services; and

	(3)	Any other information deemed appropriate by the commissioner or the State Employment and Training Commission for evaluation purposes.

	c.	In the case of a provider of occupational training services, the commissioner shall collect the information needed to measure effectively the long-term success of the former trainees of the provider in obtaining permanent employment and increasing earnings over one or more time periods following the completion or other termination of training, including a period of two years following the completion or other termination of training.  The commission shall set such standards as it deems appropriate regarding comparisons of the former trainees with groups of otherwise similar individuals who did not receive the training. The information obtained pursuant to this subsection shall be used to:

	(1)	Assist in evaluating the performance of providers of occupational training services;

	(2)	Assist in determining which providers of occupational training services to place on the State Eligible Training Provider List; and

	(3)	Assist in providing reliable information regarding the quality of available providers of occupational training services as part of the counseling provided pursuant to section 4 of this act, including the furnishing, for use in the counseling, including counseling provided pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1992, c.48 (C.34:15B-38), section 7 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-7) and section 3 of P.L.1992, c.47 (C.43:21-59), of a consumer report card on service providers showing the long-term success of former trainees of each provider in obtaining permanent employment and increasing earnings over one or more time periods following the completion or other termination of training, including a period of two years following the completion or other termination of training.

	d.	The State Employment and Training Commission, the commissioner, and each service provider shall comply with all pertinent State and federal laws regarding the privacy of students and other participants in employment and training programs, including but not limited to, the Privacy Act of 1974, Pub.L.93-579 (5 U.S.C. s.552 and 20 U.S.C. s.1232g), and shall provide all disclosures to the students and participants required by those laws.

	L.1992,c.48,s.6; amended 2005, c.354, s.5.

34:15B-41  Short title.
  	2.	Sections 2 through 7 of P.L.2019, c.84 (C.34:15B-41 to C.34:15B-46) shall be known and may be cited as the "Sign Fabrication Safety Quality Assurance Act."
 
	L.2019, c.84, s.2.

34:15B-42  Findings, declarations relative to precautions in sign fabrication.
 	3.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	The general public is subject to serious safety risks when manufacturers and other facilities engaged in the fabrication of signs for governmental, commercial or other applications produce deficient, defective or otherwise unsafe signs.
 
	b.	Research from both government and industry sources reflects the widespread recognition that registered apprenticeship programs are an extremely effective mechanism for ensuring the development of a workforce that is properly trained and appropriately equipped with necessary skills and safety knowledge in their applicable craft.
 
	c.	The threat to public safety for the use of inferior or defective fabricated signs can be lessened by requiring that manufacturers of these products adhere to great safety and quality control requirements and ensure their manual workforce receives proper skill and safety training.
 
	L.2019, c.84, s.3.

34:15B-43  Definitions relative to precautions in sign fabrication.
	4.	As used in sections 2 through 7 of P.L.2019, c.84 (C.34:15B-41 to C.34:15B-46):

	"Approved skill training program" means a sheet metal apprenticeship training program that is registered with the federal or a state government and provides both apprenticeship training and training to upgrade skills of journey persons in the skills of the sheet metal industry, including those relating to sign fabrication.
 
	"Fabricated sign" means a sign, including a sign for government or public use, that exceeds 50 pounds in weight or 25 square feet in area, or exceeds 50 pounds in weight and is elevated or designed to be elevated 25 feet or more.
 
	"Sign fabricator" means a manufacturer or other entity that produces fabricated signs.
 
	L.2019, c.84, s.4.

34:15B-44  Requirements for manufacture of fabricated signs; exceptions.
  	5. a. A person who manufactures any fabricated sign in New Jersey shall:

	(1)	provide an approved skill training program for employees who perform manual labor in connection with the production of fabricated signs; and 
 
	(2)	maintain adequate quality control procedures to ensure that all fabricated signs it manufactures, distributes or sells comply with the manufacturing and engineering specifications required by, or incorporated into, any contractual agreement executed with another party.
 
	b.	A person who manufactures, distributes or sells a fabricated sign in New Jersey after the effective date of P.L.2019, c.84 (C.34:15B-41 et al.), shall affix to the sign a safety and quality assurance seal from the sign fabricator which certifies that the sign fabricator is in compliance with the requirements of subsection a. of this section. 
 
	c.	The training requirements specified in paragraph (1) of subsection a. of this section shall not apply to a sign fabricator that employs five or fewer individuals who perform manual labor in sign manufacturing.
 
	L.2019, c.84, s.5.

34:15B-45  Violations, unlawful practice; civil penalty.
 	6. a. It shall be unlawful for a person to manufacture, distribute, sell, or use a fabricated sign in violation of section 5 of P.L.2019, c.84 (C.34:15B-44). 
 
	b.	In addition to any other penalties provided by law :
 
	(1)	a person who manufactures, distributes, sells, or uses a fabricated sign in violation of section 5 of P.L.2019, c.84 (C.34:15B-44) shall be subject to a civil penalty of 25 percent of the value of the contract for the sign, but not less than $5,000 for a first offense and not less than $10,000 for any subsequent offense, to be collected in a civil action by a summary proceeding under the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).  The Superior Court shall have jurisdiction of proceedings for the enforcement of the penalty provided by this paragraph;
 
	(2) a person who manufactures, distributes, sells, or uses a fabricated sign erected or maintained pursuant to P.L.1991, c.413 (C.27:5-5 et seq.) in violation of section 5 of P.L.2019, c.84 (C.34:15B-44) shall be subject to the penalties set forth in P.L.1991, c.413 (C.27:5-5 et seq.), including revocation of a license or permit pursuant to section 9 of P.L.1991, c.413 (C.27:5-13) and removal of a sign pursuant to section 11 of P.L.1991, c.413 (C.27:5-15).
 
	(3)	a person who manufactures a fabricated sign erected or maintained pursuant to P.L.1991, c.413 (C.27:5-5 et seq.) in violation of section 5 of P.L.2019, c.84 (C.34:15B-44) shall be liable for the cost to make all necessary adjustments or corrections to ensure the sign is not in violation of section 5 of P.L.2019, c.84 (C.34:15B-44) to any party who incurs that cost.
 
	L.2019, c.84, s.6.

34:15B-46  Severability.
 	7.	The provisions of P.L.2019, c.84 (C.34:15B-41 et al.) shall be severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held to be unconstitutional, the decision of the court shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of P.L.2019, c.84 (C.34:15B-41 et al.).
 
	L.2019, c.84, s.7.

34:15C-1  Definitions.

	4.	As used in this act:

	a.	"At-risk youth" means a teenage high school dropout or a teenage parent or other teenager whose pattern of behavior is likely to result in becoming a high school dropout.

	b.	"Commission" means the State Employment and Training Commission established pursuant to section 5 of this act.

	c.	"Federal job training funds" means any moneys expended pursuant to the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, Pub.L.105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2801 et seq.) or any other federal law to obtain employment and training services or other employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities, including employment and training services as defined in section 1 of P.L.1992, c.48 (C.34:15B-35) and employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities as described in sections 2 and 4 of P.L.2004, c.39 (C.34:1A-1.3 and 34:1A-1.5).

	d.	"Labor demand occupation" means an occupation which:

	(1)	The Center for Occupational Employment Information has, pursuant to subsection d. of section 27 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:1A-86), determined is or will be, on a regional basis, subject to a significant excess of demand over supply for trained workers, based on a comparison of the total need or anticipated need for trained workers with the total number being trained; or 

	(2)	The Center for Occupational Employment Information, in conjunction with a Workforce Investment Board, has, pursuant to subsection d. of section 27 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:1A-86), determined is or will be, in the region for which the board is responsible, subject to a significant excess of demand over supply for adequately trained workers, based on a comparison of total need or anticipated need for trained workers with the total number being trained.

	e.	"Owner" of a qualifying school means any person who acts as the proprietor of a qualifying school, including any individual who has an ownership interest of five percent or more in the qualifying school.

	f. (1) "Qualifying school" means, except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection f., a government unit, person, association, firm, corporation, private organization, or any entity doing business or maintaining facilities within the State, whether operating on a for profit or not for profit basis, which:

	(a)	Offers or maintains a course of instruction or instructional program utilized to prepare individuals for future education or the workplace, including instruction in literacy or basic skills, or provides supplemental instruction in recognized occupational skills, pre-employment skills or literacy skills;

	(b)	Offers instruction by any method including, but not limited to, classroom, shop, laboratory experience, correspondence, Internet and other distance learning media, or any combination thereof;

	(c)	Offers instruction to the general public or in conjunction with New Jersey's workforce investment system; and

	(d)	Charges tuition or other fees or costs, or receives public funding for the delivery of any of the above types of instruction.

	(2)	"Qualifying school" does not mean:

	(a)	Colleges and universities licensed by the Commission on Higher Education or other schools, institutions and entities, including public or private schools below college level, which are regulated and approved pursuant to any law of this State other than this 2005 amendatory and supplementary act;

	(b)	Employers offering instruction to their employees directly or through a contract instructor, where there is no cost to the employee and no profit to the employer; or

	(c)	Schools offering instruction which is avocational, cultural or recreational in nature.

	g.	"Service provider," "training provider" or "provider" means a provider of employment and training services including, but not limited to, a private or public school or institution of higher education, a business, a labor organization or a community-based organization.

	h.	"State job training funds" means any moneys expended from the Workforce Development Partnership Fund created pursuant to section 9 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-9), the Supplemental Workforce Fund for Basic Skills established pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2001, c.152 (C.34:15D-21) or any other source of State moneys to obtain employment and training services or other employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities, including employment and training services as defined in section 3 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-3) and employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities as described in sections 2 and 4 of P.L.2004, c.39 (C.34:1A-1.3 and 34:1A-1.5).

	i.	"Workforce Investment Board" means a board established pursuant to the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, Pub.L.105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2801 et seq.).

	j.	"Workforce investment programs" means programs and services that are State or federally funded and designed to develop, improve, or maintain the productivity and earning power of workers and job seekers, including employment and training services, as defined in  section 1 of P.L.1992, c.48 (C.34:15B-35) and section 3 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-3), and including employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities as described in sections 2 and 4 of P.L.2004, c.39 (C.34:1A-1.3 and 34:1A-1.5).

	k.	"Workforce investment services" means core, intensive, and training services as defined by the "Workforce Investment Act of 1998," Pub.L.105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2801 et seq.).

	L.1989,c.293,s.4; amended 2005, c.354, s.6.

34:15C-2.  State Employment and Training Commission; created  
     There is created in the Executive Branch of the State Government a commission which shall be known as the State Employment and Training Commission.  For the purposes of complying with the provisions of Article V, Section IV, paragraph 1 of the New Jersey Constitution, the commission is allocated within the Department of Labor, but notwithstanding this allocation, the commission shall be independent of any supervision or control by the department or by any board or officer thereof.  

    L.1989, c.293, s.5.  

34:15C-3  Members of the commission; appointments; terms.
	6.	The commission shall consist of the following members: the Governor, the Commissioners of Community Affairs, Education, Human Services, and Labor and Workforce Development, the Chief Executive Officer of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, and the Secretary of Higher Education, all of whom shall serve ex officio; one member of the Senate appointed by the Governor, as recommended by the President of the Senate to serve during the two-year legislative session in which the appointment is made; one member of the General Assembly appointed by the Governor, as recommended by the Speaker of the General Assembly to serve during the two-year legislative session in which the appointment is made; and a number of public members as determined by the Governor pursuant to section 3111 of the "Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act," (29 U.S.C. s.3111).  The public members shall be appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate for terms of three years, except that of the public members first appointed by the Governor, not less than 30% shall be appointed for three years, not less than 30% shall be appointed for two years, and the others shall be appointed for one year.  Not more than half of the members appointed by the Governor shall be of the same political party.  Of the public members appointed by the Governor, not less than five shall be representatives of labor organizations nominated by a State-wide labor federation, and not less than three shall be representatives of community-based organizations.  One of the members appointed by the Governor pursuant to section 3111 of the "Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act," (29 U.S.C. s.3111) to represent business on the commission shall be a representative of the New Jersey Business and Industry Association.  The composition of the commission shall be consistent with the composition required for a State workforce development board pursuant to section 3111 of the "Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act," (29 U.S.C. s.3111).  Each member shall hold office for the term of appointment and until his successor is appointed and qualified.  A member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring in the membership of the board for any reason other than the expiration of the term shall have a term of appointment for the unexpired term only.  All vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.  A member may be appointed for any number of successive terms. Any member appointed by the Governor may be removed from office by the Governor, for cause, after a hearing and may be suspended by the Governor pending the completion of the hearing.  Members of the board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as members.  Action may be taken and motions and resolutions may be adopted by the board at a board meeting by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members.  The Governor shall select a chairperson who shall be a nongovernmental member of the commission.  Advanced notification for, and copies of the minutes of, each meeting of the commission shall be filed with the Governor, the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the General Assembly. 
 
	L.1989, c.293, s.6; amended 2019, c.249.

34:15C-4.  Appointment of executive director; duties  
     The commission shall appoint an executive director.  The executive director shall report to the chairperson of the commission and be responsible for administering the daily operations of the commission, and may appoint not more than four administrators.  The executive director and the administrators shall serve in the State unclassified service.  The commission may also hire and employ, pursuant to Title 11A, Civil Service, of the New Jersey Statutes, other professional, technical, and clerical staff as may be necessary to perform the functions assigned to the commission.  The commission may call to its assistance and avail itself of the services of the employees of any other units of State government as it may require and as may be available to it for that purpose.  

    L.1989, c.293, s.7.  

34:15C-5  Purpose of commission.

	8.	The purpose of the commission shall be to develop and assist in the implementation of a State workforce investment policy with the goal of creating a coherent, integrated system of workforce investment programs and services which, in concert with the efforts of the private sector, will provide each citizen of the State with equal access to the learning opportunities needed to attain and maintain high levels of productivity and earning power.  The principal emphasis of the workforce investment policy shall be developing a strategy to fill significant gaps in New Jersey's workforce investment efforts, with special attention to finding ways to mobilize and channel public and private resources to individuals who would otherwise be denied access to the training and education they need to make their fullest contribution to the economic well being of the State.  To the extent practicable, the strategy shall emphasize types of training and education which foster the communication and critical thinking skills in workers and job seekers which will be of greatest benefit for long term career advancement.

	L.1989,c.293,s.8; amended 2005, c.354, s.7.

34:15C-6  Duties of commission.
	9.	The commission shall:
 
	a.	Issue the New Jersey Unified Workforce Investment Plan pursuant to the provisions of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, Pub.L.105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2801 et seq.) and section 10 of P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-7);
 
	b.	Establish performance standards for workforce investment programs pursuant to the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, Pub.L.105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2801 et seq.) and section 11 of P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-8);
 
	c.	Act to ensure the full participation of Workforce Investment Boards in the planning and supervision of local workforce investment systems.  The commission shall be responsible to oversee and develop appropriate standards to ensure Workforce Investment Board compliance with State and federal law, the State plan, and other relevant requirements regarding membership, staffing, meetings, and functions;
 
	d.	Foster and coordinate initiatives of the Department of Education and Commission on Higher Education to enhance the contributions of public schools and institutions of higher education to the implementation of the State workforce investment policy;
 
	e.	Examine federal and State laws and regulations to assess whether those laws and regulations present barriers to achieving any of the goals of this act.  The commission shall, from time to time as it deems appropriate, issue to the Governor and the Legislature reports on its findings, including recommendations for changes in State or federal laws or regulations concerning workforce investment programs or services, including, when appropriate, recommendations to merge other State advisory structures and functions into the commission;
 
	f.	Perform the duties assigned to a State Workforce Investment Board pursuant to subsection (d) of section 111 of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, Pub.L.105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2821);
 
	g.	Have the authority to enter into agreements with the head of each State department or commission which administers or funds education, employment or training programs, including, but not limited to, the Departments of Labor and Workforce Development, Community Affairs, Education, and Human Services and the Commission on Higher Education, the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, and the Youth Justice Commission, which agreements are for the purpose of assigning planning, policy guidance and oversight functions to each Workforce Investment Board with respect to any workforce investment program funded or administered by the State department or commission within the Workforce Investment Board's respective labor market area or local area, as the case may be; and 
 
	h.	Establish guidelines to be used by the Workforce Investment Boards in performing the planning, policy guidance, and oversight functions assigned to the boards under any agreement reached by the commission with a department or commission pursuant to subsection g. of this section.  The commission shall approve all local Workforce Investment Board plans that meet the criteria established by the commission for the establishment of One-Stop systems. The Department of Labor and Workforce Development shall approve the operational portion of the plans for programs administered by the department.
 
	The commission shall have access to all files and records of other State agencies and may require any officer or employee therein to provide such information as it may deem necessary in the performance of its functions.
 
	Nothing in P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:15C-7.1 et al.) shall be construed as affecting the authority of the State Treasurer to review and approve training programs for State employees pursuant to N.J.S.11A:6-25.
 
	L.1989, c.293, s.9; amended 2005, c.354, s.8; 2007, c.253, s.20; 2008, c.29, s.91; 2025, c.35, s.55.

34:15C-6.1  Report evaluating, projecting State's workforce needs.
 	1.	The commission shall, at least annually, prepare a report that evaluates and projects the State's workforce needs.
 
	a.	The report, at a minimum, shall include information that describes the following:
 
	(1)	the demand for various kinds of trained workers across all industry sectors or categories of occupations;
 
	(2)	the number of individuals receiving the credentials necessary to meet the demand for workers as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection;
 
	(3)	the absence or shortages of workforce training and educational programs available for individuals to receive the necessary credentials to meet the demand described in paragraph (1) of this subsection; and
 
	(4)	the public or private institutions or organizations that are capable of addressing the absence or shortages of training and educational programs, as described in paragraph (3) of this subsection, through the expansion of existing programs or the creation of new programs.
 
	b.	The commission shall encourage the use of the report by public and private institutions and organizations to evaluate, develop, and plan new and existing workforce training and educational programs.
 
	c.	The commission shall avail itself of the resources and data of the Department of Labor and Workforce Development and the Office of the Secretary of Higher Education in order to create the report.
 
	d.	The commission shall submit the report to the Governor, and to the Legislature pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), and shall make the report available to the public by posting it on the commission's official website.
 
	L.2015, c.280, s.1.

34:15C-7  Preparation of New Jersey Unified Workforce Investment Plan.

	10.	The commission shall prepare a New Jersey Unified Workforce Investment Plan. The plan shall include:

	a.	A description of the State workforce investment policy developed pursuant to section 8 of this act;

	b.	An assessment and an evaluation of the demand for various kinds of trained workers in New Jersey and recommendations on how to direct the State's workforce investment efforts to be most effective in using that demand to increase the productivity and earning power of the work force;

	c.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2005, c.354.)

	d.	A description of any performance standards established pursuant to section 11 of this act and remedial instruction standards established pursuant to section 14 of this act and any evaluation of workforce investment activities based on those standards;

	e.	Evaluations of other existing workforce investment programs, their goals and structures, and the consistency of each program with the State workforce investment policy developed by the commission;

	f. (1) Evaluations of the organizational structures, functions and activities of governmental agencies performing advisory functions or activities in relation to workforce investment programs or services, including advisory functions and activities performed in connection with vocational education, adult education, apprenticeship, vocational rehabilitation and human services programs; and

	(2)	Recommendations to the Governor about coordination of the State's efforts in these program areas, including, if the commission deems appropriate, a recommendation to the Governor for the transfer of these advisory functions and activities to the jurisdiction of the commission; and

	g.	Recommendations for any other changes the commission deems appropriate in the overall structure of the State's workforce investment system, including the consolidation of duplicative programs and services and the reallocation of State and federal funds to the agencies able to make the best use of those funds.

	The New Jersey Unified State Workforce Investment Plan shall be submitted to the Governor, the Legislature and each department charged with the operation of any program or service which is evaluated by the commission or the subject of a recommendation in the report consistent with the timetable established by the federal Workforce Investment Act of 1998, Pub.L.105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2801 et seq.).

	The New Jersey Unified State Workforce Investment Plan shall be a strategic unified workforce investment plan encompassing all of the required and optional One-Stop partners prescribed by the federal Workforce Investment Act of 1998, Pub.L.105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2801 et seq.).  The plan is intended to create a comprehensive workforce investment system in New Jersey.  The programs included in the plan shall include but not be limited to workforce investment-related activities and programs authorized under: the Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Applied Technology Education Amendments of 1998, Pub.L.105-332 (20 U.S.C. s.2301 et seq.); the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, Pub.L.105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2801 et seq.), including activities for adults, dislocated workers and youth under Title I of that act and adult education and family literacy programs under Title II of that act; the Work First New Jersey program established pursuant to P.L.1997, c.38 (C.44:10-55 et seq.); the federal "Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996," Pub.L.104-193 (42 U.S.C. 601 et seq.); the federal Food and Agricultural Act of 1977, Pub.L.95-113 (7 U.S.C.s. 2011 et seq.); chapter 2 of Title II of the Trade Act of 1974, Pub.L.93-618 (19 U.S.C. s.2102 et seq.); the Wagner-Peyser Act (29 U.S.C. s.49 et seq.); Part B of Title I of the "Rehabilitation Act of 1973" (29 U.S.C. s.701 et seq.); 38 U.S.C. s.4100 et seq. and 38 U.S.C. s.4200 et seq., including veterans' employment, disabled veterans' outreach, and local veterans' employment representative programs; the "unemployment compensation law," R.S.43:21-1 et seq.; the "Older Americans Act of 1965" (42 U.S.C. s.3001 et seq.); Titles V and XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. s.701 et seq. and 42 U.S.C. s.1396 et seq.); U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Community Development Block Grants, public housing programs; and Community Services Block Grant Act; and the State Workforce Development Partnership Program, P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-1 et seq.), including individual grants, customized training, youth transition to work, occupational health and safety training, tuition waivers and basic skills including literacy.

	The commission may, at any other time as it deems appropriate, issue additional reports to the Governor and the Legislature concerning any of the subjects addressed in the New Jersey Unified Workforce Investment Plan. Significant changes in the economy or technology or in federal or State policy on any area included in the workforce investment system may result in modifications to the plan.

	The commission shall conduct a periodic, comprehensive evaluation of the activities of the workforce investment system and make a periodic report to the Governor and the Legislature regarding the effectiveness of the workforce investment system in implementing the purposes of this act.

	L.1989,c.293,s.10; amended 2005, c.354, s.9.

34:15C-7.1  Selection of industries with growing, unmet demand for skilled workers.

	12. a. The State Employment and Training Commission shall select industries in which a growing or unmet demand for skilled workers, professionals or other personnel provides an opportunity to generate significant growth in employment or careers providing access to self-sufficiency and shall create State-level industry task forces consisting of key stakeholders in each selected industry to analyze the most significant mismatches between labor supply and demand in the industry and develop Statewide strategies to rectify those mismatches.  The membership of each task force shall be selected by the commission and shall include leaders of businesses, labor unions, professional associations and other stakeholders in the industry and representatives from State departments and agencies which the commission determines may be of assistance in rectifying the mismatches of supply and demand.

	b.	The commission shall select Workforce Investment Boards and direct them to create regional planning bodies to address the workforce needs in the regions under the jurisdictions of the boards of specific industries, occupations or career clusters in which a growing or unmet demand for skilled workers, professionals or other personnel provides an opportunity to generate significant growth in employment or careers providing self-sufficiency.  The membership of each regional planning body shall include representatives of Workforce Investment Boards and One Stop Career Center partners and leaders of businesses, labor unions and professional associations and other stakeholders of the industries, occupations, career clusters or employers in the region.  The region under a regional planning body shall be selected by the commission to enhance local delivery systems by providing meaningful geographic boundaries for labor market rationalization.  The region selected for one industry, occupation or career cluster may be different from the region selected for another industry, occupation or career cluster.  The size of regions under regional planning bodies may vary in accordance with the concentration of the relevant work forces or in accordance with other factors.  The commission may also determine any areas outside of the State which would benefit from a joint effort with a regional planning body and direct the body to seek cooperation with the Workforce Investment Board or boards outside of the State that have jurisdiction over those areas.

	c.	The purpose of each regional planning body shall be to develop, for its area of jurisdiction, strategies to match labor market supply and demands and support a demand-side focus anchoring the employment and training system to the labor market in a manner which increases opportunities for employment and careers providing access to self-sufficiency.  Those strategies may include job skill training and utilization of labor market and demographic information to match the location of jobs with the residence of workers.  The planning for the development of the strategy shall include an analysis of the adequacy of the transportation system to get the workers to the jobs and the suitability of the training being offered in an area for the needs of the local workplace, and shall take into consideration any Statewide strategy developed by a Statewide industry task force pursuant to subsection a. of this section which is relevant to the jurisdiction of the regional planning body.

	d.	The Legislature finds and declares that the current and growing shortage of skilled and credentialed health care professionals, paraprofessionals, and entry-level workers has reached crisis proportions.  The commission shall establish a State-level industry taskforce on the health care industry, as well as regional planning bodies on the health care industry in each region designated by the commission, to address this problem and promote enduring partnerships among employers, labor unions, professional associations and other stakeholders in the health care industry, the public workforce investment system, primary, secondary and postsecondary education, and social service providers to develop and sustain solutions in the areas of recruitment, retention, training and education capacity-building in that industry in a manner which increases opportunities for employment and careers providing access to self-sufficiency.

	L.2005,c.354,s.12.

34:15C-8  Establishment of performance standards for evaluating workforce investment system.

	11. a. The commission shall establish quantifiable performance standards for evaluating the workforce investment system, and guidelines for procedures to encourage and enforce compliance with those standards.  The commission shall establish the standards and procedures in conjunction with any department or commission which funds or administers workforce investment programs.

	The standards shall be designed to measure the success of the system in assisting the individuals it serves to attain and maintain high levels of productivity and earning power, through preparation for employment in occupations with significant opportunities for career advancement.  The standards shall take into account the specific needs and characteristics of the target populations.

	b.	Each workforce investment program, including any program funded or established pursuant to the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, Pub. L. 105-220 (29 U.S.C. s. 2901 et seq.), the Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Applied Technology Education Amendments of 1998, Pub.L.105-332 (20 U.S.C. s.2301 et seq.), or the State Workforce Development Partnership Program, P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-1 et seq.), is hereby deemed to be subject to the performance standards and guidelines established pursuant to subsection a. of this section.  The performance standards for the program shall be based on factors including, but not limited to:

	(1)	The percentage of trainees who are placed, following completion of the program, in employment in the occupation for which they are trained or who are enrolled for further education or training, if those enrollments are a goal of the program;

	(2)	The success of the program in sustaining or increasing the trainees' levels of earnings, based on the wage levels upon placement in employment, and the trainees' retention in employment; and

	(3)	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2005, c.354.)

	(4)	The success of the program in facilitating the remedial instruction which the program is required to make available to trainees under standards established pursuant to section 14 of this act.

	In establishing performance standards, the commission shall not use criteria which may adversely affect the assessment of a program because of any emphasis the program may have on long-term occupational training and instruction.

	The commission shall establish dates by which each department administering workforce investment programs shall adopt the standards and guidelines for use in the planning, budgeting and administration of those programs.

	The standards shall apply to a program which is State or federally funded except to the extent that application of the standards would prevent the program from receiving the federal funding.

	L.1989,c.293,s.11; amended 2005, c.354, s.10.

34:15C-10  Commission shall establish requirements for each workforce investment program.

	13.	The commission shall establish such requirements as it deems appropriate for each workforce investment program to utilize the comprehensive occupational information compiled and disseminated by the Center for Occupational Employment Information established pursuant to section 27 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:1A-86) and other information developed cooperatively by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development and the commission for program planning and individual career decision-making.

	L.1989,c.293,s.13; amended 2005, c.354, s.11.

34:15C-10.1  Certificate of approval for, application by qualifying schools.

	13. a. A qualifying school shall make a written application to the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development for a certificate of approval, and shall not be permitted to operate unless it receives the certificate of approval issued by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development and the Commissioner of Education pursuant to the rules that they promulgate.  The application shall be in the form prescribed by the commissioners and shall furnish the information required by the commissioners.  Upon receipt of this application, with the required documentation, the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall cause to be conducted an evaluation of the applicant school prior to the issuance of a certificate of approval.  The certificate shall be in a form prescribed by the Commissioners of Labor and Workforce Development and Education and shall be prominently displayed so that it is visible to the general public.  The certificate is issued to the applicant owner and school and is nontransferable.  In the event of a change of ownership, the new owner is required to apply for a change in ownership subject to the conditions and fees prescribed by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development and prior to the issuance of a new certificate of approval.  Approval shall also be required for changes in location and any additional locations.  Program and course curricula and instructional personnel and administrator credentials shall be submitted for approval and contain sufficient information for proper evaluation as determined by the Commissioner of Education.  The personnel of a qualifying school shall meet the qualifications set forth by the Commissioners of Labor and Workforce Development and Education in order to own, operate, market, supervise, or offer instruction.

	b.	A casino gaming school shall not receive a certificate of approval pursuant to subsection a. of this section unless the school is licensed by the New Jersey Casino Control Commission pursuant to subsection a. of section 92 of P.L.1977, c.110 (C.5:12-92).

	c.	An applicant shall not be issued a certificate of approval if, upon the review and consideration of the submitted application, the application is found to be not in accordance with the rules and regulations set forth by the Commissioners of Labor and Workforce Development and Education.  The Commissioners of Labor and Workforce Development and Education may revoke, suspend, or place reasonable conditions upon the continued approval represented by the certificate.  Prior to revocation, the Commissioners of Labor and Workforce Development and Education shall notify the holder in writing of the impending action and set forth the grounds for the action.  The Commissioners of Labor and Workforce Development and Education may reexamine a school during the year in which notice or conditions have been imposed.  A certificate of approval may be revoked, suspended, or made conditional if the Commissioners of Labor and Workforce Development and Education have reasonable cause to believe that the school is guilty of violating this section or any of the rules adopted under this section or is found to be financially unsound.

	d.	An approved qualifying school shall maintain a permanent student record for each student enrolled.  This information shall include, but not be limited to, the student's Social Security number, gender, date of birth, date of enrollment, and any date of completion, date of termination, date of start in a job, date of application for a license, licensing examination result, date of issue of a license, any credential issued, and other information as specified by the State Employment and Training Commission or the Center for Occupational Employment Information.  For any individual who does not have a Social Security number, the qualifying agency may substitute an alternate method of identification, except that, at the time of start into employment the alternate code shall be cross-referenced with the individual's valid Social Security number.  The applicant school shall submit a record retention plan to the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development that describes the method by which a student or other legitimate requester may obtain a copy of the permanent record verifying attendance and academic achievement of a student at the school.  The plan shall identify the organization or individual responsible for maintaining and responding to requests for and distributing records in the event that the school ceases operation or closes.  The Department of Labor and Workforce Development and the Department of Education may adopt additional regulations prescribing the manner in which student records, including transcripts, shall be maintained and distributed, and regulations setting penalties for failure to comply with an approved record retention plan.

	e.	An approved qualifying school shall be open for monitoring and inspection to any officer, representative or agent designated by the Commissioners of Labor and Workforce Development and Education. The Departments of Labor and Workforce Development and Education shall conduct examinations of all facilities and methods of operating, as they deem appropriate.

	f.	The Departments of Labor and Workforce Development and Education shall continue to oversee the proper conduct of qualifying schools and shall maintain rules governing curricula, qualifications of instructors and supervisors, facilities, record keeping requirements and any other matters essential to the maintenance of quality instruction and the business integrity of qualifying schools.

	g.	An approved qualifying school shall submit an annual report to the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.  The annual report shall include, but not be limited to, enrollment information, post-training placement information and tuition received as well as an electronic or paper copy of student transcripts.  Failure to furnish the required report shall be just cause for the commissioner to amend, suspend or revoke the approval to operate as previously granted by whatever governmental entity, or to take other appropriate actions. The annual report shall be for the period of July 1 through June 30 of the preceding year and shall be submitted, not later than 30 calendar days after the close of the reporting period, in the format and on the forms provided by the commissioner.  A qualifying school shall also submit any additional reports as requested by the commissioner on a more frequent basis.  A qualifying school shall submit the name and Social Security number of each newly enrolled student on a reporting basis to be established by the commissioner.

	h.	Objective performance standards and measures for evaluating qualifying schools shall be jointly developed and implemented by the State Board of Education and the New Jersey State Employment and Training Commission.  Policy makers and consumers shall be provided with information concerning approved programs and shall be provided access to a consumer report card on the effectiveness of the qualifying schools on the State Eligible Training Provider List showing the long-term success of former trainees of each qualifying school in obtaining permanent employment and increasing earnings over one or more time periods following the completion or other termination of training, including a period of two years following the completion or other termination of training.

	i.	Any State or federal funds which become available for the school approval functions performed by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development or the Department of Education, as described in this act, shall be appropriated to the respective department for the regulation and oversight of qualifying schools pursuant to the provisions of this act.

	j.	The Commissioner of the Department of Labor and Workforce Development shall, in consultation with the Department of Education, adopt, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), rules and regulations as necessary to establish approval and renewal fees and to effectuate the provisions of this section.  Existing rules and regulations, as of the effective date of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:15C-7.1 et al.), shall remain in effect for one year or until rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this subsection replace them.

	L.2005, c.354, s.13.

34:15C-10.1a  Performance quality standards, established, Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development; rules, regulations.
	2. a. Within 12 months of the effective date of P.L.2022, c.76 (C.18A:3B-45.1 et al.), the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall establish performance quality standards for:
 
	(1) private career schools, referred to and defined as "qualifying schools" under section 4 of P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-1), authorized jointly under section 13 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:15C-10.1) by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development and the Commissioner of Education to operate in New Jersey; and 
 
	(2) private career schools authorized by a professional or occupational board established within the Division of Consumer Affairs, in the Department of Law and Public Safety, to offer an educational program required for licensure, registration, or certification in a profession or occupation regulated by a professional or occupational board established within the division.
 
	b.	In establishing the performance quality standards, the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall consider the ratio of the tuition and fees charged to students in the program net of any institutional grant aid to the average earnings of New Jersey workers employed in the specific occupation for which the program prepares students.
 
	(1) In the event that the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development determines that a program offered by a private career school does not meet the minimum acceptable level of performance, the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development and the Commissioner of Education shall, pursuant to section 13 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:15C-10.1), revoke, suspend or make conditional the certificate of approval issued under that law.
 
	(2) In the event that the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development determines that an educational program required for licensure, registration, or certification in a profession or occupation regulated by a professional or occupational board established within the Division of Consumer Affairs does not meet the minimum acceptable level of performance, the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall issue a written determination directing the applicable board within the Division of Consumer Affairs to suspend or revoke the private career school's license or accreditation to offer such program.
 
	c.	All private career schools, including those operating with a certificate of approval issued jointly by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development and the Commissioner of Education, and those authorized by a professional or occupational board established within the Division of Consumer Affairs to offer an educational program required for licensure, registration, or certification in a profession or occupation regulated by a professional or occupational board established within the Division of Consumer Affairs, shall submit a quarterly report to the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development that includes:
 
	(1) the tuition and fees charged for each program;
 
	(2) a record for each student enrolled in each program.  The student record shall include, but not be limited to: the student's social security number, gender, date of birth, date of enrollment, any date of completion, date of termination, date of start in a job, date of application for a license, licensing examination result, date of issuance of a license, and any credential issued; and
 
	(3) any additional information that may be required by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	d.	Each private career school may be required by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development to submit additional reports on a more frequent basis.
 
	(1) In the event that the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development determines that a program offered by a private career school has failed to submit any report required under this section, the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development and the Commissioner of Education shall, pursuant to section 13 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:15C-10.1), revoke, suspend or make conditional the certificate of approval issued under that law.
 
	(2) In the event that the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development determines that an educational program required for licensure, registration, or certification in a profession or occupation regulated by a professional or occupational board established within the Division of Consumer Affairs has failed to submit any report required under this section, the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall issue a written determination directing the applicable board within the division to suspend or revoke the private career school's license or accreditation to offer such program.
 
	e.	Upon receiving the written determination from the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development directing the suspension or revocation of the private career school's license or accreditation to offer a program, the applicable board within the Division of Consumer Affairs may delay the effective date of the suspension or revocation for a reasonable time if it determines that doing so is necessary for the applicable board, or the affected private career school at the direction of the applicable board, to protect the interests of students.
 
	f.	Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authority of a professional or occupational board established within the Division of Consumer Affairs to suspend or revoke the license or accreditation of a private career school pursuant to Title 45 of the Revised Statutes.
 
	g.	The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, in consultation with the Commissioner of Education and the Attorney General, shall adopt, in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this section.

	L.2022, c.76, s.2.

34:15C-10.2  State Eligible Training Provider List.
 
	14. a. The Department of Labor and Workforce Development shall maintain a Statewide list of approved training providers known as the State Eligible Training Provider List. In order to be placed and retained on the list, a training provider shall meet:
 
	(1)	The requirements of section 122 of the "Workforce Investment Act of 1998," Pub.L.105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2842);
 
	(2)	The requirements of this section;
 
	(3)	Any requirement applicable to that training provider pursuant to section 13 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:15C-10.1), section 6 of P.L.1992, c.48 (C.34:15B-40) and section 6 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-8);
 
	(4)	All reporting requirements of section 29 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:1A-88); and
 
	(5)	Any other requirements established by the State Employment and Training Commission.
 
	No training provider who is not an approved training provider included on the State Eligible Training Provider List shall receive any federal job training funds or State job training funds.
 
	b.	In order to be placed on the State Eligible Training Provider List, each training provider, including a school, shall obtain approval from an authorized government agency.  Any provider that is not aligned with a specific cognizant agency shall be required to obtain approval from the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.  Authorized government agencies shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
 
	(1)	The Commission on Higher Education:  The commission shall approve programs from all institutions under its jurisdiction.  This approval includes course work for degrees and certificates awarded by higher education institutions including public and private institutions.
 
	(2)	The Department of Education:  The Department of Education shall approve all institutions in its jurisdiction.  Programs operated by the Division of Vocational Rehabilitation Services shall be approved by the Department of Education cooperatively with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.  Private schools controlled or operated by a charitable institution or any school controlled or operated by a religious denomination requesting to be included on the State Eligible Training Provider List shall be approved by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development in consultation with the Department of Education or any other appropriate State agency.  Appropriate fees may be charged for certification and annual renewal.
 
	(3)	State departments responsible for licensing:  Training providers are approved by any State department authorized to license training providers for specific training programs.
 
	(4)	The federal government:  Training providers required to be approved by an agency of the federal government shall be included on the State Eligible Training Provider List after submission of the application and documentation indicating approval by the appropriate agency.
 
	(5)	Out-of-state approval:  Training providers located in other states may be on the State Eligible Training Provider List if they demonstrate that they are approved by an appropriate state agency in the state in which they are located.  Those providers shall complete the appropriate application process, submit to the Center for Occupational Employment Information proof of their approval, agree to the established reports, agree to any other requirements established for in-State providers, and comply with the specific requirements of the funding source.
 
	c.	Where applicable, training programs shall align with or use existing nationally recognized, industry-based skill standards and certifications as the basis for developing competency based learning objectives, curricula, instructional methods, teaching materials and worksite activities; prepare students to satisfy employer knowledge and skill requirements assessed by related examination, and provide students with the opportunity to take exams and receive certifications or licenses.
 
	d.	Each training provider shall apply to be placed on the State Eligible Training Provider List and provide a record for each trainee enrolled. This information shall include, but not be limited to, the participant's Social Security number, gender, date of birth, date of enrollment, any date of completion, date of termination, date of start in a job, date of application for a license, licensing examination result, date of issue of a license, any credential issued, and other information as specified by the State Employment and Training Commission or Center for Occupational Employment Information.  For individuals who do not have a Social Security number, the qualifying agency may substitute an alternate method of identification, except that, at the time of start into employment, the alternate code shall be cross-referenced with the individual's valid Social Security number.  In addition, the training provider shall agree to provide any other information deemed appropriate by the State Employment and Training Commission, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development and the Department of Education for evaluation purposes.
 
	e.	Every training provider shall provide access for on site visitation and monitoring by the State or its designee upon request.
 
	f.	Objective performance standards and measures for evaluating training providers shall be jointly developed and implemented by the State Board of Education and the New Jersey State Employment and Training Commission.  Policy makers and consumers shall be provided with information concerning training providers on the State Eligible Training Provider List and shall be provided a consumer report card, compiled by the Center for Occupational Employment Information pursuant to section 27 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:1A-86), on the effectiveness of those training providers showing the long-term success of former trainees of each provider in obtaining permanent employment and increasing earnings over one or more time periods following the completion or other termination of training, including a period of two years following the completion or other termination of training.
 
	g.	Any qualifying school which has a currently valid certificate of approval issued pursuant to section 13 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:15C-10.1) and complies with all requirements of this section applicable to the school shall be placed on the State Eligible Training Provider List and any qualifying school which has its certificate revoked or suspended shall be removed from the list until the certification is reinstated.
 
	h.	In order to be placed on and maintain eligibility for the State Eligible Training Provider List, each training provider, including a school, shall submit the required information for the compilation of consumer report cards pursuant to section 27 of P.L. 2005, c.354 (C.34:1A-86), to the Center for Occupational Employment Information in a timely manner. Any training provider or qualified school that does not submit the required information in a timely manner shall have its certificate revoked or suspended and shall be removed from the list until the certification is reinstated.
 
	L.2005, c.354, s.14; amended 2013, c.208, s.2.

34:15C-10.2a  Eligibility contingent upon actions of training provider.
 	3. a. An individual receiving or seeking employment and training services from a training provider shall be ineligible to receive the services or any form of funding for the services, including grants, scholarships, loans, or other State job training funds or federal job training funds, if the training provider requires the individual to: 
 
	(1)	submit to an agreement to arbitrate or to an arbitration proceeding, prior to the commencement of any legal action, to resolve any matter thereafter relating to the individual's receiving the services;
 
	(2)	resolve, through an internal dispute process, a complaint relating to the individual's receiving the services;
 
	(3)	waive any right, forum, or procedure afforded to the individual, including any right to file and pursue a civil action, class action or a complaint with, or otherwise notify, any State agency, other public prosecutor, law enforcement agency, or any court or other governmental entity of any alleged violation of the individual's rights; or 
 
	(4)	be prohibited from disclosing, discussing, describing, or commenting upon the terms of the individual's receiving the services or any violation thereof.
 
	Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit an individual from receiving employment and training services or any form of funding for the services for which the individual is eligible from a different training provider.
 
	b.	A training provider shall not threaten, retaliate, or discriminate against any individual because of the refusal by the individual to: consent to an agreement to arbitrate or to an arbitration proceeding; resolve a complaint through an internal dispute process; waive any right, forum, or procedure; or consent to a prohibition to disclose, discuss, describe or comment upon any enrollment agreement terms or violations thereof. 
 
	c.	A training provider shall not require an individual to opt out of a waiver or take any affirmative action in order to preserve his rights pursuant to this section.
 
	d.	If a training provider requires an individual to take actions which make the individual ineligible to receive employment and training services pursuant to subsection a. of this section, or the training provider violates the provisions of subsection b. of this section, the training provider shall not be placed or retained on the State Eligible Training Provider List maintained pursuant to section 14 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:15C-10.2), and shall not receive any federal job training funds or State job training funds.
 
	e.	In the event that a training provider requires an individual to enter into an enrollment contract or similar agreement, the provider shall annually submit such contracts or agreements to the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.  
 
	f.	Nothing in this act shall be construed to invalidate a written arbitration agreement that is otherwise enforceable under the Federal Arbitration Act (9 U.S.C.s.1 et seq.).
 
	g.	For the purposes of this section, "federal job training funds", "State job training funds", "training provider" shall have the meanings set forth in section 4 of P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-1), and "employment and training services" shall have the meanings set forth in section 1 of P.L.1992, c.48 (C.34:15B-35) and section 3 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-3).
 
	L.2021, c.53, s.3.

34:15C-10.3  Definitions.
  	14.	As used in sections 14 through 20 of P.L.2021, c.27 (C.34:15C-10.3 through C.34:15C-10.9):
 
	"Closure" means the cessation of operations by a private career school.
 
	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	"Disorderly closure" means a closure that does not meet the requirements of P.L.2021, c.27 (C.18A:3B-90 et al.).
 
	"Eligible transfer institution" means a private career school that has been approved by the commissioner pursuant to section 17 of P.L.2021, c.27 (C.34:15C-10.6).
 
	"Institutional debt" means:
 
	(1)	the amount outstanding on any credit, including unpaid charges, extended by or on behalf of a private career school that a student is obligated to repay, whether the amount has been reduced to a judgment or the school classifies it as a loan; or
 
	(2)	a nonfederal loan or debt agreement that is issued expressly for postsecondary education expenses and that is guaranteed by a private career school or a private educational lender that is affiliated with a private career school.
 
	"Institutional financial aid agreement" means any contract, promissory note, part of an enrollment agreement, or other agreement in which a student agrees to pay an institutional debt.
 
	"Orderly closure" means a closure that meets the requirements of P.L.2021, c.27 (C.18A:3B-90 et al.).
 
	"Private career school" means a privately owned and privately operated postsecondary school, other than an institution of higher education or proprietary institution licensed to offer academic degrees, that furnishes or offers to furnish programs, whether or not requiring a payment of tuition or fee, for the purpose of training, retraining, or upgrading individuals for gainful employment as workers in recognized or emerging occupations.
 
	"Student" means an individual enrolled at a private career school in New Jersey, or a New Jersey resident enrolled at a private career school located outside of this State.
 
	"Teach-out agreement" means a written agreement between schools that provides for the equitable treatment of students and a reasonable opportunity for students to complete their program of study if a school, or a school location that provides 100 percent of at least one program offered, ceases to operate before all enrolled students have completed their program of study.
 
	"Teach-out plan" means a written plan developed by the school that provides for the equitable treatment of students if a school, or a school location, ceases to operate before all students have completed their program of study, and may include, if required by the school's accrediting agency, a teach-out agreement between schools.
 
	L.2021, c.27, s.14.

34:15C-10.4  Applicability.
  	15. a. Sections 14 through 20 of P.L.2021, c.27 (C.34:15C-10.3 through C.34:15C-10.9) shall apply to a private career school that operates in this State.
 
	b.	A private career school shall provide the commissioner a teach-out plan that addresses a potential closure of the school.  The teach-out plan shall be updated as required by the commissioner.
 
	c.	A teach-out plan shall include any information required by the commissioner and shall state that:
 
	(1)	the school shall make all reasonable efforts to ensure that any closure of a school complies with the requirements of P.L.2021, c.27 (C.18A:3B-90 et al.);
 
	(2)	the chief executive officer and the members of the governing body of the school were not in an executive position or a member of a governing body of a school in which a disorderly closure occurred; and
 
	(3)	any institutional financial aid agreement offered to a student shall contain language stating that, in the event of a disorderly closure, the institutional debt shall be void and shall not be recovered, collected, or enforced.
 
	d.	The commissioner shall seek an injunction or other judicial remedy against a private career school that fails to comply with the requirements of this section, including requiring the school to refund all tuition and fees paid by any student.
 
	L.2021, c.27, s.15.

34:15C-10.  Private career school entrance into school-to-school teach-out agreement.
 	16. a. A private career school shall enter into a school-to-school teach-out agreement at least 120 days prior to the cessation of school operations.
 
	b.	In order to satisfy the requirements of this section, a school-to-school teach-out agreement shall:
 
	(1)	be arranged by the closing private career school;
 
	(2)	be agreed to by an eligible transfer institution, the closing private career school, and the commissioner; and
 
	(3)	unless waived for good cause by the commissioner, specify that the eligible transfer institution shall:
 
	(a)	be located within a reasonable distance of the closing school, if the closing school has a physical presence in the State;
 
	(b)	accept the transfer of all completed credits from students affected by the closure; and
 
	(c)	allow a student affected by the closure to complete the student's program with substantially the same number of credit hours as was required by the closing school; and
 
	(4)	not charge a student tuition or fees in excess of the lesser of:
 
	(a)	the remaining amount that a student affected by the closure would have paid to the closing school to complete the program; or
 
	(b)	the transfer institution's applicable tuition and fees; and
 
	(5)	specify that, on request by a student affected by the closure, the closing school shall provide a complete academic record and an official transcript to the student at no cost to the student.
 
	L.2021, c.27, s.16.

34:15C-10.6  Approval of private career school to act as eligible transfer institution.
  	17. a. The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall approve a private career school to act as an eligible transfer institution if the school:
 
	(1)	is in good standing with its accreditor and, if applicable, its licensing body;
 
	(2)	if applicable, has not been sanctioned by the United States Department of Education due to having a high cohort loan default rate;
 
	(3)	has not been placed on Heightened Cash Monitoring Payment Method Level 2 by the United States Department of Education;
 
	(4)	within the previous five years, has not entered into any settlement agreements related to a consumer protection law with a law enforcement agency, or had any judgments related to a consumer protection law entered against it in favor of a law enforcement agency; and
 
	(5)	meets the requirements provided in section 16 of P.L.2021, c.27 (C.34:15C-10.5), and any additional standards provided pursuant to subsection b. of this section.
 
	b.	The commissioner may establish additional standards on a case-by-case basis for approving an eligible transfer institution.
 
	L.2021, c.27, s.17.

34:15C-10.7  Essential records filed by private career school.
  	18. a. Before any private career school ceases operations, the school shall file with the commissioner copies of all essential records of the current or former students of the school.  The obligation of a school under this section shall not be discharged in bankruptcy.
 
	b.	The records shall present, as separate documents:
 
	(1)	the official academic transcript of each student;
 
	(2)	any other academic information usually required by private career schools when considering students for transfer or advanced study; and
 
	(3)	if requested by the commissioner, the financial aid and financial account information of each student.
 
	c.	The records shall be accompanied by an affidavit as to the accuracy and completeness of the records on behalf of the school's board of trustees, bursar, chief administrative officer, chief executive officer, chief financial officer, or registrar.
 
	d.	The commissioner shall maintain a permanent file of all records filed with the commissioner under this section.
 
	e. (1) If a student who attended a private career school that closed in accordance with P.L.2021, c.27 (C.18A:3B-90 et al.) requests a copy of the student's official academic transcript from the commissioner and the commissioner determines that the requested transcript is missing, incomplete, or in a format inaccessible to the student, the commissioner may issue a replacement transcript for the student based solely on the most recent information provided by the school that the student attended.
 
	(2)	A replacement transcript issued in accordance with paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be signed by a designee of the commissioner, contain an explanation of the closure of the school, and contain an explanation of the source of all information contained in the replacement transcript.
 
	f. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, a replacement transcript issued in accordance with this section shall be accepted as an official transcript by any private career school operating in the State.
 
	(2)	For purposes of student transfer, a private career school may consider, instead of or in addition to a replacement transcript, an unofficial transcript or other transcript information provided by the student that the receiving institution or program deems relevant.
 
	g. (1) The commissioner shall adopt regulations necessary to carry out the provisions of this section, which shall include the manner and format in which student records are to be filed with the commissioner, and a description of the circumstances under which a private career school may cease operation.
 
	h.	If a private career school does not file all essential records with the commissioner in accordance with this section, the commissioner may:
 
	(1)	require the school to refund all tuition and fees paid by a student whose records are not filed in accordance with this section; and
 
	(2)	seek an injunction or other judicial remedy against the private career school.
 
	L.2021, c.27, s.18.

34:15C-10.8  Unlawful practice, violation.
 	19. a. It shall be an unlawful practice and a violation of P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-1 et seq.) for any private career school, person, or entity to collect on a student's institutional debt if the institutional financial aid agreement does not contain the language required under paragraph (3) of subsection c. of section 15 of P.L.2021, c.27 (C.34:15C-10.4).
 
	b.	It shall be an unlawful practice and a violation of P.L.1960, c.39 (C.56:8-1 et seq.) for a private career school to collect on the institutional debt of a student who attended a program in which a disorderly closure occurred.
 
	L.2021, c.27, s.19.

34:15C-10.9  Rules, regulations.
 	20.	The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, in consultation with the Commissioner of Education, shall adopt rules and regulations pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), to effectuate the purposes of sections 14 through 19 of P.L.2021, c.27 (C.34:15C-10.3 through C.34:15C-10.8).
 
	L.2021, c.27, s.20.

34:15C-11  Commission to coordinate initiatives with State departments.

	14. a. The commission shall foster and coordinate workforce investment initiatives of all State Departments. It shall promote initiatives of the Department of Education and the  Commission on Higher Education to maximize the contributions of the State's public schools and institutions of higher education in implementing the State workforce investment policy developed by the commission.  The commission shall foster and coordinate initiatives of the Department of Education and the Commission on Higher Education that will enhance the State's efforts to assist at-risk youths in achieving educational success and making successful transitions to work.  The commission shall foster initiatives of the Commission on Higher Education among institutions of higher education that will enhance the State's workforce investment efforts, including: the coordination of vocational programs between institutions; more use of facilities at institutions which provide education at or above the level of county colleges, including, but not limited to, the Advanced Technology Centers established pursuant to P.L.1985, c.102 (C.52:9X-1 et seq.), P.L.1985, c.103 (C.18A:64J-1 et seq.), P.L.1985, c.104 (C.18A:64J-8 et seq.), P.L.1985, c.105 (C.18A:64J-15 et seq.), and P.L.1985, c.106 (C.18A:64J-22 et seq.); developing more programs to offer four year degrees for working students who attend only at nights and on weekends; and expanding programs which provide college credit for training and educational experiences outside of traditional academic contexts.

	b.	The commission shall have the responsibility, jointly with the Department of Education, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development and the Commission on Higher Education, to: (1) establish standards regarding the minimum levels of remedial instruction which shall be made available to a trainee under any workforce investment program, including any program of training undertaken in connection with additional unemployment compensation benefits provided pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1992, c.47 (C.43:21-57 et al.) or any program funded or established pursuant to the "1992 New Jersey Employment and Workforce Development Act," P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-1 et al.) or the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, Pub. L. 105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2801 et seq.); and (2) coordinate the development of appropriate intake and assessment instruments and procedures for the assessment of persons seeking access to workforce investment programs.  The remedial instruction standards shall be determined through the use of common diagnostic tools, curricula, and evaluation techniques, and shall take into account the differing needs and characteristics of the various target populations which the programs serve.  The remedial instruction standards shall be based on evaluations of the minimum levels of basic skills needed to succeed in particular types of occupational training offered under the programs and any additional improvements in basic skills needed by individuals of each target population to successfully adapt to the State's changing economy.  The standard for the minimum level of remedial instruction that shall be made available to an individual receiving the occupational training for a particular occupation shall not be less than the level necessary to attain the minimum basic skill levels indicated as needed for that occupation in the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Occupational Information Network, or "O*NET."  The commission, the Department of Education, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development and the Commission on Higher Education, may jointly set this standard at a higher level, but if they do not, the level indicated in the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Occupational Information Network, or "O*NET," shall be regarded as the established standard.

	L.1989,c.293,s.14;  amended 1992, c.43, s.14; 1992, c.47, s.12; 1992, c.48, s.9; 2005, c.354, s.15.

34:15C-12  Preparation of annual budget for commission, funding.

	15. a. The chairperson of the commission shall prepare an annual budget for the commission.  Resources to support the activities of the commission and commission staff shall be contributed by each of the State's workforce investment system's partner State departments.  Up to 15 percent of allowable State administrative funds from all federally supported and State-supported workforce investment programs may be used to support the commission.

	b.	Funding for the commission and local Workforce Investment Boards shall be obtained from all workforce investment programs.  Funding shall be established cooperatively by the departments who are partners to the workforce investment system.  The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, in consultation with the commission, shall set criteria and standards for any Workforce Investment Board administrators hired with these administrative resources.

	L.1989,c.293,s.15; amended 2005, c.354, s.16.

34:15C-13.   Rules, regulations  
     The commission shall adopt rules and regulations pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) necessary to effectuate the provisions of this act.

    L.1989, c.293, s.16.  

34:15C-15  Workforce Investment Boards; representatives; duties, powers.

	18. a.  Each workforce investment area shall be under the jurisdiction of a Workforce Investment Board.  Each local workforce investment area established by the Governor shall have the same boundaries as the labor market area of which it is a part, except in cases where the boundaries are different because the Governor is required, pursuant to section 116 of Pub. L.105-220 (29 U.S.C. s. 2831), to approve a request to be a workforce investment area.

	b.	Each Workforce Investment Board shall be in conformity with section 116 of Pub. L. 105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2831) and the guidelines issued by the State Employment and Training Commission and shall consist of:

	(1)	Representatives of businesses who:

	(a)	Are owners of businesses, chief executives or operating officers of businesses, and other business executives or employers with optimum policy making or hiring authority; 

	(b)	Represent businesses with employment opportunities that reflect the employment opportunities of the local area;

	(c)	Are appointed from among individuals nominated by local business organizations and business trade associations; and

	(d)	Constitute a majority of the membership of the local board;

	(2)	Representatives of local educational entities who:

	(a)	Are representatives of local educational agencies, local school boards, entities providing adult education and literacy activities, county vocational technical schools and post-secondary educational institutions, including representatives of community colleges; and

	(b)	Are selected from nominations by regional or local educational agencies, institutions or organizations representing such local educational entities;

	(3)	Representatives of local area labor organizations who are nominated by local labor federations;

	(4)	Representatives of community-based organizations including organizations representing individuals with disabilities, organizations representing veterans, and faith-based organizations;

	(5)	Representatives of local economic development agencies including private sector entities;

	(6)	Representatives of each of the One-Stop partners; and

	(7)	Representatives that chief elected officials deem appropriate for board membership.

	The chairperson of the board shall be selected from among members of the board who are representative of business in the local area.

	c.	Members of the board shall be appointed from among individuals nominated by appropriate organizations in accordance with section 117 of Pub. L. 105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2832).  If there is only one unit of general local government in the local area with experience in administering workforce investment programs, the chief elected official of that unit shall determine the initial number of members on the board and shall appoint the members.  If there are two or more units in the local area with experience in administering job training programs, the chief elected officials of those units shall, in accordance with an agreement entered into by all of those units, determine the initial number of members on the board and appoint the members.  In the absence of an agreement by all of the units, the Governor shall determine the initial number of members on the board and appoint the members.  Members shall be appointed for fixed and staggered terms and may serve until their successors are appointed.  A vacancy in the membership of the board shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.  A member of the board may be removed for cause in accordance with procedures established by the board.

	d.	The Governor shall certify a board if it is determined that the board's composition and appointments are consistent with the provisions of this section and section 117 of Pub. L. 105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2832) and the requirements of the State Employment and Training Commission.  The certification shall be made or denied not later than 30 days after the date on which a list of members and necessary supporting documentation are submitted to the Governor.  The board shall, within 30 days after its certification by the Governor, be convened by the official or officials who made the appointments to the board under subsection c. of this section.  The board shall meet at least four times per year, with meetings open to attendance by interested persons pursuant to the "Open Public Meetings Act," P.L.1975, c.231 (C.10:4-6 et seq.).  

	e.	Each Workforce Investment Board established pursuant to this act shall:

	(1)	Provide policy guidance for, and exercise oversight with respect to, all workforce investment programs within its labor market area in partnership with the unit or units of general local government within the area.  To provide the policy guidance and oversight, the board shall review and evaluate the programs and, as appropriate, make recommendations to the Governor, the Legislature, or any State agency or local governing entity involved in the funding or administration of the programs.  The recommendations shall be based primarily on how effective each program is in meeting relevant performance standards, including standards regarding the cost and quality of training and the characteristics of participants.  The board shall provide any planning, policy guidance or oversight with respect to workforce investment programs in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to subsection g. of section 9 of this act by the commission and the department administering or funding the programs.

	(2)	Establish skill level and competency guidelines, which may be above the criteria established by the commission, consistent with the provisions of this act to be used as a basis for the selection of skill training programs and competency curriculum in its local area;

	(3)	Assist in the development, approval and submission of the State workforce investment operating plan for its labor market area;

	(4)	Prepare, approve and submit to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development and the State Employment and Training Commission a budget for itself in accordance with the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, Pub. L. 105-220 (29 U.S.C. s. 2801 et seq.);

	(5)	Submit to the State Employment and Training Commission, by September 1 of each year, an annual report covering the immediately preceding program period of July 1 to June 30.  The report shall contain:

	(a)	An account of activities during the program period, including all coordination activities undertaken by the board to eliminate unnecessary duplication of services and foster a unified  One-Stop delivery system;

	(b)	Information describing the extent to which the activities failed or succeeded in meeting relevant performance standards; and

	(c)	The skill level and competency guidelines to be used in the upcoming year;

	(6)	Fulfill any other role or function of a Workforce Investment Board required pursuant to Pub. L. 105-220 (29 U.S.C. s. 2801 et seq.); and

	(7)	Assume any additional responsibilities assigned to it by the Governor in consultation with the State Employment and Training Commission.

	f.	In order to carry out its functions under this act, a Workforce Investment Board may:

	(1)	Hire staff;

	(2)	Incorporate as a non-profit or other entity;

	(3)	Select, under agreement with the chief elected official or officials, the administrative entity for workforce investment programs funded within the workforce investment area;

	(4)	Seek, obtain and expend additional funding for the programs from public and private sources; and

	(5)	Establish as many committees as are necessary to satisfactorily perform its duties.  There shall be, at a minimum, a local Youth Council, a Disability Committee, a One-Stop Committee and a Literacy Committee.

	g.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2005, c.354.)

	h.	No member of a Workforce Investment Board established pursuant to this act shall cast a vote on the provision of services by that member or any organization which that member directly represents or vote on any matter which would provide direct financial benefit to that member.  Workforce Investment Boards shall be subject to policies concerning conflict of interest and nepotism prescribed by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.

	i.	(Deleted by amendment, P.L.2005, c.354.)

	L.1989,c.293,s.18; amended 2005, c.354, s.17.

34:15C-15.1  Workforce investment board to maintain Internet website, webpage; contents.
  
	2.	Each Workforce Investment Board shall maintain either an Internet website or a webpage on the county's Internet website.  The purpose of the website or webpage shall be to provide increased public access to the board's operations and activities.  The following information, if applicable, shall be posted on the board's website or webpage:
 
	a.	a description of the board's mission and responsibilities;
 
	b.	the budget once adopted for the current and immediately prior fiscal years.  Commencing with the fiscal year next following the effective date of P.L.2011, c.167 (C.4:24-20.1 et al.), the budgets of at least three consecutive fiscal years shall be available on the website or webpage;
 
	c.	the most recent Comprehensive Annual Financial Report or similar financial information;
 
	d.	the annual audit for the most recent and immediately prior fiscal years.  Commencing with the fiscal year next following the effective date of P.L.2011, c.167 (C.4:24-20.1 et al.), the annual audits of at least three consecutive fiscal years shall be available on the website or webpage;
 
	e.	the board's rules, regulations, and official policy statements deemed relevant by the board to the interests of the residents within the county;
 
	f.	notice, posted pursuant to the "Senator Byron M. Baer Open Public Meetings Act," P.L.1975, c.231 (C.10:4-6 et seq.), of a meeting of the Workforce Investment Board, setting forth the time, date, location, and agenda of the meeting;
 
	g.	the approved minutes including all resolutions of the board for each meeting of the Workforce Investment Board and its committees for the current fiscal year.  Commencing with the fiscal year next following the effective date of P.L.2011, c.167 (C.4:24-20.1 et al.), the approved minutes of meetings for at least three consecutive fiscal years shall be available on the website or webpage;
 
	h.	the name, mailing address, electronic mail address, if available, and phone number of every person who exercises day-to-day supervision or management over some or all of the operations of the Workforce Investment Board; and
 
	i.	a list of attorneys, advisors, consultants, and any other person, firm, business, partnership, corporation, or other organization which received any remuneration of $17,500 or more during the preceding fiscal year for any service whatsoever rendered to the Workforce Investment Board.
 
	L.2011, c.167, s.2.

34:15C-17  Findings, declarations relative to adult literacy.

	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	Education affects an individual's employability, wages, productivity, ability to function effectively in the family and community, and ultimately, it affects the State's economic well-being;

	b.	Low literacy skills rob individuals of their future and undermine the economy of the State;

	c.	Almost one-half of New Jersey's adults function at the lowest levels of literacy as defined by the National Adult Literacy Survey;

	d.	Low literacy levels are related to crime, unemployment and underemployment, public assistance, and many other social problems on which the State invests hundreds of millions of dollars each year;

	e.	A literate population is a precondition for solving many of society's ills; and

	f.	Developing a solid, well-coordinated literacy delivery system will enhance the chances of adults' success in the labor market and in society as a whole.

	L.1999,c.107,s.1.

34:15C-18  State Council for Adult Literacy Education Services.
  
	2. a. There is created within the State Employment and Training Commission, established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-2) in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, a State Council for Adult Literacy Education Services.
 
	b.	The 27-member council shall consist of the following ex officio members: the Commissioners of Labor and Workforce Development, Human Services, Education, Community Affairs and Corrections, the Executive Director of the New Jersey Commerce Commission, the Executive Director of the Commission on Higher Education, and the Executive Director of the State Employment and Training Commission.  The council shall also include one member of the Senate appointed by the President thereof and one member of the General Assembly appointed by the Speaker thereof, who shall serve during the two-year legislative session in which the appointment is made and who shall not be of the same political party; and 17 public members as follows: five public members appointed by the Governor including a member of a Workforce Investment Board literacy committee, a State or national adult education expert and three representatives of the business community, at least one of whom shall represent a small business; six public members appointed by the President of the Senate including a student or former student who received adult literacy services and a representative from each of the following: a county college, a four-year institution of higher education, the State Library or a local library, a Department of Education-funded adult education provider of adult basic education programs, general educational development programs or English as a second language programs and a community-based organization which is an adult education provider; and six public members appointed by the Speaker of the General Assembly including a representative from each of the following: a vocational school providing adult academic education programs, a trade union, the New Jersey Network, the New Jersey Association of Lifelong Learning, the Literacy Volunteers of America and the New Jersey Education Association.
 
	c.	The public members shall serve for terms of three years, but of the public members first appointed, six shall serve a term of three years, six shall serve a term of two years and five shall serve a term of one year.  Each member shall hold office for the term of appointment and until his successor is appointed and qualified.  A member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring in the membership of the board for any reason other than the expiration of the term shall have a term of appointment for the unexpired term only.  All vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.  A member may be appointed for any number of successive terms.  A member may be removed from office by the Governor, for cause, after a hearing and may be suspended by the Governor pending the completion of the hearing.
 
	d.	The members shall select annually a chairperson and a vice-chairperson, who shall be nongovernmental members of the council, and shall appoint an executive director.  The executive director shall report to the chairperson of the council and be responsible for administering the daily operations of the council.  The executive director shall serve in the State unclassified service.  The council may call to its assistance and avail itself of the services of the employees of any State, county or municipal department, board, bureau, commission or agency as it may require and as may be available to it for its purposes.
 
	e.	Members of the council shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as members, within the limits of funds appropriated or otherwise made available to the council for its purposes.  Actions may be taken and motions and resolutions may be adopted by the council by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members.
 
	L.1999, c.107, s.2; amended 2005, c.354, s.18; 2007, c.253, s.21.

34:15C-19  Purpose of council.

	3.	The purpose of the council shall be to facilitate Statewide and local policy development, planning and oversight in consultation with the stakeholders in the area of adult literacy education.  The responsibilities of the council shall include, but not be limited to:

	a.	developing a broad-based Statewide master plan, which integrates and coordinates all adult literacy programs.  At a minimum, the plan shall address service delivery, consolidation and coordination, funding and accountability, staff development and training, technology and advocacy.  The plan shall include a proposal to consolidate the State supported literacy programs;

	b.	facilitating State planning and local planning through Workforce Investment Boards and among service providers to assure concurrence with the State master plan for adult literacy education, developed by the council pursuant to subsection a. of this section;

	c.	reviewing federal and State legislation, and developing and modifying literacy plans accordingly;

	d.	developing appropriate performance standards and impact measures and Statewide benchmarks to measure the entire system and programs of adult literacy services;

	e.	developing a Statewide strategy to facilitate and improve professional development and information sharing for practitioners and policy makers and to promote the availability of services to learners, employers, and service providers;

	f.	improving communication among federal, State, and local literacy initiatives;

	g.	recommending strategies to broaden adult literacy efforts so that literacy levels of the entire family are improved; and

	h.	working with public and private sector organizations to develop strategies to publicize the problem of low-literate populations as well as the services available to address this problem.

	L.1999,c.107,s.3.

34:15C-20  Annual report to Governor, Legislature.

	4.	The council shall report annually to the Governor and the Legislature.  The annual report shall include, but not be limited to, the accomplishments and initiatives of the reporting period.  The first annual report shall also include the State master plan developed pursuant to subsection a. of section 3 of this act.

	L.1999,c.107,s.4.

34:15C-21  Council on Gender Parity in Labor and Education.
  
	1. a. There is created, in the New Jersey State Employment and Training Commission, a council which shall be known as the Council on Gender Parity in Labor and Education.
 
	b.	The council shall consist of 16 members who are individuals with experience in the fields of labor, education, training, or gender equity.  The 16 members shall include:  six members appointed by the Director of the Division on Women; six members appointed by the Executive Director of the State Employment and Training Commission; and four members who shall serve ex officio, one of whom shall be appointed by the Commissioner of Children and Families, one by the Commissioner of Education, one by the Commissioner of Human Services, and one by the Executive Director of the Commission on Higher Education.  Not more than half of the members appointed by the Director of the Division on Women and not more than half of the members appointed by the Executive Director of the State Employment and Training Commission shall be of the same political party.  The members appointed by the director and executive director shall serve for terms of three years, except that of the eight members first appointed by the director and the executive director, four shall be appointed for three years, two shall be appointed for two years, and two shall be appointed for one year.  Each member shall hold office for the term of appointment and until his successor is appointed and qualified.  A member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring in the membership of the council for any reason other than the expiration of the term shall have a term of appointment for the unexpired term only.  Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.  A member may be appointed for any number of successive terms. Any member appointed by the director or the executive director may be removed from the council by the director or the executive director, as the case may be, for cause, after a hearing and may be suspended by the director or the executive director pending the completion of the hearing.
 
	c.	Members of the council shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as members.  Action may be taken and motions and resolutions may be adopted by the council at a council meeting by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members.  The council shall elect from its members a chairperson who shall be a nongovernmental member of the council.  Advanced notification for, and copies of the minutes of, each meeting of the council shall be filed with the Governor, the President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the General Assembly.
 
	L.1999, c.223, s.1; amended 2005, c.354, s.19; 2012, c.16, s.129.

34:15C-22  Duties of council.
  
	2.	The Council shall:

	a.	Assess the effectiveness of State programs designed to provide gender equity in labor, education, and training;
 
	b.	Make recommendations to the Commissioners of Children and Families, Education, Human Services, and Labor and Workforce Development, and the Secretary of Higher Education regarding the needs, priorities, programs, and policies related to access and equity for labor, education, and workforce training throughout the State;
 
	c.	Review current and proposed legislation and regulations pertaining to gender equity in labor, education, and workforce training and make recommendations regarding possible legislation and regulations to the State Employment and Training Commission and the Division on Women;
 
	d.	Develop policies to insure that State agencies set benchmarks and integrate their data collection systems to assess progress toward achieving gender equity and take action to insure that appropriate data collection systems exist where needed;
 
	e.	Develop policies to promote linkages among individuals, schools, organizations, and public agencies providing gender equity services and programs;
 
	f.	Educate and provide information to the public on the issues and current developments in gender equity by issuing reports and holding events such as conferences and symposia;
 
	g.	Submit an annual report to the Governor, the Legislature, the State Employment and Training Commission, and the Division on Women of its assessments and recommendations made pursuant to this section;
 
	h.	Conduct studies and promote research, as practicable, to develop the means to correct gender inequitable practices, including practices leading to pay disparities between men and women and publish and otherwise make available to employers, labor organizations, professional associations, educational institutions, the media, and the general public the findings resulting from these studies and other materials;
 
	i.	Develop and make available information, as practicable, regarding best practices for workplace gender equity to enable employers to evaluate job categories based on objective criteria, such as educational requirements, skill requirements, independence, working conditions, and responsibility; and
 
	j.	Establish a Statewide recognition of exceptional practices, as practicable, to promote gender equity in the workplace to be presented to a workplace, as shall be defined by the Council, that, at a minimum, has demonstrated it has made a substantial effort to eliminate pay disparities between men and women, and thus deserves special recognition, in addition to any other requirements and specifications the Council deems appropriate in the determination of the workplace to be recognized.
 
	L.1999, c.223, s.2; amended 2011, c.186, s.1; 2012, c.16, s.130.

34:15C-23  Authority of council.

	3.	The council is authorized to:

	a.	Hold public hearings;

	b.	Employ staff, responsible to the Executive Director of the State Employment and Training Commission, to assist the council to implement the purposes of this act; and

	c.	Avail itself of the services of the employees and have access to the records of any instrumentality of the State, as necessary or useful to implement the purposes of this act.



	L.1999,c.223,s.3.  

34:15C-24  "New Jersey Advanced Manufacturing Council" established.
	5. a. There is created in the New Jersey State Employment and Training Commission, established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-2), the New Jersey Advanced Manufacturing Council.
 
	b.	The council shall consist of 11 members who are individuals with experience in the fields of labor, education, or workforce development or training.  The Governor shall appoint nine members as follows: one member shall be recommended by the Senate President; one member shall be recommended by the Speaker of the General Assembly; one member shall be recommended by the Minority Leader of the Senate; one member shall be recommended by the Minority Leader of the General Assembly; and, five members shall be recommended by the Governor.  The co-chairs of the Legislative Manufacturing Caucus shall serve as ex officio members of the council.  The members appointed by the Governor shall be appointed for five-year terms, except, of the members first appointed, three members shall be appointed for five-year terms, three members shall be appointed for three-year terms, and three members shall be appointed for four-year terms.  Each appointed member shall hold office for the term of appointment and until a successor is appointed and qualified.  A member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring in the appointed membership of the council for any reason other than the expiration of the term shall have a term of appointment for the unexpired term only.  Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.  A member may be appointed for any number of successive terms. Any member appointed may be removed from the council by the appointing authority, as the case may be, for cause, after a hearing and may be suspended by the appointing authority pending the completion of the hearing.
 
	c.	Members of the council shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as members.  Action may be taken and motions and resolutions may be adopted by the council at a council meeting by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members.  The council shall elect from its members a chairperson.  Advanced notification for, and copies of the minutes of, each meeting of the council shall be filed with the Governor, the President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the General Assembly.
 
L.2023, c.268, s.5.

34:15C-25  New Jersey Advanced Manufacturing Council, duties, responsibilities; report, Governor, Legislature, State Employment and Training Commission.
	6.	The council shall:
 
	a.	convene and enable industry-led, private-public partnerships focused on engaging New Jersey institutions of higher education in manufacturing innovation;
 
	b.	design and implement an advanced manufacturing initiative to facilitate collaboration and information sharing across State departments and agencies;
 
	c.	assist private companies to enhance technological transfer in New Jersey manufacturing industries to help companies overcome technical obstacles to scaling up production of new technologies; and
 
	d.	submit an annual report to the Governor, to the Legislature pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), and to the State Employment and Training Commission, of its assessments and recommendations to enhance State policy related to the advanced manufacturing industry in New Jersey.
 
L.2023, c.268, s.6.

34:15C-26  Council authorization.
	7.	The council is authorized to:
 
	a.	hold public hearings;
 
	b.	employ staff, responsible to the Executive Director of the State Employment and Training Commission, to assist the council to implement the purposes of this act; and
 
	c.	avail itself of the services of the employees and have access to the records of any instrumentality of the State, as necessary or useful to implement the purposes of this act.
 
L.2023, c.268, s.7.

34:15D-1.  Short title  
     1.   This act shall be known and may be cited as the "1992 New Jersey Employment and Workforce Development Act."  

    L.1992,c.43,s.1.  

34:15D-2.  Findings, declarations  
     2.   The Legislature finds and declares that:

  

    a.   New Jersey, facing an intensely competitive world economy, must choose whether to compete against countries that have low-paid, unskilled workforces or to compete for the high-productivity jobs that can provide a foundation for an economic leadership position for New Jersey and high living standards for all of its citizens;  

    b.   If New Jersey is going to take the high-skill, high-productivity, high-wage path, it will need a genuine partnership between business, labor and government to invest in the first-rate training and education for front-line workers needed to stimulate greater worker involvement in promoting innovation, quality control and responsiveness to rapid technological advances in production;  

    c.   Current private sector efforts to train and educate employees in New Jersey are extensive, involving the expenditure of hundreds of millions of dollars, but the overwhelming majority of those expenditures goes to the minority of employees, usually placed in management, scientific and technical positions, who already have college degrees;  

    d.   The inadequate emphasis on training and ongoing education for the broad majority of front-line workers is further compounded by the fact that 90% of job training expenditures by American businesses is spent by only one half of one percent of American businesses;  

    e.   Although current training programs for the long-term jobless and other disadvantaged individuals have increased skilled labor resources in the State, and although federal funding for those programs is inadequate to cover more than a small minority of those eligible, there is an even greater need for new public resources to upgrade the skills of vastly larger numbers of currently employed, or recently displaced, mainstream front-line workers;  

    f.   Proposals have been made by the administrations of both Governor Kean and Governor Florio to redirect existing payroll taxes to fund a broader and more in-depth program of worker training and access to lifelong education, a method successfully employed by other States and by leading international industrial competitors, such as Germany, Japan and France;  

    g.   The potential contribution of business-labor cooperation to create a highly productive workforce has also been demonstrated, domestically and overseas, by the effectiveness of apprenticeship programs in certain skilled trades;  

    h.   It is therefore an appropriate public purpose to sustain the current level of support of training programs for disadvantaged individuals and to establish, with the active participation of New Jersey's business and labor communities, a broader program of expanded, high-quality training and education, including needed basic skills education, for currently employed and recently displaced front-line workers, funded by the redirection of a portion of existing payroll taxes.  

    L.1992,c.43,s.2.  

34:15D-3  Definitions relative to workforce development.

	3.	As used in this act:

	"Administrative costs" means any costs incurred by the department to administer the program, including any cost required to collect information and conduct evaluations of service providers pursuant to section 8 of this act and conduct surveys of occupations pursuant to section 12 of this act, to the extent that funding is not available from federal or other sources.

	"Apprenticeship Policy Committee" means the New Jersey Apprenticeship Policy Committee established by an agreement between the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training in the United States Department of Labor, the State Department of Labor and Workforce Development and the State Department of Education and consisting of a representative of the Commissioner of the State Department of Education, a representative of the Commissioner of the State Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the Director of Region II of the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training in the United States Department of Labor and a representative of the New Jersey State AFL-CIO.

	"Approved community-based or faith-based organization" means an organization which is an approved service provider, a nonprofit organization exempt from federal taxation under section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. s. 501), and approved by the commissioner as demonstrating expertise and effectiveness in the field of workforce investment and being representative of a community or a significant segment of a community where the organization provides services.

	"Approved service provider" or "approved training provider" means a service provider which is on the State Eligible Training Provider List.

	"Commission" means the State Employment and Training Commission.

	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development or the commissioner's designees.

	"Credential" means a credential recognized by the Department of Education or the Commission on Higher Education, or approved by the Credentials Review Board established by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to section 25 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:1A-1.10).

	"Customized training services" means employment and training services which are provided by the Office of Customized Training pursuant to section 5 of this act.

	"Department" means the State Department of Labor and Workforce Development.

	"Employer" or "business" means any employer subject to the provisions of R.S.43:21-1 et seq.

	"Employment and training services" means:

	a.	Counseling provided pursuant to section 7 of this act;

	b.	Occupational training;

	c.	Remedial instruction; or

	d.	Occupational safety and health training.

	e.	In the case of a qualified disadvantaged worker who is or was receiving, or is eligible for but not receiving, benefits under the Work First New Jersey program, "employment and training services" includes, in addition to any of the benefits listed in subsections a. through d. above, Supplemental Workforce Development Benefits approved as part of the workers' Employability Development Plan pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-7).

	"Fund" means the Workforce Development Partnership Fund established pursuant to section 9 of this act.

	"Labor Demand Occupation" means an occupation which:

	a.	The Center for Occupational Employment Information has, pursuant to subsection d. of section 27 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:1A-86), determined is or will be, on a regional basis, subject to a significant excess of demand over supply for trained workers, based on a comparison of the total need or anticipated need for trained workers with the total number being trained; or 

	b.	The Center for Occupational Employment Information, in conjunction with a Workforce Investment Board, has, pursuant to subsection d. of section 27 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:1A-86), determined is or will be, in the region for which the board is responsible, subject to a significant excess of demand over supply for adequately trained workers, based on a comparison of total need or anticipated need for trained workers with the total number being trained.

	"Occupational safety and health training" means training or instruction which is designed to assist in the recognition and prevention of potential health and safety hazards related to an occupation.

	"Office" means the Office of Customized Training established pursuant to section 5 of this act.

	"One Stop Career Center" means any of the facilities established, sponsored or designated by the State, a political subdivision of the State and a Workforce Investment Board in a local area to coordinate or make available State and local programs providing employment and training services or other employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities, including job placement services, and any other similar facility as may be established, sponsored or designated at any later time to coordinate or make available any of those programs, services or activities.

	"Permanent employment" means full-time employment unsubsidized by government training funds which provides a significant opportunity for career advancement and long-term job security.

	"Poverty level" means the official poverty level based on family size, established and adjusted under section 673 (2) of Subtitle B of the "Community Services Block Grant Act," Payable-35 (42 U.S.C. s. 9902 (2)).

	"Program" means the Workforce Development Partnership Program created pursuant to this act.

	"Qualified disadvantaged worker" means a worker who is not a qualified displaced worker or a qualified employed worker but who otherwise meets the following criteria:

	a.	Is unemployed;

	b.	Is working part-time and actively seeking full-time work or is working full-time but is earning wages substantially below the median salary for others in the labor force with similar qualifications and experience; or

	c.	Is certified by the Department of Human Services as:

	(1)	Currently receiving public assistance;

	(2)	Having been recently removed from the public assistance rolls because of gross income exceeding the grant standard for assistance; or

	(3)	Being eligible for public assistance but not receiving the assistance because of a failure to apply for it.

	"Qualified displaced worker" means a worker who:

	a.	Is unemployed, and:

	(1)	Is currently receiving unemployment benefits pursuant to R.S.43:21-1 et seq. or any federal or State unemployment benefit extension; or

	(2)	Has exhausted eligibility for the benefits or extended benefits during the preceding 52 weeks; or

	b.	Meets the criteria set by the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, Pub.L.105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2801 et seq.), to be regarded as a "dislocated worker" pursuant to that act.

	"Qualified employed worker" means a worker who is employed by an employer participating in a customized training program, or other employed worker who is in need of remedial  instruction.

	"Qualified job counselor" means a job counselor whose qualifications meet standards established by the commissioner.

	"Qualified staff" means staff whose qualifications meet standards set by regulations adopted by the commissioner.

	"Remedial education" or "remedial instruction" means any literacy or other basic skills training or instruction which may not be directly related to a particular occupation but is needed to facilitate success in occupational training or work performance, including training or instruction in mathematics, reading comprehension, computer literacy, English proficiency and work-readiness skills.

	"Self-sufficiency" for an individual means a level of earnings from employment not lower than 250% of the poverty level for an individual, taking into account the size of the individual's family.

	"Service provider," "training provider" or "provider" means a provider of employment and training services including but not limited to a private or public school or institution of higher education, a business, a labor organization or a community-based organization.

	"State Eligible Training Provider List" means the Statewide list of eligible training providers maintained pursuant to section 14 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:15C-10.2).

	"Supplemental Workforce Fund for Basic Skills" means the fund established pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2001, c.152 (C.34:15D-21).

	"Total revenues dedicated to the program during any one fiscal year" means all moneys received for the fund during any fiscal year, including moneys withdrawn from the State disability benefits fund pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1992, c.44 (C.34:15D-14), minus any repayment made during that fiscal year from the fund to the State disability benefits fund pursuant to that section.

	"Training grant" means a grant provided to fund occupational training and any needed remedial instruction for a qualified displaced or disadvantaged worker pursuant to section 6 of this act, or to fund needed remedial instruction for a qualified employed worker pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2001, c.152 (C.34:15D-21).  

	"Vocational training" or "occupational training" means training or instruction which is related to an occupation and is designed to enhance the marketable skills and earning power of a worker or job seeker.  

	"Workforce Investment Services" means core, intensive, and training services as defined by the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, Pub.L.105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2801 et seq.).

	L.1992,c.43,s.3; amended 2001, c.152, s.8; 2004, c.39, s.9; 2005, c.354, s.20.

34:15D-4  Workforce Development Partnership Program.
 	4. a. The Workforce Development Partnership Program is hereby established in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development and shall be administered by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.  The purpose of the program is to provide qualified displaced, disadvantaged and employed workers with the employment and training services most likely to enable the individual to obtain employment providing self-sufficiency for the individual and also to provide the greatest opportunity for long-range career advancement with high levels of productivity and earning power.  To implement that purpose, the program shall provide those services by means of training grants or customized training services in coordination with funding for the services from federal or other sources.  The commissioner is authorized to expend moneys from the Workforce Development Partnership Fund to provide the training grants or customized training services and provide for each of the following:

	(1)	The cost of counseling required pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-7), to the extent that adequate funding for counseling is not available from federal or other sources;

	(2)	Reasonable administrative costs, which shall not exceed 10 percent of the revenues collected pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1992, c.44 (C.34:15D-13) during any fiscal year ending before July 1, 2001, except for additional start-up administrative costs approved by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget during the first year of the program's operation;

	(3)	Reasonable costs, which shall not exceed 0.5 percent of the revenues collected pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1992, c.44 (C.34:15D-13) during any fiscal year ending before July 1, 2001, as required by the State Employment and Training Commission to design criteria and conduct an annual evaluation of the program; and

	(4)	The cost of reimbursement to individuals for excess contributions pursuant to section 6 of P.L.1992, c.44 (C.34:15D-17).

	b.	Not more than 10 percent of the moneys received by any service provider pursuant to this act shall be expended on anything other than direct costs to the provider of providing the employment and training services, which direct costs shall not include any administrative or overhead expense of the provider.

	c.	Training and employment services or other workforce investment services shall be provided to a worker who receives counseling pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-7) only if the counselor who evaluates the worker pursuant to that section determines that the worker can reasonably be expected to successfully complete the training and instruction identified in the Employability Development Plan developed pursuant to that section for the worker.

	d.	All occupational training provided under this act:

	(1)	Shall be training which is likely to substantially enhance the individual's marketable skills and earning power; and

	(2)	Shall be training for a labor demand occupation, except for:

	(a)	Customized training provided to the present employees of a business which the commissioner deems to be in need of the training to prevent job loss caused by obsolete skills, technological change or national or global competition; or
	(b)	Customized training provided to employees at a facility which is being relocated from another state into New Jersey; or

	(c)	Entrepreneurial training and technical assistance supported by training grants provided pursuant to subsection b. of section 6 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-6).

	e.	During any fiscal year ending before July 1, 2001, not less than 25 percent of the total revenues dedicated to the program during any one fiscal year shall be reserved to provide employment and training services for qualified displaced workers; not less than six percent of the total revenues dedicated to the program during any one fiscal year shall be reserved to provide employment and training services for qualified disadvantaged workers; not less than 45 percent of the total revenues dedicated to the program during any one fiscal year shall be reserved for and appropriated to the Office of Customized Training; not less than three percent of the total revenues dedicated to the program during any one fiscal year shall be reserved for occupational safety and health training; and five percent of the total revenues dedicated to the program during any one fiscal year shall be reserved for and appropriated to the Youth Transitions to Work Partnership created pursuant to P.L.1993, c.268 (C.34:15E-1 et seq.).

	f.	Funds available under the program shall not be used for activities which induce, encourage or assist: any displacement of currently employed workers by trainees, including partial displacement by means such as reduced hours of currently employed workers; any replacement of laid off workers by trainees; or any relocation of operations resulting in a loss of employment at a previous workplace located in the State.

	g.	On-the-job training shall not be funded by the program for any employment found by the commissioner to be of a level of skill and complexity too low to merit training.  The duration of on-the-job training funded by the program for any worker shall not exceed the duration indicated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Occupational Information Network, or "O*NET," for the occupation for which the training is provided and shall in no case exceed 26 weeks.  The department shall set the duration of on-the-job training for a worker for less than the indicated maximum, when training for the maximum duration is not warranted because of the level of the individual's previous training, education or work experience. On-the-job training shall not be funded by the program unless it is accompanied, concurrently or otherwise, by whatever amount of classroom-based or equivalent occupational training, remedial instruction or both, is deemed appropriate for the worker by the commissioner.  On-the-job training shall not be funded by the program unless the trainee is provided benefits, pay and working conditions at a level and extent not less than the benefits and working conditions of other trainees or employees of the trainee's employer with comparable skills, responsibilities, experience and seniority.

	h.	Employment and training services funded by the program shall not replace, supplant, compete with or duplicate in any way approved apprenticeship programs.

	i.	No activities funded by the program shall impair existing contracts for services or collective bargaining agreements, except that activities which would be inconsistent with the terms of a collective bargaining agreement may be undertaken with the written concurrence of the collective bargaining unit and employer who are parties to the agreement.

	j.	All staff who are hired and supported by moneys from the Workforce Development Partnership Fund, including any of those staff located at any One Stop Career Center, but not including any staff of a service provider providing employment and training services supported by a customized training grant pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-5) or an individual training grant pursuant to section 6 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-6), shall be hired and employed by the State pursuant to Title 11A, Civil Service, of the New Jersey Statutes, be hired and employed by a political subdivision of the State, or be qualified staff hired and employed by a non-profit organization which began functioning as the One Stop Career Center operator with the written consent of the chief elected official and the commissioner prior to the effective date of P.L.2004, c.39 (C.34:1A-1.2 et al.), or be qualified staff hired and employed by an approved community-based or faith-based organization to provide services at the level of staffing provided in an agreement entered into by the organization before the effective date of P.L.2004, c.39 (C.34:1A-1.2 et al.).

	k.	Employers in the State who apply for grants for training and employment services or other workforce investment services for their employees in the State shall be evaluated by the commissioner and preference shall be given to those employers who: 

	(1)	provide equipment, supplies, or services to military bases and installations pursuant to a procurement or military contract with the United States Department of Defense, the United States Department of Veterans Affairs, or any branch of the United States Armed Forces; 

	(2)	are engaged in one or more of the following fields or industries: science, technology, engineering, mathematics, or advanced manufacturing within these fields or industries; 

	(3)	are manufacturers; or

	(4)	intend to train veterans.

	Pursuant to this paragraph, "veteran" means any resident of the State now or hereafter who has served in any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States or a Reserve component thereof or the National Guard of this State or another state as defined in section 1 of P.L.1963, c.109 (C.38A:1-1), and has been discharged honorably or under general honorable conditions from that service.

	L.1992, c.43, s.4; amended 1993, c.268, s.12; 1994, c.73, s.1; 1995, c.394, s.10; 1995, c.422, s.2; 2001, c.152, s.9; 2004, c.39, s.10; 2005, c.354, s.21; 2017, c.22, s.1; 2019, c.278, s.1; 2019, c.500, s.2.

34:15D-5  Office of Customized Training established.
	5. a. There is hereby established, as part of the Workforce Development Partnership Program, the Office of Customized Training. Moneys allocated to the office from the fund shall be used to provide employment and training services to eligible applicants approved by the commissioner.

	b.	An applicant shall be eligible for customized training services if it is one of the 
following:

	(1)	An individual employer that seeks the customized training services to create, upgrade or retain jobs in a labor demand occupation;

	(2)	An individual employer that seeks customized training services to upgrade or retain jobs in an occupation which is not a labor demand occupation, if the commissioner determines that the services are necessary to prevent the likely loss of the jobs or that the services are being provided to employees at a facility which is being relocated from another state into New Jersey;

	(3)	An employer organization, labor organization or community-based or faith-based organization seeking the customized training services to provide training in labor demand occupations in a particular industry; 

	(4)	A consortium made up of one or more educational institutions and one or more eligible individual employers or labor, employer or community-based or faith-based organizations that seeks the customized training services to provide training in labor demand occupations in a particular industry; 

	(5)	An individual employer who provides equipment, supplies, or services to military bases and installations pursuant to a procurement or military contract with the United States Department of Defense, the United States Department of Veterans Affairs, or any branch of the United States Armed Forces; 

	(6)	An individual employer who is engaged in one or more of the following fields or industries: science, technology, engineering, mathematics, or advanced manufacturing within these fields or industries; 

	(7)	An individual employer who is a manufacturer; or

	(8)	An individual employer who intends to train veterans. For the purposes of this subparagraph, a "veteran" is any resident of the State now or hereafter who has served in any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States or a Reserve component thereof or the National Guard of this State or another state as defined in section 1 of P.L.1963, c.109 (C.38A:1-1), and has been discharged honorably or under general honorable conditions from that service.

	c.	Each applicant seeking funding for customized training services shall submit an application to the commissioner in a form and manner prescribed in regulations adopted by the commissioner.  The application shall be accompanied by a business plan of each employer which will receive customized training services if the application is approved. The business plan shall include:

	(1)	A justification of the need for the services and funding from the office, including information sufficient to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the commissioner that the applicant will provide significantly less of the services if the requested funding is not provided by the office;

	(2)	A comprehensive long-term human resource development plan which:

	(a)	Extends significantly beyond the period of time in which the services are funded by the office;

	(b)	Significantly enhances the productivity and competitiveness of the employer operations located in the State and the employment security of workers employed by the employer in the State; and

	(c)	States the number of current or newly-hired workers who will be trained under the grant and the pay levels of jobs which will be created or retained for those workers as a result of the funding and the plan.

	(3)	Evidence, if the training sought is for an occupation which is not a labor demand occupation, that the customized training services are needed to prevent job loss caused by obsolete skills, technological change or national or global competition or that the services are being provided to employees at a facility which is being relocated from another state into New Jersey;

	(4)	Information demonstrating that most of the individuals receiving the services will be trained primarily for work in the direct production of goods or services;

	(5)	A commitment to provide the information needed by the commissioner to evaluate the success of the funding and the plan in creating and retaining jobs, to assure compliance with the provisions of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-1 et seq.); and 

	(6)	Any other information or commitments which the commissioner deems appropriate to assure compliance with the provisions of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-1 et seq.).

	The commissioner may provide whatever assistance he deems appropriate in the preparation of the application and business plan, which may include labor market information, projections of occupational demand and information and advice on alternative training and instruction strategies.

	d.	Each employer that receives a grant for customized training services shall contribute a minimum of 50 percent of the total cost of the customized training services, except that the commissioner shall set a higher or lower minimum contribution by an employer, if warranted by the size and economic resources of the employer or other factors deemed appropriate by the commissioner, and except that, for individuals hired by the employer through a One Stop Career Center who receive classroom training under the grant and were recipients of benefits under the Work First New Jersey program at any time during the 12 months preceding the date of employment, the employer shall be eligible for reimbursement of up to 50 percent of wages paid to the individual during the classroom training in addition to reimbursement for tuition and other direct costs of the training as determined to be appropriate by the office, and provided, further, that no individual shall be hired or placed in a manner which results in a violation of the restrictions of subsection f. of section 4 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-4) against displacing current employees.

	e.	Each employer receiving a grant for customized training services shall hire or retain in permanent employment each worker who successfully completes the training and instruction provided under the customized training.  The employer shall be entitled to select the qualified employed, disadvantaged or displaced workers who will participate in the customized training, except that if any collective bargaining unit represents a qualified employed worker, the selection shall be conducted in a manner acceptable to both the employer and the collective bargaining unit.  The commissioner shall provide for the withholding, for a time period he deems appropriate, of whatever portion he deems appropriate of program funding as a final payment for customized training services, contingent upon the hiring and retention of a program completer as required pursuant to this section.  If an employer receiving a grant for customized training services pursuant to this section relocates or outsources any or all of the jobs out of the State for which the customized training services were provided under the grant within three years following the end date of the customized contract, the employer shall, if all of the jobs are relocated or outsourced, return all of the moneys provided to the employer by the State for customized training services, or, if only a portion of the jobs are relocated or outsourced, return a part of the moneys, deemed by the commissioner to be appropriate and proportional to the portion of the jobs relocated or outsourced, and the returned amount shall be deposited into the Workforce Development Partnership Fund.

	f.	The customized training services provided to an approved applicant may include any combination of employment and training services or any single employment and training service approved by the commissioner, including remedial instruction provided to upgrade workplace literacy.  Each service may be provided by a separate approved service provider.  No training or employment service shall be funded through a customized training grant, unless the service is provided directly by an employer or is provided by an approved service provider.  An employer who directly provides training and employment services to his own employees shall not be regarded as a service provider and shall not be subject to any requirement to obtain approval by the State as a service provider, including the requirements of section 13 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:15C-10.1) to be approved as a qualifying school or the requirements of section 14 of P.L.2005, c.354 (C.34:15C-10.2) to be included on the State Eligible Training Provider List.

	g.	Customized training services shall include any remedial instruction determined necessary pursuant to section 7 of this act. Applications for customized training services shall include estimates of the total need for remedial instruction determined in a manner deemed appropriate by the commissioner.

	h.	Any business seeking customized training services shall, in the manner prescribed by the commissioner, participate in the development of a plan to provide the services.  Any business seeking customized training services for workers represented by a collective bargaining unit shall notify the collective bargaining unit and permit it to participate in developing the plan.  No customized training services shall be provided to a business employing workers represented by a collective bargaining unit without the written consent of both the business and the collective bargaining unit.

	i.	Any business receiving customized training services shall be responsible for providing workers' compensation coverage for any worker participating in the customized training.

	j.	The commissioner shall establish an annual goal that 15 percent or more of the jobs to be created or retained in connection with training supported by grants from the office shall be jobs provided to individuals who were recipients of benefits under the Work First New Jersey program at any time during the 12 months prior to being placed in the jobs.  The means to attain the goal shall include coordinated efforts between the office and One Stop Career Centers to prepare recipients for employment and make them available to employers, but shall not include any policy which may penalize employers or discourage employers from using customized training service provided by the office.

	L.1992, c.43, s.5; amended 2004, c.39, s.11; 2005, c.354, s.22; 2017, c.22, s.2; 2019, c.278, s.2; 2019, c.500, s.3.

34:15D-5.1  Findings, declarations relative to under-represented participants in apprenticeships.
	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that women, minorities, and persons with disabilities are under-represented in the skilled trades and apprenticeship programs, despite the fact that these groups represent a large and growing portion of the workforce.  As apprenticeship programs often lead to high paying jobs in growing industries, women, minorities, and persons with disabilities should be provided better access and support in benefitting from them. 
 
	Although apprenticeships can benefit these groups, sometimes women, minorities, and persons with disabilities begin the programs, but leave before completion.  One reason for this may be that the groups are under-represented.  When they encounter harassment and discrimination or other difficulties, they may not have a trusted support network on which they can depend.  
 
	For example, while all participants in federally-registered apprenticeship programs are required to receive a mentor, it is unlikely that the mentor would come from the same under-represented group as the participant.  Participants who are not from under-represented groups would not face this dilemma.
 
	It is therefore an appropriate public purpose to begin, in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, a peer-to-peer mentoring program for women, minorities, and persons with disabilities.
 
	L.2020, c.58, s.1.

34:15D-5.2  Establishment of peer-to-peer Statewide apprenticeship mentoring program for women, minorities, and persons with disabilities.
  	2. a. The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, in consultation with the Commissioner of Education and the Chief Diversity Officer of New Jersey, shall establish a peer-to-peer Statewide apprenticeship mentoring program for women, minorities, and persons with disabilities.  The purpose of the mentoring program is to provide mentoring and support services to women, minorities, and persons with disabilities throughout the State, as well as to establish a network of peers involved in apprenticeship groups among those groups.
 
	b.	The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall analyze which groups of people are under-represented in industries throughout the State, and then form employee resource groups for apprentices involved in those industries.
 
	L.2020, c.58, s.2.

34:15D-6  Training grants.

	6.  a. The Workforce Development Partnership Program shall, to the extent that resources available in the fund permit, provide, for each qualified displaced or disadvantaged worker who undergoes counseling pursuant to section 7 of this act, a training grant to pay for employment and training services which are identified in the Employability Development Plan developed pursuant to that section for that worker.  No training grant made pursuant to this subsection during the first 12 months following July 1, 1992 shall exceed the amount deemed reasonable by the commissioner for the particular training, which amount shall not exceed $4,000, except that the commissioner may permit an additional amount, if he deems it necessary to provide remedial education identified in the Employability Development Plan.

	b.	The Workforce Development Partnership Program may provide, for any individual who is selected to receive a self-employment assistance allowance pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1995, c.394 (C.43:21-70), a training grant to pay for entrepreneurial training and technical assistance deemed necessary and appropriate by the commissioner to help the individual to become self-employed.  A training grant made pursuant to this subsection shall be in an amount deemed reasonable by the commissioner for the particular training, but, during the first 12 months following January 1, 1996, shall not be in an amount which exceeds $400, or, if the grant is for training provided by any public institution of higher education indicated in N.J.S.18A:62-1, shall not be in an amount which exceeds $1,500.

	c.	The maximum amounts permitted for training grants made pursuant to subsection a. or b. of this section may be adjusted annually thereafter by the commissioner, taking into consideration changes in the prevailing costs of services and the availability of alternative sources of funding for the services.  Any cost for employment and training services which exceeds the amount of a training grant shall be the responsibility of the worker receiving the grant.  The cost of counseling provided pursuant to section 7 of this act shall not be charged against the training grant.  No portion of a training grant may be expended on wage subsidies.

	d.	If the requirements of this section and sections 4 and 7 of this act are met, a qualified displaced, disadvantaged or employed worker shall not be denied a training grant for any of the following reasons: the training includes remedial education needed by the worker to advance in his current employment or occupation or to succeed in the vocational component of the training; the qualified displaced worker or other individual has identifiable vocational skills but the training services are needed to enable the individual to develop skills necessary to attain at least the level of self-sufficiency; the training is part of a program under which the worker may obtain any college degree enhancing the worker's marketable skills and earning power; the worker has previously received a training grant; the length of the training period under the program; or the lack of a prior guarantee of employment upon completion of the training.

	L.1992,c.43,s.6; amended 1995, c.394, s.11; 2001, c.152, s.10.

34:15D-6.1  Apprenticeship Start-Up Grant Program.
 	3. a. There is created in the Office of Customized Training in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development the Apprenticeship Start-Up Grant Program.  The purpose of the program is to provide an incentive for eligible organizations to support the development and expansion of apprenticeship programs, which will provide additional opportunities for New Jersey's workforce to access careers in high-skill, high-wage occupations.
 
	b.	An eligible organization may apply for a grant in an amount not to exceed $5,000 to offset the qualified start-up costs associated with the initial year of participation in an apprenticeship program or for a grant in an amount not to exceed $10,000 to offset the qualified start-up costs associated with the initial year of participation in an apprenticeship program that provides greater opportunities for workers in key industries.
 
	c.	An eligible organization shall demonstrate to the commissioner that it has participated in the establishment or operation of an apprenticeship program within the 12-month period before applying for a grant. An eligible organization shall submit an application in such form as shall be required by the commissioner.  The application shall require, at a minimum, an eligible organization to submit to the department a report to verify the qualified start-up costs incurred by an eligible organization associated with the initial year of participation in an apprenticeship program.  The report shall include such information as shall be determined necessary by the department to substantiate the qualified start-up costs incurred by an eligible organization.
 
	d.	As used in this section:
 
	"Apprenticeship program" means a registered program providing to each trainee combined classroom and on-the-job training under the direct and close supervision of a highly skilled worker in an occupation recognized as an apprenticable trade, and: (1) registered by the Office of Apprenticeship of the U.S. Department of Labor and meeting the standards established by that office; or (2) registered by a State apprenticeship agency recognized by the office.
 
	"Eligible organization" means a labor union or an organization exempt from taxation pursuant to paragraph (3) of subsection (c) of section 501 of the federal Internal Revenue Code, (26 U.S.C. s.501(c)(3)).
 
	"Key industry" means an industry that makes or could make an important contribution to the economy of the State, which may include, but not be limited to advanced manufacturing, construction, healthcare, logistics, pharmaceuticals, transportation, tourism, and renewable energy defined by the department in accordance with regulations adopted pursuant to P.L.2019, c.417 (C.54:10A-5.44 et al.).
 
	"Qualified start-up costs" means the ordinary and necessary costs to start an apprenticeship program in that industry and occupation, including the salary costs of employees working on the program and, if applicable, the non-recurring costs of fixed telecommunication furnishings and office equipment.

 	L.2019, c.417, s.3.

34:15D-6.2  Apprentice Assistance and Support Services Pilot Program.
 	1. a. There is established in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development a five-year Apprentice Assistance and Support Services Pilot Program.  The purpose of the program shall be to address two significant barriers to individuals participating in apprenticeships, lack of affordable and reliable transportation and lack of affordable, high-quality childcare, by providing stipends to eligible individuals participating in apprenticeships.  To be eligible for the program, an individual is required to participate in an apprenticeship program accredited and approved by the United States Department of Labor.
 
	b.	The assistance provided by the pilot program shall consist of two components:
 
	(1)	Transportation assistance: If an individual travels five miles or more to a job site for work or to a classroom for apprenticeship training, the individual is eligible to receive mileage reimbursement at 50 percent of the current federal rate, or reimbursement of documented expenditures on public transportation, up to $500 per individual per year.
 
	(2)	Child Care Stipend: An individual who, after the effective date of this act, enters into a qualified apprenticeship in accordance with subsection a. of this section shall be eligible for a child care  stipend funded by the Apprentice Assistance and Support Services Pilot Program and provided through the Department of Labor and Workforce Development if the individual's income and assets exceed the maximum allowable income and asset criteria under the Child Care Subsidy Program administered by the Department of Human Services.  Nothing in P.L.2019, c.419 (C.34:15D-6.2 et al.) shall preclude an individual who receives a child care subsidy from the Department of Human Services from receiving a child care stipend under P.L.2019, c.419 (C.34:15D-6.2 et al.) if the subsidy received from the Department of Human Services is insufficient to cover the actual cost of child care incurred by the individual.  Individuals receiving a child care stipend shall utilize a licensed child care provider, registered family care provider, or a home or summer camp that is approved by the State. The stipend provided shall be as follows, but in no event, shall exceed $10,000 per individual per year:
 
	(a)	up to $10,000 for child care paid during the first year following the individual's date of apprentice registration and dispatch;
 
	(b)	up to $7,500 for child care paid during the second year following the individual's date of apprentice registration and dispatch; and
 
	(c)	up to $5,000 for child care paid during the third year following the individual's date of apprentice registration and dispatch.
 
	c.	To receive transportation assistance in accordance with paragraph (1) of subsection b. of this section, an individual shall apply to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development for reimbursement for travel expenses related to the individual's apprenticeship. As part of the individual's application, the individual is required to provide documentation that the apprenticeship in which the individual is participating is accredited and approved by the United States Department of Labor.
 
	d.	To receive a child care stipend in accordance with paragraph (2) of subsection b. of this section, an individual shall apply to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development for child care costs incurred as a result of the individual's commitment to the apprenticeship.  As part of the individual's application, the individual is required to provide documentation that the apprenticeship in which the individual is participating is accredited and approved by the United States Department of Labor.  An individual shall also provide documentation of the costs of child care, which shall include documentation that the child care is utilized during the days and times in which the individual is participating in the apprenticeship.  The funding shall be allocated by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development in accordance with section 9 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-9).
 
	e.	In determinations of which eligible apprentices are to receive assistance under the Apprentice Assistance and Support Services Pilot Program, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development shall give first priority to apprentices who:
 
	(1)	belong to a group that, based on their race, color, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, disability, or age, is underrepresented in the career field of the apprenticeship;
 
	(2)	were eligible to receive benefits under the Work First New Jersey program or the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program within twelve months preceding the beginning of the apprenticeship but no longer qualify to receive those benefits ;
 
	(3)	are displaced workers; 
 
	(4)	were previously incarcerated ; or
 
	(5)	are veterans.
 
	 f.	No later than January 1, 2023, the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall submit to the Governor, and to the Legislature, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), a report that evaluates the results of the pilot program and its effectiveness in assisting program participants in entering the workforce or in obtaining better employment.  The report shall include a recommendation regarding whether to renew the Apprentice Assistance and Support Services Pilot Program, and if renewal is recommended, if the program should be expanded or otherwise enhanced.
 
	L.2019, c.419, s.1.

34:15D-7  Counseling.
	7.	Counseling shall be made available by the department to each qualified displaced worker or qualified disadvantaged worker applying to participate in the Workforce Development Partnership program and, in the case of a qualified disadvantaged worker who is a recipient of, or eligible for, benefits under the Work First New Jersey Program, to participate in the Workforce Development Partnership program or in any of those employment-directed workforce development programs or activities transferred to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2004, c.39 (C.34:1A-1.3) which provide employment and training services as defined in section 3 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-3), including the services indicated in paragraphs (11) through (16) of subsection b. of section 2 of P.L.2004, c.39 (C.34:1A-1.3).  Counseling may also be made available to a qualified employed worker who seeks remedial instruction or is selected to participate in a customized training program, if the worker's employer requests the counseling.  The counseling shall be provided by a job counselor hired and employed by the State pursuant to Title 11A, Civil Service, of the New Jersey Statutes, or hired and employed by a political subdivision of the State, or be provided by a qualified job counselor hired and employed by a non-profit organization which began functioning as the One Stop Career Center operator with the written consent of the chief elected official and the commissioner prior to the effective date of P.L.2004, c.39 (C.34:1A-1.2 et al.), or be provided by a qualified job counselor hired and employed by an approved community-based or faith-based organization to provide counseling which the organization entered into an agreement to provide before the effective date of P.L.2004, c.39 (C.34:1A-1.2 et al.), or be provided by a qualified business counselor hired and employed by an approved community-based or faith-based organization to provide counseling for individuals seeking to embark upon a microenterprise self-employment venture.  In the case of a qualified disadvantaged worker who is a recipient of, or is eligible for, benefits under the Work First New Jersey Program, the counseling provided pursuant to this section shall be the counseling for the provision of employment and training services either under the Workforce Development Partnership program or under programs or activities transferred to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2004, c.39 (C.34:1A-1.3), but the counseling provided pursuant to this section shall be provided in conjunction and in coordination with counseling provided in connection with any services, other than training and employment services, made available to the disadvantaged worker under programs or activities transferred to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2004, c.39 (C.34:1A-1.3).  The purpose of any job counseling made available pursuant to this section is to assist each worker in obtaining the employment and training services most likely to enable the worker to obtain employment providing self-sufficiency for the worker and also to provide the worker with the greatest opportunity for long-range career advancement with high levels of productivity and earning power.  The purpose of any business counseling provided pursuant to this section is to assist each individual seeking to embark upon a microenterprise self-employment venture with counseling by qualified business counselors determined to be necessary and appropriate for the success of the microenterprise self-employment venture.  The counseling shall include:
 
	a.	Testing and assessment of the worker's job skills and aptitudes, including the worker's literacy skills and other basic skills.  Basic skills testing and assessment shall be provided to the worker unless information is provided regarding the worker's educational background and occupational or professional experience which clearly demonstrates that the worker's basic skill level meets the standards established pursuant to section 14 of P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-11) or unless the worker is already participating in a remedial instruction program which meets those standards;
 
	b.	An evaluation by a qualified job counselor of what remedial instruction, or by a qualified business counselor of what microenterprise self-employment training, if any, is determined to be necessary for the worker to advance in his current career or occupation, or microenterprise self-employment venture, or to succeed in any particular occupational training which the worker would undertake under the program, provided that the remedial instruction shall be at a level not lower than that needed to meet the standards established pursuant to section 14 of P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-11);
 
	c.	The provision to the worker of information regarding any of the labor demand occupations for which training meets the requirements of section 4 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-4) in the worker's case, including information about the wage levels in those occupations, the profitability of self-employed microentrepreneurs in those occupations, and information regarding the effectiveness of approved service providers of occupational training, or microenterprise training, in occupations which the worker is considering, including a consumer report card on service providers showing the long-term success of former trainees of each provider in obtaining permanent employment, or establishing a self-employed microenterprise business, and increasing earnings over one or more time periods following the completion or other termination of training, including a period of two years following the completion or other termination of training;
 
	d.	The timely provision of information to the worker regarding the services and benefits available to the worker, and all actions required of the worker to obtain the services and benefits, under the provisions of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-1 et seq.) and P.L.1992, c.47 (C.43:21-57 et al.), and under the Work First New Jersey program in the case of a qualified disadvantaged worker receiving or eligible for benefits under that program; and the provision to the worker of a written statement of the worker's rights and responsibilities with respect to programs for which the worker is eligible, which includes a full disclosure to the worker of the worker's right to obtain the services most likely to enable the worker to obtain employment providing self-sufficiency and the workers' right not to be denied training services for any of the reasons indicated in subsection d. of section 6 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-6), including the worker's right not to be denied training services because the worker already has identifiable occupational skills, if those existing skills are for employment with a level of earnings lower than the level of self-sufficiency;
 
	e.	Discussion with the counselor of the results of the testing and evaluation; and
 
	f.	The development of a written Employability Development Plan identifying the training, employment and other workforce investment services, including any needed remedial instruction, to be provided to the worker pursuant to this act.  In the case of a qualified disadvantaged worker, the Employability Development Plan will be, to the greatest extent possible while remaining in compliance with any applicable federal requirements, coordinated and made consistent with any individual responsibility plan developed for the worker under the Work First New Jersey program.  In the case of a qualified disadvantaged worker who is or was receiving, or who is eligible for but not receiving, benefits under the Work First New Jersey program, and who does not have a marketable bachelor's degree, the counselor may approve, as part of the workers' Employability Development Plan, the replacement of Work First New Jersey program benefits by Supplemental Workforce Development Benefits paid to the disadvantaged worker for full-time educational activity without, or with insufficient, other work activity from available resources for employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities transferred from the Department of Human Services pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2004, c.39 (C.34:1A-1.3) or from the account of the Workforce Development Partnership Fund reserved for qualified disadvantaged workers pursuant to subsection b. of section 9 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-9), for any period of time for which the counselor determines that:
 
	(1)	Full-time remedial instruction to obtain a high school diploma or G.E.D. or full-time post-secondary education in a two-year or four-year degree-granting educational program with a course of study related to work, even if the duration of the full-time education is longer than two years, is the training and employment service that is most likely to enable the worker to obtain employment providing self-sufficiency;
 
	(2)	The worker has responsibility during that period of time for the care of dependent children or other family members unable to care for themselves the magnitude of which, if added to the full-time instructional or educational activities indicated in paragraph (1) of this subsection, make it likely that any additional work activity will jeopardize the success of the instructional or educational activity; and
 
	(3)	Providing Work First New Jersey program benefits to the worker during that period of time for the full-time instructional or educational activity without, or with insufficient, work activities would result in a loss of benefits for the worker pursuant to section 9 of P.L.1997, c.38 (C.44:10-63) or would be counted toward the maximum limit of 60 cumulative months of Work First New Jersey program benefits provided to the worker pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1997, c.37 (C.44:10-72).
 
	With respect to the use of the funds deposited during any fiscal year in the account of the Workforce Development Partnership Fund reserved for qualified disadvantaged workers pursuant to subsection b. of section 9 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-9), first priority shall be given for the payment of Supplemental Workforce Development Benefits pursuant to this subsection.  Not more than 1,500 qualified disadvantaged workers shall receive Supplemental Workforce Development Benefits pursuant to this subsection at any one time.  With respect to using available resources for employment-directed and workforce development programs and activities transferred from the Department of Human Services pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2004, c.39 (C.34:1A-1.3) for Supplemental Workforce Development Benefits, no federal funds which are part of those resources may be used for Supplemental Workforce Development Benefits which result in the imposition of conditions of participation other than those established by this subsection.  If federal funds are used for childcare costs of a participant, the Department of Human Services may transfer the funds to the Child Care and Development Block Grant, as permitted by law and as needed to permit the use of the federal funds while preventing any loss of benefits to the participant and preventing the childcare time from being counted toward the participant's maximum limit of 60 cumulative months of Work First New Jersey program benefits.  The counselor shall assist in facilitating the use, to the maximum extent possible, of Pell grants or other available educational grants to pay for tuition and other educational costs of a recipient of Supplemental Workforce Development Benefits provided pursuant to this section.  The requirements for receiving Supplemental Workforce Development Benefits may include work-site experience which will enhance the participant's employability in the participant's field, provided that the required sum of class hours for a full-time class schedule, hours of study time at not less than one and one half times class time, and hours of work-site experience, shall not exceed 40 hours per week and that the commissioner shall adopt regulations for reasonable adjustments in participation requirements for good cause, including verifiable needs related to physical or mental health problems, illness, accident or death or serious personal or family problems that necessitate reduced participation, provided further that no individual shall receive Supplemental Workforce Development Benefits for a period of more than five years.  The commissioner shall adopt regulations setting standards for satisfactory academic progress for continued participation.  Participation may not be denied for any of the reasons which subsection d. of section 6 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-6) prohibits from being used to deny training grants.  For the purposes of this section, "Work First New Jersey benefits" means benefits for which a worker and the worker's family would be eligible if the worker was participating in the Work First New Jersey program or any successor program to the Work First New Jersey program.
 
	Counseling made available at the request of an employer participating in a customized training program may include only those components requested by the employer.
 
	All information regarding a worker applicant or trainee which is obtained or compiled in connection with the testing, assessment and evaluation and which may be identified with the worker shall be confidential and shall not be released to an entity other than the worker, the counselor, the department or partners of the One-Stop system as necessary for them to provide training and employment services or other workforce investment services to the individual, unless the worker provides written permission to the department for the release of the information or the information is used solely for program evaluation.
 
	L.1992, c.43, s.7; amended 2001, c.152, s.11; 2004, c.39, s.12; 2005, c.354, s.23; 2017, c.25, s.2.

34:15D-8  Employment, training services; criteria.

	8. a. No employment and training services shall be obtained from a service provider with moneys from the fund unless the provider is located in New Jersey and the provider is an approved service provider, except that, in the case of occupational safety and health training, the service provider shall be approved by the commissioner in consultation with the Commissioner of Health and Senior Services.

	b.	No service provider shall be approved to be funded by the program to provide an employment and training service unless the provider agrees to provide the service to each trainee referred to it on a first-come, first-served basis, up to the total number of trainees that the provider agrees to serve.  This subsection shall not be construed as limiting or curtailing in any way an employer's right to select the workers who participate in customized training pursuant to the provisions of subsection e. of section 5 of this act.

	c.	Each service provider shall maintain, make available and submit appropriate records and data for monitoring and evaluation purposes, as required by the State Employment and Training Commission and the department.  The records and data shall include, but not be limited to:

	(1)	A record for each student enrolled, including the student's name, Social Security number, gender, date of birth, date of enrollment, and any date of completion, termination, start in a job or application for a license, any licensing examination result, date of issue of a license or credential issued, and any other information specified by the State Employment and Training Commission or the Center for Occupational Employment Information.  For any individual who does not have a Social Security number, the service provider may substitute an alternate method of identification, except that, at the time of start into employment, the alternate code shall be cross-referenced with the individual's valid Social Security number;

	(2)	A record of all administrative and overhead expenses of the provider related to the providing of employment and training services funded by the program and the provider's direct expenses of providing the services; and 

	(3)	Any other information deemed appropriate by the commissioner or the State Employment and Training Commission for evaluation purposes.

	d.	In the case of a provider of occupational training services, the commissioner shall collect the information needed to effectively measure the long-term success of the former trainees of the provider in obtaining permanent employment and increasing earnings over one or more time periods following the completion or other termination of training, including a period of two years following the completion or other termination of training.  The commission shall set such standards as it deems appropriate regarding comparisons of the former trainees with groups of otherwise similar individuals who did not receive the training. The information obtained pursuant to this subsection shall be used to:

	(1)	Assist in evaluating the performance of providers of occupational training services;

	(2)	Assist in determining which providers of occupational training services to place on the State Eligible Training Provider List;

	(3)	Assist in providing reliable information regarding the quality of available providers of occupational training services as part of the counseling provided pursuant to section 7 of this act, including the furnishing, for use in the counseling, including counseling provided pursuant to section 4 of P.L.1992, c.48 (C.34:15B-38), section 7 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-7) and section 3 of P.L.1992, c.47 (C.43:21-59), of a consumer report card on service providers showing the long-term success of former trainees of each provider in obtaining permanent employment and increasing earnings over one or more time periods following the completion or other termination of training, including a period of two years following the completion or other termination of training; and

	(4)	Assist in evaluating the overall effectiveness of training funded by the program.

	e.	The State Employment and Training Commission, the commissioner, and each service provider shall comply with all pertinent State and federal laws regarding the privacy of students and other participants in employment and training programs, including but not limited to, the Privacy Act of 1974, Pub. L.93-579 (5 U.S.C. s.552 and 20 U.S.C. s.1232g), and shall provide all disclosures to the students and participants required by those laws.

	L.1992,c.43,s.8;  amended 2005, c.354, s.24.

34:15D-9  Workforce Development Partnership Fund.
	9. a. A restricted, nonlapsing, revolving Workforce Development Partnership Fund, to be managed and invested by the State Treasurer, is hereby established to: provide employment and training services to qualified displaced, disadvantaged and employed workers by means of training grants or customized training services; provide for the other costs indicated in subsection a. of section 4 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-4); provide for the New Jersey Innovation and Research Fellowship Program as provided for in section 3 of P.L.2015, c.235 (C.34:15D-26); provide for the Talent Network Program as provided for in section 2 of P.L.2019, c.125 (C.34:15D-29); and facilitate the provision of education and training to youth by means of grants provided by the Youth Transitions to Work Partnership pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1993, c.268 (C.34:15E-1 et al.).  All appropriations to the fund, all interest accumulated on balances in the fund and all cash received for the fund from any other source shall be used solely for the purposes specifically delineated by this act.
 
	b.	During any fiscal year beginning after June 30, 2001, of the total revenues dedicated to the program during any one fiscal year:
 
	(1) 25% shall be deposited in an account of the Workforce Development Partnership Fund reserved to provide employment and training services for qualified displaced workers, and through fiscal year 2023, not less than 10% of the revenues deposited in that account shall be reserved to provide employment and training services to qualified displaced workers in the pursuit of industry-valued credentials under the pilot program established pursuant to P.L.2019, c.252 (C.34:15D-30 et al.); and during any fiscal year beginning after June 30, 2019, 0.5% shall be deposited in an account of the Workforce Development Partnership Fund reserved for an appropriated to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development for the Apprenticeship Start-Up Grant Program created pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2019, c.417 (C.34:15D-6.1);
 
	(2) 6% shall be deposited in an account of the Workforce Development Partnership Fund reserved to provide employment and training services for qualified disadvantaged workers, and through fiscal year 2023, not less than 10% of the revenues deposited in that account shall be reserved to provide employment and training services to qualified disadvantaged workers in the pursuit of industry-valued credentials under the pilot program established pursuant to P.L.2019, c.252 (C.34:15D-30 et al.);
 
	(3) 37% prior to July 1, 2022, and 35% after June 30, 2022 shall be deposited in an account of the Workforce Development Partnership Fund reserved for and appropriated to the Office of Customized Training;
 
	(4) 5% prior to July 1, 2022, and 7% after June 30, 2022 shall be deposited in an account of the Workforce Development Partnership Fund reserved for the Youth Transitions to Work Partnership created pursuant to P.L.1993, c.268 (C.34:15E-1 et seq.);
 
	(5) 3% shall be deposited in an account of the Workforce Development Partnership Fund reserved for occupational safety and health training;
 
	(6) 5% shall be deposited in an account of the Workforce Development Partnership Fund reserved for and appropriated to the Talent Network Program established pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2019, c.125 (C.34:15D-29);
 
	(7) 3% shall be deposited in an account of the Workforce Development Partnership Fund reserved for the New Jersey Innovation and Research Fellowship Program established pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2015, c.235 (C.34:15D-26);
 
	(8) 10% shall be deposited in an account of the Workforce Development Partnership Fund reserved for administrative costs as defined in section 3 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-3);
 
	(9) 0.5% shall be deposited in an account of the Workforce Development Partnership Fund reserved for the State Employment and Training Commission to design criteria and conduct an annual evaluation of the program; and
 
	(10) 5% shall be deposited in an account of the Workforce Development Partnership Fund to be used, at the discretion of the commissioner, for any of the purposes indicated in subsection a. of section 4 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-4).
 
	c.	Beginning January 1, 1995, through June 30, 2002, the balance in the fund as of the previous December 31, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, shall not exceed 1.5 times the amount of contributions deposited for the calendar year then ended.  If the balance exceeds this amount, the excess shall be deposited into the unemployment compensation fund within seven business days of the date that the determination is made.
 
	d.	Beginning July 1, 2002, and for any subsequent fiscal year, if the unexpended cash balance in any of the accounts indicated in subsection b. of this section, except for the account reserved for the Talent Network Program, less any amount awarded in grants but not yet disbursed from the account, is determined to exceed 20% of the amount of contributions collected for deposit in the account pursuant to this subsection during the fiscal year then ended, the excess shall be regarded as an unemployment compensation contribution and deposited into the unemployment compensation fund within seven business days of the date that the determination is made.  If the unexpended cash balance in the account reserved for the Talent Network Program, less any amount awarded in grants but not yet disbursed from the account, is determined to exceed 20% of the amount of contributions collected for deposit in the account pursuant to this subsection during the fiscal year then ended, the excess shall be deposited into the Workforce Development Partnership Fund account reserved for the Office of Customized Training.
 
	e.	$250,000 shall be allocated to the Apprentice Assistance and Support Services Pilot Program established pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2019, c.419 (C.34:15D-6.2) from the $29,690,000 which was appropriated pursuant to the annual appropriations act for State fiscal year 2019 from the Workforce Development Partnership Fund for the purpose of funding Work First New Jersey Work Activities and Work First New Jersey-Training Related Expenses, and, $1,100,000 shall be allocated to the pilot program in each of fiscal years 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023, and 2024 from the amounts appropriated pursuant to the annual appropriations act in those fiscal years from the Workforce Development Partnership Fund for the purpose of funding Work First New Jersey Work Activities and Work First New Jersey-Training Related Expenses.  Of the funds allocated to the pilot program pursuant to this subsection, 90% shall be dedicated to the Child Care Stipend program and 10% to transportation reimbursement.
 
	f.	Upon the effective date of P.L.2022, c.89 (C.34:15E-6 et al.) and notwithstanding the provisions of any law or regulation to the contrary, in addition to the amount deposited in an account of the Workforce Development Partnership Fund reserved for the Youth Transitions to Work Partnership pursuant to subsection b. of this section, $1,000,000 shall be allocated to the Youth Transitions to Work Partnership from the $22,500,000 which was appropriated pursuant to the annual appropriations act for State fiscal year 2022 from the Workforce Development Partnership Fund for the purpose of funding the NJ Apprenticeship Network, the Career Accelerator Internship Program, the Workforce Development Policy and Evaluation Lab, the NJ Career Network, and such other priority workforce initiatives recommended by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	L.1992, c.43, s.9; amended 1993, c.268, s.10; 2001, c.152, s.12; 2015, c.235, s.2; 2019, c.125, s.3; 2019, c.252, s.3; 2019, c.417, s.4; 2019, c.419, s.2; 2022, c.89, s.2.

34:15D-10.   Commissioner's duties  
    10.  The commissioner shall, in a manner which complies with all provisions of this act:  

   a.   Implement performance measurements for the program consistent with the provisions of section 8 of this act and with the criteria and procedures established by the State Employment and Training Commission pursuant to section 13 of this act;  

   b.   Establish minimum standards for consideration of proposals from applicants for customized training services;  

   c.   Establish review and approval procedures for training grant applications from qualified displaced and disadvantaged workers; and  

   d.   Ensure the provision of adequate fiscal accounting controls for the monitoring and auditing of training grants and customized training services provided pursuant to this act.  

   L.1992,c.43,s.10.  

34:15D-11.   Rules, regulations  
   11.    The commissioner shall, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), adopt rules and regulations necessary to govern the proper conduct and operation of the program consistent with the provisions of this act.  These rules and regulations may include guidelines in addition to, but not inconsistent with, those provided by this act regarding:  

  a.     Contracts between applicants for customized training services, the program, service providers or any combination of the three;  

  b.     The issuance of training grants to qualified displaced and disadvantaged workers;  

  c.     Eligibility and priority of employment and training services to employers and qualified displaced, disadvantaged and employed workers; and  

  d.     Qualifications of instruction, facilities, financial responsibility, business practices, and any other matter essential to the maintenance of the adequacy of employment and training services.  

  L.1992,c.43,s.11.  

34:15D-12.   Definitions  
   1.     For the purposes of sections 1 through 9 of this act:

  

  "Commissioner" is the Commissioner of Labor, or designee of the commissioner.

  

  "Department" means the New Jersey Department of Labor.

  

  "Employer" means any employer subject to R.S.43:21-1 et seq.

  

  "Fund" or "Workforce Development Partnership Fund" means the Workforce Development Partnership Fund created pursuant to section 9 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-9).  

  L.1992,c.44,s.1.  

34:15D-13.   Employer and worker contributions
	2. 	Beginning on January 1, 1993, each worker shall contribute to the Workforce Development Partnership Fund an amount equal to 0.025% of the worker's wages as determined in accordance with paragraph (3) of subsection (b) of R.S.43:21-7 regarding the worker's employment with an employer.

	Also beginning on January 1, 1993, each employer shall contribute to the Workforce Development Partnership Fund an amount equal to the amount that the employer's contribution to the Unemployment Compensation Fund is decreased pursuant to subparagraph (G) of paragraph (5) of subsection (c) of R.S.43:21-7.

	L.1992,c.44,s.2; amended 1995,c.422,s.4.

34:15D-14.   Transfer of funds to Workforce Development Partnership Fund 
   3.     The State Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to requisition and withdraw on or after July 1, 1992 an amount not to exceed $25,000,000 from revenues received pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection (e) of R.S.43:21-7, at the discretion of the commissioner, from the State disability benefits fund established pursuant to section 22 of P.L.1948, c.110 (C.43:21-46) and to deposit the sum in the Workforce Development Partnership Fund.  No transfers may be made from the State disability benefits fund to the Workforce Development Partnership Fund at any time after one year following the effective date of this act.  The amount transferred shall be repaid to the State disability benefits fund with interest at the rate earned by the investments made with moneys remaining in the State disability benefits fund. The repayment period shall not exceed three years and shall begin no later than January 1, 1994.  For purposes of determining the balance in the State disability benefits fund as prescribed pursuant to subsubparagraph (1) of subparagraph (E) of paragraph (3) of subsection (e) of R.S.43:21-7, the amount of any outstanding advances to the Workforce Development Partnership Fund along with accrued interest shall be included therein.  

  L.1992,c.44,s.3.  

34:15D-15.   Employer responsibilities for workers' contributions  
   4.     Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, each employer shall: withhold in trust the amount of all workers' contributions from their wages at the time wages are paid, show the deduction on the payroll records, furnish the evidence thereof and permit any inspection of the records as prescribed by the commissioner, and transmit all workers' contributions and other contributions due from the employer pursuant to this act to the department in a manner and at the times that the commissioner prescribes.  Interest and any expense to the department of recovery may be assessed by the commissioner on payments not made within the prescribed due dates at the same rate as provided for pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of R.S.43:21-14.  If any employer fails to deduct the contributions of any workers at the time their wages are paid, or fails to make a deduction therefor at the time wages are paid for the next succeeding payroll period, the employer shall be solely liable for those contributions.  

  L.1992,c.44,s.4.  

34:15D-16.   Failure of employer to make report; deficiencies  
   5.     If an employer fails to make any report or permit any inspection required by the commissioner to implement the provisions of this act, an estimate shall be made regarding the liability of the employer from information available and the employer shall be assessed for any amount due, including the amount that was withheld or that should have been withheld from its employees for deposit into the fund.  Also, if, after an examination of any report filed, a deficiency is discovered with respect to the taxable wages reported, the employer shall be assessed the amount of any determined deficiency.  Additional remedies through the court may be established by the commissioner, including the charging of any expenses incurred by the department in recovering the assessment.  

  L.1992,c.44,s.5.  

34:15D-17.   Refund to taxpayer
	6.  a.  If an employee receives wages from more than one employer during any calendar year, and the sum of the employee's contributions deposited in the Workforce Development Partnership Fund exceeds an amount equal to 0.025% of the wages determined in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (3) of subsection (b) of R.S.43:21-7 during the calendar year beginning January 1, 1993 or any subsequent calendar year, the employee shall be entitled to a refund of the excess if a claim establishing the employee's right to the refund is made within two years after the end of the respective calendar year in which the wages are received and are the subject of the claim.  The commissioner shall refund any overpayment from the fund without interest.

	b. 	Any employee who is a taxpayer and entitled, pursuant to the provisions of subsection a. of this section, to a refund of contributions deducted during a tax year from his wages shall, in lieu of the refund, be entitled to a credit in the full amount thereof against the tax otherwise due on his New Jersey gross income for that tax year if he submits his claim for the credit and accompanies that claim with evidence of his right to the credit in the manner provided by regulation by the Director of the Division of Taxation.  In any case in which the amount, or any portion thereof, of any credit allowed hereunder results in or increases an excess of income tax payment over income tax liability, the amount of the new or increased excess shall be considered an overpayment and shall be refunded to the taxpayer in the manner provided by subsection (a) of N.J.S.54A:9-7.

	L.1992,c.44,s.6; amended 1995,c.422,s.5.

34:15D-18.   Cancellation, refusal to honor checks  
   7.     The State Treasurer, as treasurer and custodian of the Workforce Development Partnership Fund, is hereby authorized and directed to cancel of record and to refuse to honor checks issued against the fund which have not been presented for payment within six years from the date of issuance.  Upon that cancellation, revenues held on deposit for payment of the checks shall be credited to the fund.  

  L.1992,c.44,s.7.  

34:15D-19.   Schedule of fines  
   8.     A schedule of fines, no fine exceeding $1,000 for a single offense, shall be established by the commissioner for any of the following actions or omissions with respect to the collection of contributions or the use of moneys disbursed from the fund:  

  a.     A false statement or misrepresentation made knowingly;

  

  b.     Failure to disclose a material fact;

  

  c.     Attempt to defraud;

  

  d.     Willful failure or refusal to: withhold or transfer any contribution or other payment; furnish any report or information; or produce or permit the inspection or copying of records as required pursuant to this act; and  

  e.     Willful violation of any provision of this act or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this act.  

  The fines shall be recoverable in a civil action by the commissioner in the name of the State of New Jersey.  In addition to penalties established for any person, employing unit, employer or entity, each shall be liable for each offense upon conviction before any court of competent jurisdiction at the discretion of the court. All fines shall be payable to the commissioner for deposit in the fund.  

  L.1992,c.44,s.8.  

34:15D-20.   Rules, regulations  
   9.     The commissioner shall, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) promulgate rules and regulations necessary to implement the provisions of this act, including any requirements regarding the keeping and reporting of records and any sanctions against false statement, misrepresentation, willful violations or fraud.  

  L.1992,c.44,s.9.  

34:15D-21  "Supplemental Workforce Fund for Basic Skills."
	1. a. A restricted, nonlapsing, revolving "Supplemental Workforce Fund for Basic Skills," to be managed and invested by the State Treasurer, is hereby established in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development to provide basic skills training. All moneys appropriated to the fund, all interest accumulated on balances in the fund and all cash received for the fund from any other source shall be allocated by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development as follows:
 
	(1) 24% shall be deposited in an account reserved to support basic skills training delivered by the State's One Stop Career Centers to qualified displaced, disadvantaged and employed workers pursuant to Employability Development Plans developed pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-7);
 
	(2) 28% shall be deposited in an account reserved for Workforce Investment Boards to provide grants for basic skills training for qualified displaced, disadvantaged and employed workers pursuant to Employability Development Plans developed pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-7) and for other individuals with learning disabilities or otherwise in need of vocational rehabilitation services;
 
	(3) 25% shall be deposited in an account reserved for grants to consortia including one or more of any of the following: eligible individual employers, employer organizations, labor organizations, community-based organizations or educational institutions to provide basic skills training to qualified displaced, disadvantaged or employed workers or to other individuals seeking to enter apprenticeship training; except that, during the fiscal year beginning after June 30, 2019, 12.5% shall be deposited in an account reserved for grants to consortia including one or more of any of the following: eligible individual employers, employer organizations, labor organizations, community-based organizations or educational institutions to provide basic skills training to qualified displaced, disadvantaged or employed workers or to other individuals seeking to enter apprenticeship training, and 12.5% shall be deposited in an account reserved to provide grants under the High-Growth Industry Regional Apprenticeship Development Grant Pilot Program, established pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2019, c.314 (C.34:15D-32) through fiscal year 2024;
 
	(4) 13%, but not less than $3 million, shall be deposited in an account reserved for a grant to the New Jersey Community College Consortium for Workforce and Economic Development, a part of the New Jersey Council of County Colleges, to provide basic skills training to qualified displaced, disadvantaged or employed workers.  If the 13% is less than $3 million, an additional amount shall be deposited into this account either from the 87% deposited pursuant to paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (5) of this subsection or from other funds as determined by the commissioner until this account equals $3 million; and
 
	(5) 10% shall be deposited in an account to be used, at the discretion of the commissioner, for any of the purposes indicated in this subsection a. and any administrative costs incurred by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development in connection with the fund.
 
	b.	Any grant provided in connection with paragraph (3) of subsection a. of this section directly to an employer or to an employer through a consortium shall be regarded as a customized training grant and shall be administered by the Office of Customized Training and the employer and consortium shall comply with all requirements of section 5 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-5), except that any grants provided directly or indirectly to an employer for use in connection with any program which includes apprenticeship training or activities or preparation for entry into apprenticeship training shall be exempt from the requirement of this subsection b. to be administered by the Office of Customized Training and be subject to the requirements of section 5 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-5), if it is approved by the Apprenticeship Policy Committee, as defined in section 3 of P.L.1993, c.268 (C.34:15E-3), and the employer complies with the provisions of subsection e. of section 5 of P.L.1993, c.268 (C.34:15E-5). Any grant provided in connection with paragraph (2) of subsection a. of this section directly to an individual shall be regarded as an individual training grant and shall be subject to the requirements of subsections a., c. and d. of section 6 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-6).
 
	Also, any funds provided in connection with paragraph (4) of subsection a. of this section shall be provided to the New Jersey Community College Consortium for Workforce and Economic Development by the Office of Customized Training, and shall comply with the following requirements:
 
	(1) The New Jersey Community College Consortium for Workforce and Economic Development shall work with all the community colleges throughout the State of New Jersey to deliver basic skills training in the most effective and efficient manner possible at any of their 63 campuses or at any appropriate business facility;
 
	(2) There shall be no charge to the employer sending employees to the training, but the employer shall pay employees regular wages for the hours the training takes place, except that any waiver of this requirement to pay employees regular wages, for the hours of training, authorized by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, may, at the discretion of the commissioner, be offered to the New Jersey Community College Consortium for Workforce and Economic Development on the same basis as any other grant recipient;
 
	(3) The employers sending their employees to this training shall not be asked to provide any paperwork or complete any financial disclosure forms, including a tax clearance certificate as provided in section 1 of P.L.2007, c.101 (C.54:50-39), except that employers shall provide the employees participating in the training with the information that the employees need to comply with paragraph (4) of this subsection, and shall provide the New Jersey Community College Consortium for Workforce and Economic Development with the information the employer has regarding its participating employees that the consortium needs to produce the annual report required pursuant to paragraph (7) of this subsection;
 
	(4) The employees being trained shall provide the Federal Employer Identification Number (FEIN) of their employer and the employer's contact information at the beginning of the training;
 
	(5) The mean class size for training under this subsection shall be 10, but the New Jersey Community College Consortium for Workforce and Economic Development may aggregate employees from multiple employers in a single training to reach that mean of 10;
 
	(6) The training provided under this subsection shall be basic skills training, but the apportionment of classes in the different areas of basic skills as defined by subsection h. of this section may be determined by the New Jersey Community College Consortium for Workforce and Economic Development in consultation with representatives of the business community;
 
	(7) The New Jersey Community College Consortium for Workforce and Economic Development shall file an annual report by September 1 of each year with the New Jersey Legislature and the New Jersey Department of Labor and Workforce Development containing the total number of workers trained, the total funds expended on training, the number of workers trained in each area of basic skills training, the number of businesses with employees trained, the number of classes held in each area of basic skills training, the number of classes held at each community college, the wage ranges of the workers trained, the job titles of the workers trained and the results of the pre-training and post-training assessments. The report shall also include an analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the training program and how it can be improved in the following year. The report shall supplant all requirements for any other reporting that the New Jersey Community College Consortium for Workforce and Economic Development may be asked to complete with respect to the funds it receives through paragraph (4) of subsection a. of this section; and
 
	(8) The New Jersey Community College Consortium for Workforce and Economic Development shall work with the business community to promote this program to businesses across the State, including chambers of commerce and Statewide associations, such as the New Jersey Business and Industry Association, and shall seek out, and work with, State, regional, and county organizations that are dedicated to the economic empowerment of segments of society by race, ethnicity, gender, age, religion, disability, or sexual orientation, including, but not limited to the African American Chamber of Commerce of New Jersey and the Statewide Hispanic Chamber of Commerce of New Jersey, and any other appropriate business organizations.
 
	c.	Any employment and training services funded by the Supplemental Workforce Fund for Basic Skills shall be provided in a manner which complies with the provisions of subsections b., c., f., g., h. and i. of section 4 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-4), to the extent that those subsections pertain to remedial education.  Any service provider receiving moneys from the Supplemental Workforce Fund for Basic Skills shall be subject to the provisions of section 8 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-8) and section 8 of P.L.1992, c.44 (C.34:15D-19).
 
	d.	All staff located at any One Stop Career Center supported by funds provided from the Supplemental Workforce Fund for Basic Skills shall be hired and employed by the State pursuant to Title 11A, Civil Service, of the New Jersey Statutes.
 
	e.	Beginning July 1, 2002, and for any subsequent fiscal year, if the unexpended cash balance in any of the accounts indicated in subsection a. of this section, less any amount awarded in grants but not yet disbursed from the account, is determined to exceed 20% of the amount of contributions collected for deposit in the account pursuant to this subsection during the fiscal year then ended, the excess shall be regarded as an unemployment compensation contribution and deposited into the unemployment compensation fund within seven business days of the date that the determination is made.
 
	f.	The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall establish standards of performance for providers of basic skills training pursuant to this act. The standards shall include, but not be limited to, standards for the curriculum or training to be furnished, qualifications for persons who will provide the training under the act, and standards for establishing what constitutes successful completion of the training program. The commissioner shall establish means of determining the ability of enrollees to gain or maintain employment following the successful completion of a training program established pursuant to this section. In the event that the commissioner determines that a provider has not conducted its training program in accordance with the standards of performance, he may take that action necessary to correct the deficiencies of the provider, or terminate the contract with the provider of basic skills services if the provider fails to respond to remedial action.
 
	g.	The State Employment and Training Commission shall review and evaluate the operations of programs supported by the Supplemental Workforce Fund for Basic Skills established pursuant to this section, with special consideration to how those programs assist in the implementation of the goals of the Strategic Five-Year State Plan for New Jersey's Workforce Investment System, and shall consult with the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development regarding its findings.
 
	h.	For the purpose of this section:
 
	"Basic skills training" means basic mathematics, reading comprehension, basic computer literacy including new technology topics, English proficiency and work-readiness skills including topics for entry level managers and shall be regarded as a form of "remedial education" for the purposes of section 3 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-3);
 
	"One Stop Career Center" means one of the centers established in local areas to coordinate a variety of State and local programs providing employment and training services, including job placement services, or any other similar State or local government-sponsored center providing employment and training services as may be developed at any later time; and
 
	"Qualified disadvantaged worker," "qualified displaced worker," "qualified employed worker," and "employment and training services" have the meanings given to them by section 3 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-3).

	L.2001, c.152, s.1; amended 2009, c.199, s.3; 2012, c.7; 2017, c.52; 2019, c.314, s.2; 2021, c.289.

34:15D-21.1  Short title.
 
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Basic Skills Training Program for Economic Growth Act."
 
	L.2009, c.199, s.1.

34:15D-21.2  Findings, declarations relative to the basic skills training program.
 
	2.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	A skilled workforce is one of the most critical issues to New Jersey businesses and the State's economic competitiveness, and, unfortunately, the basic computer, mathematics, communications and English skills of many New Jersey workers is less than what employers require for success;
 
	b.	In 2007, a public-private partnership formed between the New Jersey Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the New Jersey Community College Consortium for Workforce and Economic Development, and the New Jersey Business and Industry Association to provide basic skills training with more flexibility to businesses throughout the State by means of a grant from the Supplemental Workforce Fund for Basic Skills;
 
	c.	During the first two years of this training program, 750 employers sent almost 10,000 enrollees to be trained, significantly more than any other single New Jersey Department of Labor and Workforce Development grant program;
 
	d.	This program was successful in reaching so many more workers and businesses because of its flexibility, in not requiring employers to complete any paperwork or financial disclosure, not charging them for the training, other than requiring that they pay their employees while they are trained, and not requiring every class to have a minimum of ten employees from a single employer;
 
	e.	Credit for this flexibility and the program's success should be given to Governor Jon S. Corzine, Commissioner David J. Socolow and the grant staff at the New Jersey Department of Labor and Workforce Development, because they understood that the focus of this grant should be on training as many workers as possible and not on fitting within previous grant structures and traditions, and without them, 750 businesses would not have been helped and 10,000 enrollees would not have been trained;
 
	f.	This program has been positive for all those involved: the employees receiving portable training and skills; the employers improving their workforce; the community colleges being optimally utilized to provide the most effective and efficient method of training; and the State positively contributing to workers, businesses and economic development with no new costs; and
 
	g.	Legislation is needed to ensure that the success of this program and the flexibilities afforded it by the Governor and commissioner are made permanent in the statutes.
 
	L.2009, c.199, s.2.

34:15D-21.3  Findings, declarations relative to certain county college certificate programs.
 	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	A skilled workforce is one of the most critical issues facing New Jersey employers and the availability of appropriately trained workers directly impacts the State's ability to compete nationally and internationally;
 
	b.	While the State of New Jersey, through the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, has initiated many programs to link business and industry with employees, there remain areas of the State that are the home to particular industries that lack the skilled workforce necessary to fill available employment positions;
 
	c.	It has become increasingly apparent that an increased focus is needed on training individuals for the "right" jobs as opposed to training individuals for "a" job;
 
	d.	Increased attention needs to be paid and efforts made to connect individual employers and groups of employers to appropriate educational institutions so that curriculum may be developed that is exactly in line with the needs of these employers and directed to individuals who may have the greatest chance of program and employment success; and
 
	e.	County colleges already have a long history of partnering with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development and local Workforce Investment Boards to design training programs for dislocated workers, but these efforts can be further refined and more explicitly targeted to develop certificate programs in which regional employers have a vested interest through their role in program development and program candidate review that will allow them to grow their business by immediately hiring appropriately trained individuals.
 
	L.2019, c.228, s.1.

34:15D-21.4  Development of certificate programs to connect regional employers to county colleges.
  	2. a. The New Jersey Community College Consortium for Workforce and Economic Development shall consult with each county college in the State to foster the development of certificate programs that connect regional employers to the county colleges in the collaborative development of programs that meet the unique needs of the employer and are directly connected to the knowledge and skills required by the employer.  The certificate programs established by a county college shall be directly targeted to business and industry located in the region that have an identified and immediate need to hire employees with education and skills that are not being addressed through available training and educational opportunities.
 
	b. (1) Under a certificate program, the employer shall develop the curriculum to ensure that it is directly aligned to the needs of the employer.  The employer shall consult with appropriate faculty at the county college for assistance in the curriculum development and to receive faculty input and feedback to ensure the alignment of the curriculum.  
 
	(2)	The employer may prescreen candidates prior to enrollment in the certificate program to ensure that the candidate demonstrates the aptitudes, abilities, and qualities sought by the employer.
 
	(3)	The county college shall provide the faculty for the certificate program and shall make college facilities available for the program.  Upon agreement with an employer, certificate program classes may be provided on-site at the employer's business location.
 
	(4)	An employer may hire an individual enrolled in a certificate program prior to completion of the program with continued employment dependent upon successful completion.  The county college shall issue a certificate to each individual who successfully completes the program to indicate that the individual has acquired the requisite knowledge and skills for employment in the identified field or occupation.
 
	(5)	An employer who participates in the development of the certificate program shall make a commitment to interview all graduates of the program for employment positions that are available at the time of the participant's completion of the program.
 
	L.2019, c.228, s.2.

34:15D-22  Contributions to fund.

	2.	Beginning on January 1, 2002, each worker shall contribute to the Supplemental Workforce Fund for Basic Skills an amount equal to 0.0175% of the worker's wages as determined in accordance with paragraph (3) of subsection (b) of R.S.43:21-7 regarding the worker's employment with an employer.

	Beginning on July 1, 2001, each employer shall contribute to the Supplemental Workforce Fund for Basic Skills an amount equal to the amount that the employer's contribution is decreased pursuant to subparagraph (J) of paragraph (5) of subsection (c) of R.S.43:21-7.

	L.2001,c.152,s.2.

34:15D-23  Refund of excess employee contributions.

	3.	If an employee receives wages from more than one employer during any calendar year, and the sum of the employee's contributions deposited in the Supplemental Workforce Fund for Basic Skills exceeds an amount equal to 0.0175% of the wages determined in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (3) of subsection (b) of R.S.43:21-7 during the calendar year beginning January 1, 2002 or any subsequent calendar year, the employee shall be entitled to a refund of the excess if a claim establishing the employee's right to the refund is made within two years after the end of the respective calendar year in which the wages are received and are the subject of the claim.  The commissioner shall refund any overpayment from the fund without interest.

	Any employee who is a taxpayer and entitled, pursuant to the provisions of this section, to a refund of contributions deducted during a tax year from his wages shall, in lieu of the refund, be entitled to a credit in the full amount thereof against the tax otherwise due on his New Jersey gross income for that tax year if he submits his claim for the credit and accompanies that claim with evidence of his right to the credit in the manner provided by regulation by the Director of the Division of Taxation.  In any case in which the amount, or any portion thereof, of any credit allowed hereunder results in or increases an excess of income tax payment over income tax liability, the amount of the new or increased excess shall be considered an overpayment and shall be refunded to the taxpayer in the manner provided by subsection (a) of N.J.S.54A:9-7.

	L.2001,c.152,s.3.

34:15D-24  "NJ PLACE" program.
 
	1. a. There is established, in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development and under the direction of the State Employment and Training Commission as part of the commission's responsibilities pursuant to subsection d. of section 9 of P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-6), the New Jersey Pathways Leading Apprentices to a College Education, or "NJ PLACE", program.  The purpose of the program is to facilitate cooperation between appropriate State agencies, employer organizations, labor organizations, schools, and two-year and four-year institutions of higher education to enter into agreements to provide college credit in connection with apprenticeship programs and permit the work of apprentices in those programs to be credited towards two-year and four-year college degrees.  To implement its purpose, the program shall continue the current process of negotiations between county colleges and other institutions of higher education, employer organizations, labor organizations and State agencies which has resulted in the establishment of an associate in applied science in technical studies degree program into which credits are transferred for the time spent by apprentices in classroom and non-classroom apprenticeship training and education.  While most of these existing articulation agreements establishing transfer credits are between county colleges and construction trade apprenticeships, the NJ PLACE program shall work to facilitate agreements involving additional apprenticeship programs outside, as well as inside, of the construction industry and involving four-year, as well as two-year, college degrees.
 
	b.	The NJ PLACE program shall coordinate its efforts to promote apprenticeship programs and related higher education with the efforts of the "Youth Transitions to Work Partnership Act," created pursuant to P.L.1993, c.268 (C.34:15E-1 et al.) and consortia of businesses, business organizations, labor organizations and educational institutions funded by that partnership to link newly established and existing apprenticeship programs with secondary schools and institutions of higher education to provide effective transitions for high school graduates into those programs.
 
	c.	The State Employment and Training Commission is authorized to obtain, accept and utilize resources for the NJ PLACE program as may be, or may become, available from appropriate State, federal and non-governmental sources of funding for employment, training and educational purposes, including the Workforce Development Partnership Fund created pursuant to section 9 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-9), the "Supplemental Workforce Fund for Basic Skills" established pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2001, c.152 (C.34:15D-21), or funds available pursuant to the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, Pub.L.105-220 (29 U.S.C. s.2801 et seq.).
 
	d.	For the purposes of this section, "apprenticeship program" means a registered apprenticeship program providing to each trainee combined classroom and on-the-job training under the direct and close supervision of a highly skilled worker in an occupation recognized as an apprenticeable trade, registered by the Office of Apprenticeship of the U.S. Department of Labor, and meeting the standards established by the office.
 
	L.2009, c.200, s.1.

34:15D-25  Findings, declarations relative to workforce development funds.
 	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that: 

	a.	New Jersey, the headquarters of many of the leaders in the field of industrial research and development, has a long, successful history of innovation in the technology field.
 
	b.	New Jersey is the birthplace of such varied technology and inventions as: the quadruplex telegraph in 1874; the phonograph in 1877; the "band aid" in 1920; air conditioning in 1921; the first long distance television transmission in 1927; condensed soup in 1939; the first commercial mobile telephone service in 1947; tetracycline in 1952; the solar cell battery in 1954; bubble wrap and the laser in 1957; vaccines to prevent the mumps and the measles in 1963; the UNIX operating system in 1969; and the digital signal processor chip in 1980. 
 
	c.	Some of the most important inventors and technology companies in the world call New Jersey home. These companies, working in concert with universities, business partners and scientists, are part of the innovation ecosystem that consumers in the State, nation and around the world depend on and need to drive the economy. 
 
	d.	An innovation ecosystem is an environment in which the persons who have the knowledge, ideas and actions are connected by institutional entities, such as universities, business firms, research institutes, state and local governments, and policy makers, to the materials and capital needed to spur development, inventions and economic growth.
 
	e.	It is essential that New Jersey acts to fertilize, maintain and grow an innovation ecosystem that allows technological ideas to flourish in New Jersey, and to expand upon the already rich environment for the development of technology in the State. 
 
	f.	By directing workforce development funds toward the establishment of technological seed growth in New Jersey, the State will assist in the growth of the type of innovation ecosystem that has created such groundbreaking technology in the past.
 
	g.	Legislation is needed to dedicate workforce development funds to create a grants-funded fellowship program to support technology research and innovation throughout the State. 
 
	L.2015, c.235, s.1.

34:15D-26  New Jersey Innovation and Research Fellowship Program.
 	3. a. The Department of Labor and Workforce Development, in consultation with the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, shall establish the New Jersey Innovation and Research Fellowship Program.
 
	b.	The New Jersey Innovation and Research Fellowship Program shall be funded through the funds reserved for that program from the Workforce Development Partnership Fund pursuant to section 9 of P.L.1992, c. 43 (C.34:15D-9). The funds shall be distributed by the department as follows: 
 
	(1)	The department shall work in consultation with the New Jersey Economic Development Authority to fund, no less than, 20 fellowships, administered by the department, which focus on information technology research and innovation. The fellowships may be provided to entities, of which at least eight shall be large businesses, employing more than 25 people and eight shall be small businesses, employing from two to 24 people. The remainder of the fellowships may be authorized according to the discretion of the department. 
 
	(2)	The fellowships shall be issued for two to three years each and shall be used primarily for research and innovation; not capital purchases. 
 
	c.	The department, in consultation with the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, shall promulgate rules and regulations providing for the establishment, administration and evaluation of the New Jersey Innovation and Research Fellowship Program.
 
	d.	The department, in consultation with the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, shall conduct an evaluation of the effectiveness of the New Jersey Innovation and Research Fellowship Program to spur growth in the information technology research fields no later than five years after the approval of the first fellowship.
 
	L.2015, c.235, s.3.

34:15D-27  New Jersey Military Skills Council.
 	1. a. There is established in the Department of State the New Jersey Military Skills Council, which shall be comprised of the Secretary of State, the Adjutant General, the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, the Chairperson of the State Employment and Training Commission, the Secretary of Higher Education, and the Commissioner of Education, or their designees, who shall serve ex officio.  The council shall also include one member from the Senate appointed by the President of the Senate, one member from the General Assembly appointed by the Speaker of the General Assembly, one member from the Senate appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate, and one member from the General Assembly appointed by the Minority Leader of the General Assembly, who shall serve during the two-year legislative session in which the appointment is made, and one public member appointed by the President of the Senate and one public member appointed by the Speaker of the General Assembly.
 
	b.	The council shall organize as soon as its membership has been appointed and shall select a chairman and vice-chairman from among its members and may select a secretary, who need not be a member of the council.  The council shall meet quarterly, and at such other times as may be necessary.
 
	c.	It shall be the duty of the council to assess the condition of military skills and training in the State and to advise the Department of Labor and Workforce Development and the Department of Education on expenditures from the Workforce Development Partnership Fund and other State funds for the training and education of workers in preparation for jobs with the military and supporting industries.
 
	d.	In developing an assessment of the condition of military skills and training in the State, the council shall:
 
	(1)	develop a comprehensive needs analysis of the State's military installations and key industries;
 
	(2)	explore barriers impeding workforce alignment with the federal government and offer solutions to overcome those barriers;
 
	(3)	identify opportunities for growth and deficiencies in the current skill sets of the workforce;
 
	(4)	examine methods to develop and align curriculum, specifically science, technology, engineering, and math, at all levels of education in preparation for jobs with the military and supporting industries, as well as methods for increasing enrollment of students of all ages in science, technology, engineering, and math programs;
 
	(5)	develop methods to improve understanding of the resources, benefits, and improved outcomes for service members resulting from federal or State legislation that provides opportunities for veterans, such as the federal Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Act of 2008;
 
	(6)	prepare workforce development strategies for the jobs of today and the future, by expanding academic and training opportunities to support workforce needs and exploring public-private partnerships to support workforce development; and
 
	(7)	engage with educators, the military, and industry to ensure that workforce alignment initiatives address military, public, and private sector needs.
 
	e.	The council shall submit an annual report to the Legislature by March 1 of each year, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1).
 
	L.2016, c.16, s.1.

34:15D-28  Findings, declarations relative to the Talent Network Program.
  	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that:

	a.	To maintain a competitive edge in the 21st century, New Jersey must develop a highly productive workforce that has the knowledge, skills, and abilities needed by employers in the State's key industries;
 
	b.	Workforce development and education programs that are directly aligned with the needs of employers will ensure that more New Jersey residents have pathways to economic opportunity and successful careers, and that employers receive the talent required to drive the growth of their businesses;
 
	c.	To cultivate such employer-driven partnerships, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development has supported the development of talent networks since 2011; 
 
	d.	The department currently funds nine talent networks of employers, educational institutions, and workforce development organizations in industries including advanced manufacturing; construction & utilities; financial services; food industry; health care; life sciences; technology; transportation, logistics, and distribution; and retail, hospitality, and tourism; and 
 
	e.	The establishment of a Talent Network Program will create a permanent plan within the department to strengthen and enhance these and future partnerships in meeting the workforce needs of the State.
 
	L.2019, c.125, s.1.

34:15D-29  Talent Network Program.
 	2. a. There is established in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development the Talent Network Program.  The purpose of this program is to develop centralized sources of intelligence about the workforce needs of the State's key industries by building employer-driven partnerships between employers, educational institutions, and other organizations concerned with workforce development.  
 
	b.	To fulfill the goal of the Talent Network Program, the department shall annually award grant funds to nonprofit organizations, industry associations and post-secondary educational institutions, who demonstrate knowledge and expertise in one of the State's key industries.  The department may continue grant agreements with talent networks which were awarded prior to the enactment of P.L.2019, c.125 (C.34:15D-28 et al.).  
 
	c.	Each nonprofit organization, industry association and post-secondary educational institution awarded grant funds through the Talent Network Program pursuant to subsection b. of this section shall:
 
	(1)	engage and convene employers located throughout the State to identify common skill gaps and workforce needs within the targeted industry;
 
	(2)	engage and convene key education and workforce providers located throughout the State to identify the capacity of local partners to meet industry workforce needs;
 
	(3)	form partnerships that are employer-driven and that include at least three key education and workforce providers;
 
	(4)	create a strategy for building and sustaining such partnerships through commitments from employers, workforce organizations, educational institutions, training providers, community and faith-based organizations, and other key stakeholders;
 
	(5)	facilitate the development of a workforce plan to respond to identified workforce needs and opportunities;
 
	(6)	host an annual industry summit to gather intelligence and inform key workforce stakeholders of essential employer needs; 
 
	(7)	contribute to the department's development of an industry-valued credential and degree list and career awareness materials; 
 
	(8)	maintain a website and a presence on social media to disseminate industry intelligence and labor market information to job seekers, students, employers, and education and workforce stakeholders; 
 
	(9)	report annually to the department and the Legislature the status of the industry's workforce needs; and
 
	(10) perform any other duties as required by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	d.	Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the Talent Network Program shall be funded through federal job training funds, as defined in section 4 of P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-1).  The department is authorized to use any additional funds necessary to fulfill the provisions of this section, as determined by the commissioner, from the Workforce Development Partnership Fund moneys reserved for the Talent Network Program pursuant to section 9 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-9).
 
	L.2019, c.125, s.2.

34:15D-30  Definitions relative to an industry-valued credentials pilot program.
 	1.	As used in this act:

	"Eligible adult" means an individual who is a "qualified displaced worker" or a "qualified disadvantaged worker" as defined in section 3 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-3).
 
	"Information or math literacy" means an individual's ability to use appropriate mathematical, literacy, or technical skills for career success.
 
	"Secretary" means the Secretary of Higher Education.
 
	"Soft skills" means social skills, transferrable skills, and interpersonal skills, which relate to an individual's ability to communicate and collaborate with others.
 
	L.2019, c.252, s.1.

34:15D-31  Design of pilot program.
 	2. a. (1) The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, in consultation with the Secretary of Higher Education, the county colleges, county vocational school districts, and the Department of Education, shall design a pilot program through which an eligible adult who has an insufficient level of information or math literacy may obtain industry-valued credentials on an accelerated schedule to assist the eligible adult in entering or re-entering the workforce or in obtaining better employment.  The pilot program shall include at least 20 certificates that eligible adults may obtain by completing courses that integrate information and math literacy development programs, and soft skills development programs, with career and technical training.  The time required to complete a certificate program shall not exceed 12 months.
 
	(2)	The commissioner shall develop and initially offer under the pilot program at least 10 industry-valued credentials by the fall semester of the 2020-2021 academic year and at least 10 additional industry-valued credentials by the spring semester of the 2021-2022 academic year. In determining for which industries to develop and offer a certificate program, the commissioner shall give preference to industries with occupations on the Demand Occupation List, or any successor list, compiled by New Jersey Career Connections in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.  One of the industries for which the commissioner shall develop and offer a certificate program shall be the restaurant and hospitality industry. A certificate program for the restaurant and hospitality industry shall include the following employer-valued credentials:
 
	(a)	ServSafe Food Manager Certification; 
 
	(b)	ServSafe Alcohol Certificate; and
 
	(c)	ServSafe Workplace.  
 
	b.	The commissioner shall collaborate with and may enter into memorandums of understanding with county colleges, county vocational school districts, the Department of Education, the Office of the Secretary of Higher Education, and other adult education providers to ensure that the pilot program is implemented locally.
 
	c.	The commissioner shall ensure that, at a minimum, the pilot program:
 
	(1)	is available to eligible adults who are seeking to enter or re-enter the workforce or obtain better employment and who may benefit from information and math literacy development programs, as indicated by the individual's score on a basic skills assessment in English and Mathematics selected by the secretary;
 
	(2)	includes only industry-valued credentials that a student can complete within 12 months; and
 
	(3)	requires that each course offered through a certificate program integrates appropriate information or math literacy instruction, career and technical skills, and soft skills, and is jointly designed by mathematics, English, and career and technical education faculty.
 
	d.	A county college, a county vocational school district, or an adult education program operated in cooperation with the Department of Education or the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, may choose to participate in the pilot program by implementing one or more of the certificate programs established by the commissioner pursuant to this act.
 
	e.	An entity that participates in the pilot program to offer one or more certificate programs shall on or before July 1 of each year of the pilot program submit to the commissioner a report that includes the following information:
 
	(1)	the certificate programs offered;
 
	(2)	the number of students who enrolled in each certificate program;
 
	(3)	the number of students who successfully completed each certificate program; and
 
	(4)	the percentage of students who obtained employment in the area in which they obtained a certificate or who enrolled in additional educational offerings in that subject area.
 
	f.	No later than January 1, 2023, the commissioner shall submit to the Governor, and to the Legislature pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), a report that evaluates the results of the pilot program and its effectiveness in assisting program participants in entering or re-entering the workforce or in obtaining better employment.  The report shall include a recommendation on the advisability of the program's continuation and extension to additional certificate and technical programs.
 
	L.2019, c.252, s.2.

34:15D-31.1  Industry-valued credential list.
	1. a. The Department of Labor and Workforce Development may develop and maintain a list of industry-valued credentials identifying the specific credentials offered in this State in which employers are most interested, based on analysis of State labor market data and feedback from employers in the State.  The industry-valued credential list may be updated annually and made available as a list and as a downloadable document on the Internet website of the department.
 
	b.	The department may adopt rules and regulations pursuant to the “Administrative Procedure Act,” P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), to effectuate the purposes of this act.
 
L.2025, c.372.

34:15D-31.2  Short title.
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the “New Economy Opportunity Skills System Act.”
 
L.2025, c.375, s.1.

34:15D-31.3  Findings, declarations.
	2.	The Legislature finds and declares that:
 
	a.	Because New Jersey needs a skilled workforce to compete in the global economy and to promote economic mobility for residents, the State seeks to create a more efficient and seamless service delivery model for local workforce and economic development by better aligning State workforce development services, community colleges, and post-secondary programs in county vocational school districts; and
 
	b.	Strengthening strategic coordination between these entities will enhance the delivery of training and services, address labor market needs, and provide a skilled talent pipeline to meet the demands of employers throughout New Jersey.
 
L.2025, c.375, s.2.

34:15D-31.4  Definitions.
	3.	As used in this act:
 
	“Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.

	“Community college” means a county college established pursuant to chapter 64A of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes.
 
	“County vocational school district” means any entity established pursuant to article 3 of chapter 54 of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes for the purpose of providing efficient occupational, technical and academic education opportunities to secondary and postsecondary students.
 
	“Department” means the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	“Division” means the Division of Workforce Development in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	“Local workforce development board” means the local board established in each designated  local workforce development area pursuant to the “Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act” (29 U.S.C. s.3101 et seq.).
 
L.2025, c.375, s.3.

34:15D-31.5  New Economy Opportunity Skills System Pilot Program; annual report.
	4. a. To establish the “New Economy Opportunity Skills System Pilot Program,” the division shall initiate a pilot program in a select number of local workforce development areas to strengthen strategic alignment and collaboration between the operations of local workforce development boards, community colleges, and post-secondary programs in county vocational school districts.  Under the division’s oversight, the pilot program shall include:
 
	(1)	joint development and implementation of workforce training programs with an emphasis on industry-recognized credentials along with strengthening and validating participants’ existing skills and experience;
 
	(2)	dedication to a customer-centered approach that enables participants’ success through delivery of wrap-around assistance as appropriate;
 
	(3)	collaborative efforts for branding, outreach, and marketing to increase awareness of available training and career services;
 
	(4)	integrated planning and coordination of funding resources to maximize the impact of State and federal support for workforce development; and
 
	(5)	performance evaluations based on appropriate metrics aligned with State and federal workforce development programs to assess participant outcomes, program effectiveness, and other measures as required under the “Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act,” (29 U.S.C. s.3101 et seq.) and applicable State laws; and
 
	(6)	a memorandum of understanding binding all participating entities through a specific scope of work, pilot timeline, delineated roles and responsibilities, funding and mechanisms for disbursement of funds to participating entities by the division, and reporting requirements to ensure participating entities expend public monies efficiently towards pilot goals.
 
	b.	The division shall partner with the Office of Research and Information in the department to ensure the local workforce development areas participating in the pilot program are selected based on objective, scientific criteria.  To the extent possible, the division shall consider the criteria identified by the Office of Research and Information to ensure participating areas are representative of the larger universe of local workforce development areas in the State so that the pilot outcomes may be evaluated based on evidence-based criteria.
 
	c.	The division, in consultation with the New Jersey Council of County Colleges and the New Jersey Council of County Vocational-Technical Schools, shall develop a strategy to strengthen Statewide strategic alignment and collaboration between local workforce development boards, community colleges, and post-secondary programs in county vocational school districts.  The strategy shall include:
 
	(1)	a guideline for scaling the pilot program established pursuant to subsection a. of this section to other areas throughout the State;
 
	(2)	recommendations for legislative and regulatory changes needed to facilitate integration; and
 
	(3)	an implementation timeline and resource plan for Statewide integration.
 
	d.  At the end of the pilot period, the division shall submit an annual report to the Governor and to the Legislature, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), on the progress and outcomes of the pilot program and the implementation of the “New Economy Opportunity Skills System Pilot Program.”  The report shall include:
 
	(1)	data on participant outcomes, including, but not limited to, employment rates, credential attainment, wage increases, and other appropriate metrics aligned with State and federal workforce development programs and applicable State laws;
 
	(2)	recommendations for improvements or adjustments to the “New Economy Opportunity Skills System Pilot Program”;
 
	(3)	an update on the Statewide integration strategy and its implementation; and
 
	(4)	 a recommendation as to whether the pilot program can and should be scaled and expanded Statewide.
 
L.2025, c.375, s.4.

34:15D-32  High-Growth Industry Regional Apprenticeship Development Grant Pilot Program.
	1. a. There is established in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development a five-year High-Growth Industry Regional Apprenticeship Development Grant Pilot Program, which shall provide grants to support funding for three newly-established adult apprenticeship programs in high-growth industries in three regions of the State. There shall be one grant awarded in the northern, central, and southern region of the State, respectively. A grant may extend beyond one year in duration.  To be eligible for the grant, the apprenticeship program shall be accredited and approved by the United States Department of Labor, or shall be in the process of obtaining that accreditation.  The program shall be administered by the Office of Apprenticeship in the department.
 
	For the purposes of P.L.2019, c.314 (C.34:15D-32 et al.), the northern region shall include Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Morris, Passaic, Sussex, Union, and Warren counties; the central region shall include Burlington, Hunterdon, Mercer, Middlesex, Monmouth, Ocean, and Somerset counties; and the southern region shall include Atlantic, Camden, Cape May, Cumberland, Gloucester, and Salem counties.
 
	b.	Each of the three grants shall be selected from a separate high-growth industry, but any organizational sponsor of an apprenticeship program is eligible to receive the grant, including businesses; business organizations and associations; labor organizations; joint labor-management partnerships; local education agencies; public vocational schools; two-year and four-year colleges; local workforce development boards; workforce training providers; economic development organizations; and community-based and other non-profit organizations.
 
	To apply for the grant, an organization shall submit an application to the Office of Apprenticeship, which shall include documentation that the apprenticeship which the organization is sponsoring is or will be accredited and approved by the United States Department of Labor.
 
	c.	No later than July 1, 2019, the department shall begin accepting grant applications to be awarded no later than January 1, 2020 from funds allocated for the program pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2001, c.152 (C.34:15D-21). The department shall rank eligible applicants for grants based upon: 
 
	(1)	each applicant's potential to:
 
	(a)	reach a broad audience through its recruitment and outreach efforts;
 
	(b)	significantly increase enrollment and completion of the apprenticeship program; and
 
	(c)	fill existing needs for skilled workers in the market; and
 
	(2)	the applicant's partnership with an industry for which apprenticeship programs targeted at training and providing skilled workers who have the ability to perform jobs in that industry have demonstrated positive outcomes.
 
	d.	An eligible applicant is required to demonstrate that it intends and is prepared to contribute its own financial resources to the apprenticeship program and has secured an industry partner or a monetary or in-kind contribution, including conditional job placement guarantees, from an industry partner.  Moreover, each eligible applicant shall provide documentation of:
 
	(1)	the apprenticeship program's curriculum, location, and skills to be taught;
 
	(2)	the recruitment efforts for the apprenticeship program, and projected enrollment with and without receipt of grant funds;
 
	(3)	a description of how the grant funds will be utilized;
 
	(4)	information on specific industry needs or gaps in the workforce that will be addressed by the apprenticeship program;
 
	(5)	costs to operate apprenticeship program; and
 
	(6)	any other information the department requires.
 
	e.	An eligible applicant who is selected by the department for receipt of a grant for the purpose of funding an apprenticeship program in accordance with P.L.2019, c.314 (C.34:15D-32 et al.), shall, on an annual basis for so long as the grant is provided, make an annual report to the commissioner detailing the enrollment in the program, the number of participants completing the program, the number of participants obtaining employment as a result of the program, and any other information as the commissioner may require.
 
	f.	Beginning January 1, 2020, and each year thereafter for the duration of the pilot grant program, the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall submit to the Governor, and to the Legislature, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), a report that evaluates the results of the program and its effectiveness in preparing individuals to meet existing and burgeoning workforce needs and addressing gaps in skills in the workforce.  The report shall include a recommendation regarding whether to renew the "High-Growth Industry Regional Apprenticeship Development Grant Pilot Program," and if renewal is recommended, if the program should be expanded or otherwise enhanced.  The report shall include:
 
	(1)	The number of grants awarded in the prior year, including the amount, recipient, and duration of each grant;
 
	(2)	The number of individuals who enrolled in and completed an apprenticeship program offered by each grant recipient;
 
	(3)	The number of individuals who obtained employment in a position that uses the skills for which they were trained by a grant recipient, or in a position for which the completion of the apprenticeship program was a condition of employment; and
 
	(4)	All relevant information provided by grant recipients as to measurable outcomes of participants.
 
	g.	Funds from grants provided in accordance with P.L.2019, c.314 (C.34:15D-32 et al.) shall not be used:
 
	(1)	for any activities which replace, supplant, compete with or duplicate in any way existing approved apprenticeship programs;
 
	(2)	to induce, encourage or assist: any displacement of currently employed workers by trainees, including partial displacement by means such as reduced hours of currently employed workers; any replacement of laid off workers by trainees; or any relocation of operations resulting in a loss of employment at a previous workplace; or
 
	(3)	to impair existing contracts for services or collective bargaining agreements, except that activities which would be inconsistent with the terms of a collective bargaining agreement may be undertaken with the written concurrence of the collective bargaining unit and the employer or employers who are parties to the agreement.
 
	h.	As used in P.L.2019, c.314 (C.34:15D-32 et al.): 
 
	"Eligible applicant" means a business; labor organization; college; workforce training provider; non-profit organization; or any other entity that offers or plans to offer an apprenticeship program that is accredited and approved by the United States Department of Labor and that has partnered with an industry to offer or fund the apprenticeship program. 
 
	"High-growth industry" means an industry identified by the New Jersey Talent Network, or its successor entity with the department, and includes, but is not limited to: advanced manufacturing; construction and utilities; financial services; life sciences; information technology; renewable energy; science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM); and transportation, logistics, and distribution.  The department shall, on at least a two-year basis, review the classification of high-growth industries to determine if a particular industry should be added or eliminated from the classification.
 
	"Department" means Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	L.2019, c.314, s.1.

34:15D-33  Definitions.
 	1.	As used in this act: 

	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, or the commissioner's designee. 
 
	"Department" means the Department of Labor and Workforce Development. 
 
	"Direct business assistance from the department" means monetary or financial assistance in any form, including but not limited to a grant or other monetary or financial benefit awarded to a person by the department to assist the person in the conduct or operation of a business, occupation, trade, or profession in the State, in connection with the following programs: 
 
	(1)	Customized training services provided pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-5); 
 
	(2)	Employment and training services provided pursuant to section 6 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-6);
 
	(3)	Employment and training services funded by the Supplemental Workforce Fund for Basic Skills under section 1 of P.L.2001, c.152 (C.34:15D-21);
 
	(4)	Outreach and training programs for minority group members and women in construction trade occupations or other occupations utilized in the performance of public works contracts funded by the New Jersey Builders Utilization Initiative for Labor Diversity (NJBUILD) pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2009, c.313 (C.52:38-7);
 
	(5)	The New Jersey Innovation and Research Fellowship Program pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2015, c.235 (C.34:15D-26);
 
	(6)	The Apprenticeship Start-Up Grant Program pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2019, c.417 (C.34:15D-6.1); 
 
	(7)	The Apprentice Assistance and Support Services Pilot Program pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2019, c.419 (C.34:15D-6.2); 
 
	(8)	The New Jersey Pathways Leading Apprentices to a College Education (NJPLACE) Program pursuant to section 1 of P.L.2009, c.200 (C.34:15D-24); 
 
	(9)	Any other program funded in whole or in part by the Workforce Development Partnership Fund established under section 9 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-9); 
 
	(10) Any program funded by or through the Department in whole or in part under the "Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act," (29 U.S.C. s.3101 et seq.); 
 
	(11) Any program funded by or through the Department in whole or in part under the "Wagner-Peyser Act," (29 U.S.C. s.49 et seq.); 
 
	(12) The Talent Network Program pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2019, c.125 (C.34:15D-29); 
 
	(13) The industry-valued Credentials pilot program pursuant to P.L.2019, c.252 (C.34:15D-30 et seq.); 
 
	(14)	The High-Growth Industry Regional Apprenticeship Development Grant Pilot Program pursuant to P.L.2019, c.314 (C.34:15D-32); 
 
	(15) The Youth Transitions to Work Partnership pursuant to P.L.1993, c.268 (C.34:15E-1 et seq.); 
 
	(16) The At-Risk Youth Mentoring Program pursuant to P.L.1999, c.279 (C.34:15F-1 et seq.); and
 
	(17) Any other similar program by which the department confers a monetary or financial benefit upon a person to assist the person in the conduct or operation of a business, occupation, trade or profession in the State. 
 
	"Final order" means either a final administrative determination of the Commissioner issued following adjudication of a matter as a contested case pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), and the Uniform Administrative Procedure Rules, N.J.A.C.1:1, or where the department has made a finding regarding a violation of law or rule, or regarding the levying of a penalty or fee pursuant to law or rule, and has notified the violator of same and where the violator has either expressly waived the right to a hearing or has waived the right to a hearing by virtue of having failed to request same within the appropriate time limit established by either law or rule. 
 
	"Person" means a natural person or an organization, including but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, proprietorship, limited liability company, association, cooperative, joint venture, estate, trust, or government unit. 
 
	"Strategic enforcement" means a proactive, rather than purely complaint driven, approach to enforcement, which focuses agency resources to assist vulnerable employee communities and target high-violation industries with the ultimate goal of increasing the cost to violators of non-compliance, thereby changing non-compliant behavior in a sustainable way. 
 
	"State wage, benefit and tax laws" means "State wage, benefit and tax laws" as that term is defined in section 1 of P.L.2009, c.194 (C.34:1A-1.11). 
 
	L.2021, c.166, s.1.

34:15D-34  "Office of Strategic Enforcement and Compliance."
 	2. a. There is hereby established in the department an "Office of Strategic Enforcement and Compliance," which shall oversee and coordinate across the divisions of the department and, when necessary, between the department and other State agencies and entities, strategic enforcement of State wage, benefit and tax laws, as deemed appropriate by the commissioner. 
 
	b.	Each division within the department selected by the commissioner shall designate at least one employee whose duties shall include, among others, serving as a liaison with the "Office of Strategic Enforcement and Compliance." 
 
	c.	The commissioner shall devote departmental resources, including those of the department's Office of Research and Information, to support a data-driven approach to the work of the "Office of Strategic Enforcement and Compliance." 
 
	d. (1) As a precondition to the award to a person of direct business assistance from the department, and as a precondition for the department to report to another State agency or entity that a business is in substantial good standing, the department shall determine whether the person has any outstanding liability to the department under any of the statutes or rules that the department enforces, including but not limited to, for unpaid contributions to the unemployment compensation fund or the State disability benefits fund; to any individual on whose behalf the department has issued a final order for the payment of wages or benefits; or for any penalties, fees or interest due the department pursuant to a final order issued under any of the statutes or rules that the department enforces. 
 
	As an example, prior to the department reporting substantial good standing as required under the "New Jersey Economic Recovery Act of 2020," P.L.2020, c.156 (C.34:1B-269 et al.), the department shall complete the determination required by this paragraph.
 
	If the department determines that a person has any outstanding liability to the department under any of the statutes or rules that the department enforces, the application by the person for direct business assistance from the department shall be denied, and it shall be reported to any inquiring State agency or entity that the business is not in substantial good standing. If a person is seeking the award of direct business assistance from the department, or where a report has been requested as to whether the person is in substantial good standing with the department, if the person has entered into an agreement with the department to immediately and fully comply with the statutes and rules enforced by the department and to resolve all delinquencies or deficiencies within a time period specified by the commissioner, then the commissioner may approve the award of direct business assistance from the department, or issue a report that the person is in substantial good standing with the department, notwithstanding the outstanding liability to the department under any of the statutes or rules that the department enforces.
 
	(2)	The "Office of Strategic Enforcement and Compliance" shall oversee and coordinate review processes good standing with the Department's laws and rules as determined under paragraph (1) of this subsection.
 
	L.2021, c.166, s.2.

34:15D-35  Short title.
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey YouthBuild Act."
 
L.2023, c.334, s.1.

34:15D-36  "New Jersey YouthBuild Act", purpose.
	2.	The purpose of the "New Jersey YouthBuild Act" shall be to:
 
	a.	Enable economically disadvantaged youth, especially youth who have not finished high school, to obtain the education, job skills training, personal counseling, leadership development skills training, job placement assistance, and long-term follow-up leading to economic self-sufficiency;
 
	b.	Provide communities the opportunity to establish or rebuild neighborhood stability in economically depressed and low-income areas, as well as historic areas requiring restoration or preservation, while providing economically disadvantaged youth and youth who have not finished high school an opportunity for meaningful participation in society;
 
	c.	Allow communities to maintain and expand the supply of affordable housing for homeless and other low-income individuals by utilizing the energies and talents of economically disadvantaged youth and young people who have not graduated from high school; and
 
	d.	Foster the development of leadership skills and a commitment to community development among youth.
 
L.2023, c.334, s.2.

34:15D-37  Definitions.
	3.	As used in this act:
 
	"Applicant" means a public or private not-for-profit agency eligible to provide education and employment training under federal or State employment training programs.
 
	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	"Department" means the Department of Labor and Workforce Development. 
 
	"Eligible entity" means a public or private nonprofit agency or organization, including a consortium of public or private nonprofit agencies or organizations, including but not limited to:
 
	a community-based organization;
 
	a faith-based organization;
 
	an entity carrying out activities under this act, such as a local board;
 
	a community action agency;
 
	a State or local housing development agency;
 
	an Indian tribe or other agency primarily serving Indians;
 
	a community development corporation;
 
	a State or local youth service or conservation corps; and
 
	any other entity eligible to provide education or employment training under a federal program (other than the program carried out under this section).
 
	"YouthBuild" means the program established by this act that provides disadvantaged youth with opportunities for comprehensive education, employment, leadership development, and training in the construction or rehabilitation of housing for special needs populations, very low-income households, and low-income households.
 
L.2023, c.334, s.3.

34:15D-38  Department of Labor and Workforce Development Commissioner, grants, YouthBuild programs, services.
	4.	a. The commissioner shall, subject to appropriation, make grants to applicants for the purpose of carrying out YouthBuild programs as approved under this section.  All programs funded pursuant to the provisions of this section shall reflect strong youth and community involvement.  In addition, funding provided under this section shall be used by each YouthBuild program to provide, at a minimum, the following services:
 
	(1)	integrated education and job skills training services and activities which are evenly divided within the program, with 50 percent of students' time spent in classroom-based instruction, counseling, and leadership development instruction and 50 percent of their time spent in service learning experiences at construction sites.  The programs shall include, at a minimum, the following elements:
 
	(a)	an education component which includes basic skills instruction, secondary education services, and other activities designed to lead to the attainment of a high school diploma or its equivalent.  The curriculum for this component shall include math, language arts, vocational education, life skills training, social studies related to the cultural and community history of the students, leadership skills, and other topics at the discretion of the programs; 
 
	(b)	a vocational learning experience and skills training component apprenticeship program that includes the construction and rehabilitation activities described in paragraph (4) of this subsection.  The process of construction shall be tied with skills training and with close on-site supervision by experienced trainers.  The curriculum for this component shall contain a set of locally agreed upon skills and competencies that are systematically taught, with a student's mastery assessed individually on a regular, ongoing basis.  Safety skills shall be taught at the outset.  The vocational learning experience and skills training component shall be coordinated to the maximum extent feasible with pre-apprenticeship and apprenticeship programs.  In order to receive grant funding, programs shall offer vocational learning experiences that conclude with the administration of assessments to obtain an industry-valued credential, per the list provided by the Department of Labor and Workforce Development; and 
 
	(c)	assistance in attaining post-secondary education and required financial aid to be made available to participants prior to graduation;
 
	(2)	counseling services designed to assist participants to positively participate in society, which should include all of the following if necessary: outreach, assessment, and orientation; individual and peer counseling; life skills training, drug and alcohol abuse education and prevention; and referral to appropriate drug rehabilitation, medical, mental health, legal, housing, and other services and resources in the community;
 
	(3)	leadership development training that provides participants with meaningful opportunities to develop leadership skills such as decision making, problem solving, and negotiating. The program shall also encourage participants to develop strong peer group ties that support their mutual pursuit of skills and values. All programs shall establish a youth council in which participants are afforded opportunities to develop public speaking and negotiating skills and management and policy-making participation in specific aspects of the program; and
 
	(4)	assistance with the acquisition, rehabilitation, acquisition and rehabilitation, or construction of housing and related facilities which will serve as the vocational training sites and then to be used for the purpose of providing home ownership for disadvantaged persons, residential housing for homeless individuals, and low-income and very low-income families, or transitional housing for persons who are homeless, have disabilities, are ill, are de-institutionalized, or have special needs and rehabilitation or construction of community facilities owned by not-for-profit or public agencies.
 
	b.	A YouthBuild program shall provide a stipend to participants to cover the costs associated with their full-time participation in the program.  The stipend shall not be considered as income in determining eligibility for other State or federal assistance programs.  Stipends may be distributed in a manner that offers incentives for good performance.
 
	c.	Full-time participation in a YouthBuild program shall be offered for a period of not less than six months and not more than 24 months.
 
	d.	A concentrated effort shall be made to find jobs for all graduates of the program who have performed well.  The skills training curriculum shall provide participants with basic preparation for seeking and maintaining a job.  Follow-up counseling and assistance in job-seeking shall also be provided to participants for the 12 months following graduation from the program.
 
	e.	All programs serving 20 trainees or more are required to have a full-time director responsible for the coordination of all aspects of the YouthBuild program.
 
L.2023, c.334, s.4.

34:15D-39  YouthBuild, eligible participants, age range, economic status, specified group membership.
	5. a. Eligible participants in a YouthBuild program shall be youth, 16 to 24 years old, who are economically disadvantaged as defined in 29 U.S.C. s.1503, and who are part of one of at least one of the following groups:
 
	(1)	persons who are not attending any school and not received a secondary school diploma or its equivalent; 
 
	(2)	persons currently enrolled in a traditional or alternative school setting or a high school equivalency testing program and who are in danger of dropping out of school; or
 
	(3)	a member of a low-income family, a youth in foster care (including a youth aging out of foster care), a youth offender, a youth with a disability, a child of incarcerated parents, or a migrant youth. 
 
	b.	Not more than 25 percent of participants in the program may be individuals who do not meet the requirements of paragraphs (1) or (2) of subsection a. of this section, but who are deficient in basic skills despite having attained a secondary school diploma, high school equivalency certificate, or other State-recognized equivalent, or who have been referred by a local secondary school for participation in a YouthBuild program leading to the attainment of a secondary school diploma. 
 
L.2023, c.334, s.5.

34:15D-40  Eligible entities to be awarded funds, experience operating YouthBuild programs, Housing and Urban Development YouthBuild grant.
	6.	Eligible entities to be awarded funds under this act are not-for-profit private agencies with experience operating a YouthBuild program or entities that have received a federal Housing and Urban Development (HUD) YouthBuild grant or have experience in serving this population and have plans to incubate a YouthBuild program. Priority in the awarding of funds under this act shall be given to applicants with experience in operating YouthBuild programs or organizations that have received HUD YouthBuild funding. Only not-for-profit private agencies that are affiliates of YouthBuild USA or have received a federal HUD YouthBuild grant shall be eligible to use the term YouthBuild. 
 
L.2023, c.334, s.6.

34:15D-41  YouthBuild funds application requirements.
	7.	The commissioner shall require that an application for YouthBuild funds under this act contain at a minimum:
 
	a.	A request for an implementation grant, specifying the amount of the grant requested and its proposed uses;
 
	b.	A description of the applicant and a statement of its qualifications, including a description of the applicant's past experience running a YouthBuild program; with housing rehabilitation or construction; and with youth, youth education, youth leadership development and employment training programs, and other relevant community organizations;
 
	c.	A description of the educational and job training activities, work opportunities, and other services that will be provided to participants;
 
	d.	A description of the proposed construction or rehabilitation activities to be undertaken and the anticipated schedule for carrying out those activities;
 
	e.	A description of the manner in which eligible youths will be recruited and selected, including a description of the arrangements which will be made with community-based organizations, local educational agencies, public assistance agencies, the courts of jurisdiction for status and youth offenders, shelters for homeless individuals and other agencies that serve homeless youth, foster care agencies, and other appropriate public and private agencies;
 
	f.	A description of the special efforts that will be undertaken to recruit eligible young women (including young women with dependent children) with plans for addressing appropriate supports they may need, especially childcare;
 
	g.	A description of how the proposed program will be coordinated with other youth-serving agencies in the service area;
 
	h.	Assurances that there will be a sufficient number of adequately trained supervisory personnel in the program who have attained the level of journeyman or its equivalent;
 
	i.	A description of the applicant's relationship with any local building trade unions, which may exist, regarding their involvement in training, and the relationship of the YouthBuild program with established apprenticeship programs;
 
	j.	A description of activities that will be undertaken to develop the leadership skills of participants, including their role in decision making;
 
	k.	A detailed budget and a description of the system of fiscal controls and auditing and accountability procedures that will be used to ensure fiscal soundness;
 
	l.	A description of any contracts and arrangements entered into between the applicant and other agencies and entities including all in-kind donations and grants from both public and private entities that will serve to augment State YouthBuild funds;
 
	m.	The qualifications and past experience of the person who will fill the full-time program director position; and
 
	n.	Other information or factors as deemed necessary by the commissioner.
 
L.2023, c.334, s.7.

34:15D-42  YouthBuild applicant selected for funding, provide information, certain; Department of Labor and Workforce Development, evaluation report, Governor, Legislature.
	8. a. An applicant selected for funding under this act shall provide to the department information on program and participant outcomes, including but not limited to: attendance, retention, GED attainment, high school diplomas issued, educational improvement levels, placement, construction outcomes, and community service accomplishments.
 
	b.	The department shall prepare and submit annual evaluation reports to the Governor and the Legislature pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1) on the progress of individual programs funded under this act.  The department shall prepare and submit a final evaluation report to the Governor and the Legislature, pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1991, c.164 (C.52:14-19.1), on individual programs at the times of program completion.  The final evaluation report shall include, but not be limited to, information on the effectiveness of the program, the status of program participants, and recommendations on program administration at the State and local level.  The Department shall submit the first evaluation report by July 1, 2024, and subsequent annual reports by July 1 of each year thereafter. 
 
L.2023, c.334, s.8.

34:15E-1.    Short title  
    1.   This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Youth Transitions to Work Partnership Act."  

   L.1993,c.268,s.1.  

34:15E-2.    Findings, declarations  
    2.   The Legislature finds and declares that:

  

   a.   To succeed in the face of intensely competitive conditions, the economy of New Jersey requires the creation of a growing pool of highly trained, technologically sophisticated young workers, which can be achieved, in part, by providing greater opportunities and incentives for youths who in the past have not sought college education or even completed high school;  

   b.   The potential value of work-based, hands-on learning to create that growing pool has been demonstrated by the high quality of the training and education provided by existing registered apprenticeship programs;  

   c.   The benefits of apprenticeship training in creating a highly-skilled workforce, however, are limited to less than 3% of the workforce of the United States or this State, compared to more than two thirds of German workers;  

   d.   In this State, as well as in this nation, most participants do not enter apprenticeship programs until six or more years after their graduation from high school;  

   e.   Education and training for careers in skilled trades are unattractive to many high school students and their parents, because workers in those trades are rarely provided with the opportunities for lifelong occupationally relevant learning and ongoing advancement that are commonplace in professional occupations;  

   f.   The experience of German and Japanese schools and employers clearly demonstrates that all youth need a strong educational foundation in order to have the flexibility to succeed in the face of rapid economic change and that work-based learning is a necessary supplement to, but not a substitute for, high academic standards;  

   g.   It is therefore an appropriate public purpose to establish a Youth Transitions to Work Partnership to establish new apprenticeship programs for high-wage, high-skill, labor demand occupations and link those new programs and existing apprenticeship programs with secondary schools and institutions of higher education to provide effective transitions for high school graduates into those programs, while sustaining or enhancing educational standards, and to create opportunities for lifelong occupationally relevant learning and ongoing career advancement for front-line workers, thereby motivating youth to greater success in secondary and post-secondary education.  

   L.1993,c.268,s.2.  

34:15E-3    Definitions.
 
 	3.	As used in this act:

	"Apprenticeship Policy Committee" or "committee" means the New Jersey Apprenticeship Policy Committee which:  
 
	a.	Was established by a written agreement of: the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training in the U.S. Department of Labor; the State Department of Labor and Workforce Development; and the State Department of Education; and 
 
	b.	Consists of: the Assistant Commissioner, State Department of Education, Division of Adult and Occupational Education; the Director of Region II of the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training in the U.S. Department of Labor; an assistant commissioner of the State Department of Labor and Workforce Development; and a representative of the New Jersey State AFL-CIO.  
 
	"Apprenticeship program" means a registered apprenticeship program providing to each trainee combined classroom and on-the-job training under the direct and close supervision of a highly skilled worker in an occupation recognized as an apprenticeable trade, and registered by the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training of the U.S. Department of Labor and meeting the standards established by the bureau, or registered by a State apprenticeship agency recognized by the bureau. 
 
	"Labor demand occupation" means an occupation for which there is or is likely to be an excess of demand over supply for adequately trained workers, including, but not limited to, an occupation designated as a labor demand occupation by the New Jersey Occupational Information Coordinating Committee pursuant to section 12 of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:1A-78). 
 
	"Youth Transitions to Work Partnership" or "Partnership" means the Youth Transitions to Work Partnership established pursuant to section 4 of this act.
 
	L.1993, c.268, s.3; amended 2007, c.39, s.15.

34:15E-4.    Youth Transitions to Work Partnership established; purpose  
    4. a.  The Youth Transitions to Work Partnership is hereby established in, but not of, the Department of Labor. Notwithstanding any appropriations that are made to the Youth Transitions to Work Partnership from the revenues collected pursuant to section 2 of P.L.1992, c.44 (C.34:15D-13), the Youth Transitions to Work Partnership is separate from the Workforce Development Partnership Program and not subject to the requirements of P.L.1992, c.43 (C.34:15D-1 et al.).  

   b.   The purpose of the Youth Transitions to Work Partnership is to facilitate effective transitions by youths to high-skill, high-wage employment in labor demand occupations with long-term career potential and opportunities for occupationally relevant lifelong learning, and thereby motivate youth to greater success in secondary and post-secondary education.  To implement that purpose, the partnership shall provide consortia of businesses, business organizations, labor organizations and educational institutions with:  

   (1)  Grants pursuant to section 5 of this act for the establishment of new apprenticeship programs in occupations or industries which do not currently have apprenticeship programs in this State; and  

   (2)  Grants pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of this act to establish new programs to link education and higher education to either existing apprenticeship programs or new apprenticeship programs established pursuant to section 5 of this act.  

   c.   All training, education or other services provided pursuant to this act shall be for careers in occupations which are labor demand occupations and have an average level of pay in the State which exceeds 80% of the average level of pay for all workers in the State or shall be in connection with an apprenticeship program in which the average level of pay upon completion of the program exceeds 80% of the average level of pay for all workers in the State.  

   d.   Funds available in connection with the partnership shall not be used for activities which:  

   (1)  Induce, encourage or assist: any displacement of currently employed workers by trainees, including partial displacement by means such as reduced hours of currently employed workers; any replacement of laid off workers by trainees; or any relocation of operations resulting in a loss of employment at a previous workplace;  

   (2)  Replace, supplant, compete with or duplicate in any way existing approved apprenticeship programs; or  

   (3)  Impair existing contracts for services or collective bargaining agreements, except that activities which would be inconsistent with the terms of a collective bargaining agreement may be undertaken with the written concurrence of the collective bargaining unit and employer who are parties to the agreement.  

   e.   Any business which has an individual working for it under a program established under a grant provided by the partnership shall be responsible for providing workers' compensation coverage for the individual.  

   L.1993,c.268,s.4; amended 1994,c.73,s.2.  

34:15E-5.    Grant eligibility  
    5.  a.  To be eligible for a grant from the partnership, a consortium shall include:  

   (1)  Each employer that employs apprentices in connection with the grant or participates in developing or providing linkage services pursuant to section 6 of this act;  

   (2)  Each educational institution that provides classroom training or education to the apprentices or participates in developing or providing linkage services pursuant to section 6 or 7 of this act; and  

   (3)  Any labor organization which represents workers employed by a participating employer.  

   b.   The consortium may also include:

  

   (1)  Any business or trade organization representing the employer; and  

   (2)  Any labor organization which represents workers in the occupation for which the apprentices will be trained.  

   c.   Each consortium applying for a grant from the partnership shall submit an application to the committee in a form and manner prescribed by the committee.  Each application from a consortium shall describe how each participant in the consortium will carry out its responsibilities in establishing a permanent apprenticeship program, including the role of each employer, educational institution and, where applicable, labor organization, in developing curriculum and occupation skill standards, the role of each employer in providing skilled workers as job coaches and mentors for apprentices and the role of each participant in establishing and operating related linkage programs pursuant to section 6 or 7 of this act.  The application shall include a comprehensive long-term human resource development plan from each participating employer and a commitment from participating employers to continue participation in the apprenticeship program on a long-term basis significantly beyond the term of the grant.  

   d.   Each member of the committee and each member of the council may direct or request the department or agency that member represents on the committee or council to provide whatever technical assistance the member deems appropriate in the preparation of an application by a consortium.  

   e.   Each business, business organization, labor organization and educational institution included in a consortium applying for a grant shall be permitted to participate in planning for the use of grant moneys.  No grant moneys shall be provided to a business employing workers represented by a labor organization without the written consent of both the business and the collective bargaining unit and, where no labor organization represents the employees, no grant shall be provided without the written consent of both the business and a labor organization, if any exists, which represents workers in the occupation for which the apprentices will be trained.  

   f.   Grants awarded pursuant to this section or section 6 or 7 of this act shall be awarded by the committee, in consultation with the council, based on the committee's determination of which applying consortia are most likely to successfully create permanent new apprenticeship programs in occupations or industries which do not currently have apprenticeship programs in this State or are most likely to successfully create linkage programs for new or existing apprenticeship programs in compliance with the requirements of this act.  When considering applications for grants made pursuant to this section or section 6 or 7 of this act, the committee shall give priority to any applicant which made a valid application to the Department of Education for a Youth Apprenticeship grant prior to June 15, 1993.  The committee, the Department of Labor and the Department of Education shall provide assistance to the applicant in making whatever modifications are necessary to bring the application into compliance with the provisions of this act.  If the occupation for which training was to be provided under the Youth Apprenticeship grant application is not an occupation which currently has an apprenticeship program in this State, the committee, the Department of Labor and the Department of Education shall assist the applicant in modifying the application so that it provides for the creation of a new apprenticeship program.  

   g.   Except that a grant to establish linkage programs pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of this act for an existing apprenticeship program which shall provide funding only for the linkage programs, each grant to a consortium shall include subgrants to each of the following consortium participants that seeks a subgrant:  

   (1)  A subgrant to each participating employer to pay costs to the employer during the term of the grant related to the establishment or operation of the apprenticeship program and any associated linkage program established pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of this act, except for the wages of apprentices or student learners, which shall be paid entirely by the employer. The costs paid by the subgrant may include, but are not limited to: employer costs of developing curriculum and occupation skill standards; employer costs of providing skilled workers as job coaches and mentors or other employer-sponsored services for apprentices or student learners, including tuition for classes at the option of the employer when not available from other sources; and other employer costs in establishing and operating related linkage programs pursuant to section 6 or 7 of this act, including any employer involvement in counseling and recruitment efforts.  These subgrants shall be administered by the committee and shall be financed by moneys appropriated to the partnership pursuant to this act.  A subgrant may also be provided pursuant to this paragraph to a participating labor organization which incurs costs related to the grant;  

   (2)  A subgrant to each participating educational institution providing classroom training and education for apprentices under the grant to pay costs to the institution during the term of the grant related to the establishment or operation of the apprenticeship program, which may include, but are not limited to, staff and staff development costs, costs of developing curriculum and occupational skill standards, costs of child care for apprentices who are parents, and costs related to increased responsibilities for apprenticeship coordinators when not available from other sources. These subgrants shall be financed by moneys appropriated to the partnership pursuant to this act and shall be administered by the committee in consultation with the Chancellor of Higher Education, and the committee is authorized to require such matching funds from the institution as the committee deems appropriate;  

   (3)  A subgrant to each educational institution which participates in developing or operating any linkage program established pursuant to section 6 of this act to pay costs to the institution during the term of the grant related to the linkage program which may include, but are not limited to, staff and staff development costs, costs of developing curriculum and occupational skill standards, costs of child care for student learners or apprentices who are parents, and costs related to increased responsibilities for apprenticeship coordinators when not available from other sources.  These subgrants shall be financed by moneys appropriated to the partnership pursuant to this act and shall be administered by the committee, which is authorized to require such matching funds from the institution as the committee deems appropriate; and  

   (4)  A subgrant to each educational institution which participates in developing or operating any linkage program established pursuant to section 7 of this act to pay costs to the institution during the term of the grant related to the linkage program.  These subgrants shall be financed by moneys appropriated to the partnership pursuant to this act and shall be administered by the committee in consultation with the Chancellor of Higher Education, and the committee is authorized to require such matching funds from the institution as the committee deems appropriate.  

   L.1993,c.268,s.5.  

34:15E-6.    School-to-apprenticeship linkage program, establishment.  
	6. a. Each consortium which is awarded a grant from the partnership shall establish a pre-apprenticeship, or school-to-apprenticeship linkage program, for high school students, which shall include the development of the curriculum which will best prepare students to qualify for apprenticeships established under the grant, thus encouraging high school completion and increasing graduation rates.  Grants may also be provided to a consortium pursuant to this section to create new pre-apprenticeship, or linkage, programs for existing apprenticeship programs.  The pre-apprenticeship, or linkage program may include workplace experience, but not in violation of applicable child labor standards, and shall not involve any reduction of the classroom time of a participating student or of academic standards, other than reductions in classroom time mutually agreed to by all of the entities participating in the consortium pursuant to subsection a. of section 5 of P.L.1993, c.268 (C.34:15E-5).  The provisions of this section shall not be construed as prohibiting nontraditional scheduling of classroom time.  If the pre-apprenticeship, or school-to-apprenticeship linkage, program includes a workplace experience component:
 
	(1) The student shall be regarded as a student learner entitled to all of the benefits and services provided to student learners pursuant to P.L.1993, c.268 (C.34:15E-1 et seq.);
 
	(2) The workplace experience component of the student learner shall be regarded as a cooperative vocational experience subject to all applicable standards promulgated by the State Department of Education and the State Department of Labor and Workforce Development for cooperative vocational experiences, including requirements that work is under the direct supervision of a qualified person, and that the student learner be provided an individualized training plan outlining the tasks to be performed and the progression of learning experiences, and the safety instruction and occupational competencies to be learned; and
 
	(3) Employers participating in the consortium who hire student learners shall do so based on recommendations of the students' educational institutions which give consideration to the overall academic achievement of the students.
 
	To the greatest extent permitted by federal law, a participating employer shall also consider the overall academic achievement of students when selecting apprentices under the grant.
 
	b.	Each pre-apprenticeship, or school-to-apprenticeship, linkage program shall include counseling, recruitment, training in life skills, including communication, working in teams, and meeting employer expectations, training in needed basic math and literacy skills, including one-to-one tutoring, and supportive services, including child care for student learners who are parents and transportation assistance, and other services as are needed to maximize program participation by women, minority-group members, and individuals with disabilities, who are economically disadvantaged individuals, have barriers to employment, or both.  The objectives of these services shall include increasing the success of women in nontraditional employment and encouraging greater academic achievement among at-risk and other students.
 
	c.	Employers and other participants in a consortium, when selecting applicants to participate in their apprenticeship programs, shall give first priority to applicants who have successfully completed the pre-apprenticeship programs and have met all other requirements for entering the apprenticeship programs.
 
	d.	Each grant awarded to a consortium shall provide that not less than 25% of the grant funds be used for a pre-apprenticeship, or school-to-apprenticeship, linkage program established pursuant to this section.

   L.1993,c.268,s.6; 2022, c.89, s.1.

34:15E-7.    Program link to post-secondary education options established 
    7.   Each consortium which is awarded a grant from the partnership shall establish a program which provides the option of linkages from apprenticeship to subsequent post-secondary education.  Grants may also be provided to consortiums pursuant to this section to create new linkage programs for existing apprenticeship programs.  Each participating educational institution in a consortium which is awarded a grant shall develop or modify the classroom curriculum for apprentices to make the classroom training applicable toward associate and baccalaureate degrees.  In addition, participating educational institutions shall develop, to the extent feasible, articulation in post-secondary programs which provides participating apprentices with options to progress from apprenticeable trades to professional occupations.  The purpose of the program is to enhance the prestige of education for skilled technical work by providing front-line workers with opportunities for lifelong vocationally-relevant learning and advancement.  

   L.1993,c.268,s.7.  

34:15E-7.1  Guidelines to encourage high school students to participate in apprenticeship training.
 	1.	The Commissioner of Education, in consultation with the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, shall develop guidelines for use by high school counselors to coordinate services with representatives of the New Jersey State Building and Construction Trades Council for purposes of encouraging student participation in apprenticeships and raising awareness of apprenticeship opportunities.  The Commissioner of Education shall make the guidelines available on the Department of Education's website and shall update the information annually.
 
	L.2019, c.96.

34:15F-1  Findings, declarations relative to mentoring programs.
	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that there are a significant number of students in New Jersey who are economically and socially disadvantaged and who are alienated from the community and school. These students are at-risk of substance use disorder, teen pregnancy or other behavioral problems that inhibit academic achievement and successful integration into society.
 
	The Legislature further finds that mentoring programs that develop relationships between professionally trained and committed adult volunteers and at-risk students, for the purpose of providing support, counseling, reinforcement and constructive examples, create an environment in which students can achieve their full academic potential and which fosters their future success as productive citizens of the State.

	L.1999, c.279, s.1; amended 2023, c.177, s.116.

34:15F-2  Definitions relative to mentoring programs.
 
	2.	As used in this act:

	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development;
 
	"Department" means the Department of Labor and Workforce Development;
 
	"Educational foundation" means a nonprofit organization that may be created by or on behalf of a board of education or a nonprofit organization that has experience in the establishment of mentoring programs or the provision of services to at-risk youth;
 
	"Joint committee" means the Joint Committee on Mentoring;
 
	"Mentor" means a volunteer from the community who agrees to participate in a mentoring program; 
 
	"Program" means the At-Risk Youth Mentoring Program established by this act; and
 
	"SDA district" means an SDA district as defined pursuant to section 3 of P.L.2000, c.72 (C.18A:7G-3).
 
	L.1999, c.279, s.2; amended 2004, c.61, s.2; 2007, c.260, s.79.

34:15F-3  At-Risk Youth Mentoring Program.
 
 	3.	There is established in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development an At-Risk Youth Mentoring Program to be administered by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development pursuant to the provisions of this act.  The commissioner shall consult with the Department of Human Services, the Department of Children and Families, and the Department of Education and other appropriate State agencies regarding the development, operation and administration of the program.  The commissioner shall also consult with the Community Agencies Corporation of New Jersey and other public and private nonprofit organizations providing youth mentoring services.  The program shall provide for the training of volunteer mentors through local collaborative partnerships between the school district, the educational foundation and other community based organizations and for the assignment of mentors to at-risk students enrolled within a participating school district.  The program shall also provide for collaboration with public and private organizations that provide comprehensive health, employment, and social services to youth. The purpose of the program shall be to enable at-risk students to develop a relationship with a caring and responsible adult to provide the personal and emotional support necessary for school success and future successful functioning in society.
 
	L.1999, c.279, s.3; amended 2006, c.47, s.182.

34:15F-4  "At-Risk Youth Mentoring Grant Fund."

	4.	There is established within the Department of Labor a separate grant fund to be known as the "At-Risk Youth Mentoring Grant Fund."  An educational foundation shall be eligible to apply for a grant of a minimum of $25,000 up to a maximum of $50,000, depending on the size of the program, in order to pay the expenses associated with the operation and maintenance of a mentoring program.  During the first year of implementation of the program, only educational foundations operating in Abbott districts shall be eligible to receive a grant.

	L.1999,c.279,s.4.

34:15F-5  Application for grant.

	5.	An educational foundation shall submit an application for a grant to the commissioner for his review.  The application shall provide the following information: the name of the educational foundation; the name of the school district that created or authorized the creation of the foundation if applicable; the name of the coordinating teacher;  a description of the activities of the program; the number and grade level of the students who will participate in the program; the process of student referral to the program; the selection criteria for student participants, which shall include the identification of students who are not successfully meeting the core curriculum content standards and district standards of behavior; the procedure for the identification and selection of adult mentors; an implementation schedule; a plan for supervision of the program; a training plan; a plan for quality assurance and evaluation;and the process which will be utilized to match students to mentors.  An educational foundation shall also submit with its application a letter of commitment defining agreements to provide mentoring services for at-risk public school students in its respective school district.  Preference may be given to applicants that have prior experience in the establishment and oversight of mentoring programs and the provision of services to at-risk youth.

	L.1999,c.279,s.5.

34:15F-6  Participation of mentor; student schedules.

	6. a. Under the program each mentor shall commit to participate in the program for a minimum of one calendar year.  Each student shall meet with a mentor one day per week for at least one hour unless the district determines that some other schedule would be of greater benefit to the student.  Any meeting between the mentor and the student may also occur off school property or before or after school hours for the purpose of engaging in enrichment activities.

	b.	A program shall not serve less than 25 students nor exceed 50 students, unless exceeding such a limit is approved by the commissioner. 

	L.1999,c.279,s.6.

34:15F-7  Criminal history record check for mentor.

	7.	Notwithstanding any provision of P.L.1986, c.116 (C.18A:6-7.1 et seq.) to the contrary, a mentor shall undergo a criminal history record check in accordance with the procedures established in that act, except that the educational foundation shall bear the cost of the check, including all costs for administering and providing the check.

	L.1999,c.279,s.7.

34:15F-8  Joint Committee on Mentoring.

	8.	There is created a joint legislative committee to be known as the Joint Committee on Mentoring.  The joint committee shall be comprised of 12 members, six members from each House.  The President of the Senate and the Minority Leader of the Senate shall each appoint three members, and the Speaker of the General Assembly and the Minority Leader of the General Assembly shall each appoint three members. 


	L.1999,c.279,s.8.

34:15F-9  Annual report on progress of mentoring program; report to Governor, Legislature after three years.

	9. a. An educational foundation shall submit an annual report on the progress of its mentoring program to the department and to the joint committee on or before May 1 of each year.  The report shall include information concerning the number of mentors and students participating in the program, the approximate number of hours each mentor spent with the students over the course of the preceding year, the utilization of grant funds, and a general description of activities conducted pursuant to the program.  The department may establish additional reporting requirements as necessary.

	b.	On or before January 1 of the third year of the program, the commissioner shall report to the Governor, the joint committee, the President of the Senate, the Speaker of the General Assembly, and the Minority Leaders of the Senate and the General Assembly on the effectiveness and implementation of the program.  The report shall include a recommendation on whether the program should be continued.  If the Legislature does not act on the recommendation by the adoption of a concurrent resolution within 60 days of the commissioner's submission of the report, then the commissioner's recommendation regarding continuation of the program shall take effect following the expiration of the third year of the program.

	L.1999,c.279,s.9.

34:15F-11  Rules, regulations.

	11. The Department of Labor shall adopt, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), the rules and regulations necessary to carry out the provisions of this act.

	L. 1999, c.279, s.11.

34:15F-12  Youth Employment and After School Incentive Pilot Program.
	1. a. There is established in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development a Youth Employment and After School Incentive Pilot Program which shall be administered by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, pursuant to the provisions of P.L.2001, c.446 (C.34:15F-12 et seq.).  The program shall provide for employment opportunities for disadvantaged youth with private and nonprofit employers.  The purpose of the program shall be to enable disadvantaged youth to acquire job knowledge and skills and an understanding of the linkage between the skills, behaviors, and attitudes necessary to function as an adult in the workplace.
 
	As used in P.L.2001, c.446 (C.34:15F-12 et seq.), "disadvantaged youth" means public and nonpublic school students as well as youth who are not students who reside in municipalities where both the rates of unemployment and violent crime significantly exceed the Statewide rates of unemployment and violent crime by percentages which shall be designated by the commissioner.  The term shall include youth in these municipalities who are participating in a program of aftercare following their release from juvenile detention or community facilities.  
 
	b.	There is established in, but not of, the Department of Labor and Workforce Development the Disadvantaged Youth Employment Opportunities Council.  Notwithstanding the allocation of the council to the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, the council shall directly report to the Chairperson of the State Employment and Training Commission established by section 5 of P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-2).  The council shall consist of 18 members: the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, the Commissioner of Education, the Executive Director of the New Jersey Commission on Higher Education, the Chief Executive Officer and Secretary of the New Jersey Commerce, Economic Growth and Tourism Commission, the Secretary of State and the Executive Director of the Youth Justice Commission, or their designees, who shall serve ex officio and as nonvoting members; and 12 public members appointed by the Governor, the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the General Assembly.  The Governor shall appoint two religious leaders and two representatives of education organizations.  The President of the Senate and the Speaker of the Assembly shall each appoint a leader of the business community, a labor leader, a representative of a county vocational-technical school, and a person representing organizations that have expertise serving the needs of disadvantaged youth.  The public members shall serve for terms of three years, may be reappointed and may serve until a successor has been appointed.  Of the public members first appointed, six shall be appointed for terms of three years, and six shall be appointed for terms of two years.  A vacancy in the membership, occurring other than by expiration of a term, shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment, but for the unexpired term only.  The members shall serve without compensation, but the council may, within the limits of funds appropriated or otherwise made available to it, reimburse members for actual expenses necessarily incurred in the discharge of their official duties.
 
	The council shall organize as soon as its members are appointed and shall select a chairman and vice-chairman from among its members and may select a secretary, who need not be a member of the council.  The council shall meet monthly, and at such other times as may be necessary.
 
	The council may employ, prescribe the duties and fix and pay the compensation of such persons it may deem necessary to carry out the duties of the council within the limits of available appropriations.  
 
	It shall be the duty of the council to:  
 
	(1)	Develop a master plan to increase employment opportunities for disadvantaged youth; 
 
	(2)	Enlist the commitment of the State's business leadership to provide employment opportunities for disadvantaged youth; 
 
	(3)	Enlist the support of the State's key unions which operate apprenticeship and similar programs; 
 
	(4)	Develop proposals for innovative efforts to assist economically disadvantaged youth to enroll in and successfully complete employment programs; 
 
	(5)	Involve all sectors of the community, including high level representatives of business, youth-serving agencies, foundations, local school systems, the communications media, and the religious community in an effort to promote and coordinate employment opportunities for disadvantaged youth; and 
 
	(6)	In conjunction with the Department of Labor and Workforce Development and the Commerce, Economic Growth and Tourism Commission, seek to identify and maximize any available federal funding for the purpose of enhancing employment opportunities provided under P.L.2001, c.446 (C.34:15F-12 et seq.).
 
	The council shall be entitled to call to its assistance and avail itself of the services of such employees of any State, county or municipal department, board, bureau, commission, or agency as it may require and as may be available to it for these purposes.  
 
	The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, in consultation with the State Employment and Training Commission and the council, may promulgate rules and regulations necessary to effectuate the purposes of P.L.2001, c.446 (C.34:15F-12 et seq.).
 
	L.2001, c.446, s.1; amended 2007, c.189, s.1; 2025, c.35, s.56.

34:15F-13  Development, administration of program.
	2. a. In cooperation with the Disadvantaged Youth Employment Opportunities Council established in section 1 of P.L.2001, c.446 (C.34:15F-12), the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, in consultation with the State Employment and Training Commission shall develop and administer the employment program established under this act.  The commissioner shall, to the greatest extent feasible, attempt to achieve a balance of enrolled disadvantaged youth from the northern, central, and southern parts of the State.  
 
	b.	The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, in consultation with the State Employment and Training Commission, the Department of Education, the Youth Justice Commission, and the council, shall develop procedures relating to the program referral process; establish the selection criteria for participants which shall include the identification of local disadvantaged youths assessed by local law enforcement and juvenile corrections authorities as being at risk of gang membership or involvement or reinvolvement in the criminal justice system and students who are not meeting minimal district standards of behavior and academic achievement; provide a listing of employers who have agreed to participate in the program; and establish the process which will be utilized for matching disadvantaged youth to employment opportunities that will enhance the self-esteem and assimilation of life skills necessary for productive functioning in the school setting and society.
 
	L.2001, c.446, s.2; amended 2007, c.189, s.2; 2025, c.35, s.57.

34:15F-14  Maximum hours of employment for youths.
  
	3. a. The State's limitations on hours of employment for child labor shall govern the maximum hours of employment for youths employed through the program.  For participation in the employment program, the youth shall receive from the employer compensation of not less than the minimum wage rate pursuant to section 5 of P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a4).  
 
	b.	The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, in conjunction with the State Employment and Training Commission and the council, shall endeavor to work with the Secretary of State, the Commissioner of Education, major Statewide education organizations, and nonprofit organizations providing specialized services to youth to publicize the opportunities available under the program and promote the voluntary participation therein of school districts and students.  
 
	L.2001, c.446, s.3; amended 2007, c.189, s.3.

34:15F-15  Plan to collect data on effectiveness of program.
 
 	4. a. The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall implement a plan to collect data on the effectiveness of the program in meeting the needs and conditions of disadvantaged youths which place them at risk of academic or social failure or both.  The plan shall include a system to track participants to determine if they successfully completed the school year and whether such students and other youth participants succeed in making productive contributions to their communities.
 
	b.	Within two years following the effective date of P.L.2001, c.446 (C.34:15F-12 et seq.), the Commissioners of Labor and Workforce Development and Education, in concert with the State Employment and Training Commission and the council established in section 1 of P.L.2001, c.446 (C.34:15F-12), shall submit to the Governor and the Legislature an evaluation of the Youth Employment and After School Incentive Pilot Program and recommendations to the Legislature that will enable them to better coordinate and improve the effectiveness of their efforts.
 
	L.2001, c.446, s.4; amended 2007, c.189, s.4.

34:15F-16  Eligibility for tax credit allotments.

	5.	Employers participating in the employment program established under this act shall be eligible for the tax credit allotments authorized under the provisions of P.L.    , c.    (C.    ) (now pending before the Legislature as Assembly Bill No.1918 of 2000).

	L.2001,c.446,s.5.

34:15F-17  Study, report on providing students with information and employment in high-demand industries.
  
	1.	The Commissioner of Education and the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall undertake a review of all existing efforts of their respective departments that provide middle and high school students with information concerning employment in high-demand industries and shall report directly to the Governor no later than three months after the effective date of this act on whether those efforts provide sufficient career guidance to such students.
 
	L.2013,c .256, s.1.

34:16-20  Definitions.
 	1.	As used in this chapter:

	"Division" means the Division of Vocational Rehabilitation Services in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, for the rehabilitation of persons with disabilities.
 
	"Maintenance" means payments to cover the basic living expenses of a person with a disability, such as: food, shelter, clothing, health maintenance, and other subsistence expenses essential to achievement of the individual's vocational rehabilitation or independent living rehabilitation objective.
 
	"Individual with a disability" means, for the purpose of vocational rehabilitation services, any individual who has a physical or mental disability which constitutes a substantial impediment to employment, but which is of such a nature that vocational rehabilitation services may reasonably be expected to give the individual suitable skills to achieve gainful employment outcomes.
 
	"Individual with a severe disability" means, for the purpose of independent living rehabilitation services, an individual who has a physical or mental disability, as defined by rules and regulations of the division, as to require institutional care or nursing home care or attendance in the individual's household continuously or for a substantial portion of the time, but who reasonably can be expected as a result of independent living rehabilitation services to achieve an independent living status.
 
	"Independent living status" means that degree of independence for individuals with severe disabilities which will eliminate the need for institutional care or nursing home care or eliminate or substantially reduce the need for an attendant's care at home and which may in many instances make such persons capable of achieving vocational rehabilitation.
 
	"Prosthetic device" means any appliance designed to support or take the place of a part of the body, or to increase the acuity of a sensory organ.
 
	"Vocational rehabilitation services" means diagnostic and related services (including transportation) incidental to the determination of eligibility for and the nature and scope of services to be provided; training, books, and training material, including necessary small tools, such prosthetic devices as are essential to obtaining or retaining employment, occupational licenses, guidance and placement services for individuals with disabilities; and in the case of an individual found to require financial assistance with respect to these services, after full consideration of the individual's eligibility for any similar benefit by way of pension, compensation, and insurance, any other goods and services necessary to give the individual suitable skills to achieve gainful employment outcomes (including gainful homebound work), including but not limited to the following physical rehabilitation and other goods and services:
 
	(1)	Corrective surgery or therapeutic treatment to correct or improve a physical or mental condition which constitutes a substantial impediment to employment;
 
	(2)	Necessary hospitalization in connection with surgery or treatment specified in paragraph (1);
 
	(3)	Maintenance, not exceeding the estimated cost of subsistence, during rehabilitation;
 
	(4)	Tools, equipment, initial stocks, and supplies, including equipment and initial stocks and supplies for vending stands;
 
	(5)	Transportation (except where necessary in connection with determination of eligibility or nature and scope of services);
 
	(6)	Acquisition of vending stands or other equipment, and initial stocks and supplies for small business enterprises conducted by individuals with severe disabilities under the supervision of the State agency;
 
	(7)	The establishment of public and other nonprofit rehabilitation facilities to provide services for individuals with disabilities and the establishment of public and other nonprofit workshops for individuals with severe disabilities.
 
	"Vocational rehabilitation services" (for purposes of the determination of rehabilitation potential) also means: diagnosis and related services (including transportation), training, books, and training material, including necessary small tools, prosthetic devices, and guidance, which are provided to an individual who has a physical or mental disability which constitutes a substantial impediment to employment, during the period specified to be necessary for and which are provided for the purpose of ascertaining whether it may be reasonably expected that the individual will be able to achieve gainful employment through the provision of goods and services described in the preceding paragraph; and in the case of any such individual found to require financial assistance with respect thereto, after full consideration of the individual's eligibility for any similar benefit by way of pension, compensation, and insurance, any other goods and services necessary to the determination of a rehabilitation potential, including but not limited to physical rehabilitation and other goods and services.
 
	"Independent living rehabilitation service" means counseling, diagnostic, and related services (including transportation) provided to individuals with severe disabilities, and needed prosthetic appliances, books training materials, and other devices which will contribute to independent living, training in the use of these devices, and in the case of any individual found to require financial assistance with respect thereto, after full consideration of the individual's eligibility for any similar benefits by way of pension, compensation, and insurance, such term shall include but shall not be limited to the following: (1) physical rehabilitation and related services, including corrective surgery, therapeutic treatment, and hospitalization; (2) maintenance needed to assure the availability of such services, not exceeding the estimated cost of subsistence; (3) such rehabilitation services necessary for the achievement of independent living status.
 
	"Rehabilitation facility" means a facility operated for the primary purpose of assisting in the vocational rehabilitation and independent living rehabilitation of individuals with disabilities and individuals with severe disabilities, (1) which provides one or more of the following types of service: testing, fitting, or training in the use of prosthetic devices; prevocational or conditioning therapy; physical or occupational therapy, adjustment training, evaluation, treatment, or control of disabilities; or (2) through which is provided an integrated program of medical, psychological, social and vocational evaluation and services under competent professional supervision; provided, that the major portion of such evaluation and service is furnished within the facility, and that all medical and related health services are prescribed by, or under the formal supervision of, persons licensed to practice medicine or surgery in the State.
 
	"Workshop" means a place where any manufacture or handiwork is carried on, and which is operated for the primary purpose of providing gainful employment to individuals with disabilities (1) as an interim step in the rehabilitation process for those who cannot be readily absorbed in the competitive labor market; or (2) during such time as employment opportunities for individuals with disabilities in the competitive labor market do not exist.
 
	"Gainful employment" includes employment in the competitive labor market; practice of a profession; self-employment; homemaking, farm, or family work (including work for which payment is in kind rather than cash); sheltered employment; and home industries or other homebound work of a gainful nature.
 
	L.1955, c.64, s.1; amended 1961, c.20, s.1; 1967, c.123, s.1; 1969, c.91, s.1; 2017, c.131, s.133.

34:16-21.  Rehabilitation commission;  membership
    There is hereby established the Rehabilitation Commission which is placed in  the Department of Labor and Industry for housekeeping purposes. The commission  is hereby designated as the sole State agency to administer and supervise  vocational rehabilitation and independent living rehabilitation authorized by  this chapter.  The commission shall consist of the Commissioner of Labor and  Industry, the Commissioner of Education, the Commissioner of the Department of  Institutions and Agencies, the Commissioner of Health, ex officio, or such  deputy as any of them respectfully designate, and 8 members appointed by the  Governor.

    Of the 8 members so appointed by the Governor, one and only one shall be a person who by reason of vocation, activities and affiliations can be considered  as a representative of the employers of labor of the State.  One member, and  only one, shall be a person who by reason of vocation, activities and  affiliations can be considered as a representative of organized labor of the  State.  Two members, one of whom shall be a woman, shall be chosen because of  their special interest in and knowledge of the field of social welfare.

     L.1955, c. 64, p. 213, s. 2.  Amended by L.1961, c. 20, s. 2;  L.1967, c. 123,  s. 2, eff. June 21, 1967.

34:16-22.  Chairman
    The chairman of the commission shall be the Commissioner of Labor and Industry of the State of New Jersey.

     L.1955, c. 64, p. 213, s. 3.

34:16-23.  Terms of office;  vacancies
    Of the members of the commission appointed by the Governor, the first members shall be appointed, 3 for 1 year, 3 for 2 years, 2 for 3 years, and their successors shall be appointed for terms of 3 years.  The members so appointed shall hold over until their respective successors are appointed and shall qualify.  Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms only.

     L.1955, c. 64, p. 213, s. 4.

34:16-24.  Compensation;  expenses
    The members of the commission shall serve without pay but actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties shall be paid out of funds appropriated for the purposes of the commission.

     L.1955, c. 64, p. 213, s. 5.

34:16-25.  Removal of members
    The Governor may at any time remove for inefficiency or neglect of duty any  member of the commission appointed by him, charges in writing having been preferred and sustained after public hearing.

     L.1955, c. 64, p. 213, s. 6.

34:16-26.  Report to Governor;  recommendations
    The commission shall annually make report to the Governor of its work in carrying out the provisions of this chapter and shall submit to him its recommendations concerning legislation and a statement of the sum necessary for  such work for the ensuing year.

     L.1955, c. 64, p. 214, s. 7.

34:16-27  Powers of division.
	8.	The division shall be authorized to:

	(a)	Adopt and promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of P.L.1955, c.64 (C.34:16-20 et seq.).
 
	(b)	Provide vocational rehabilitation and independent living rehabilitation services, directly or through public or private instrumentalities, to eligible individuals with disabilities without discrimination as to sex, race, color, creed, or national origin, except that the division shall not duplicate services provided for persons who are blind through the Commission for the Blind and Visually Impaired and persons who are deaf or hard of hearing through the New Jersey School for the Deaf, Katzenbach Campus, nor shall the division provide services for persons who in its judgment will not benefit from rehabilitation. In case vocational rehabilitation and independent living rehabilitation services cannot be provided to all eligible individuals with disabilities who apply for such services, the division shall provide, by regulation, the order to be followed in selecting those to whom such services will be provided.
 
	(c)	Construct or establish and operate rehabilitation facilities and workshops, which may include residential accommodations related to the rehabilitation of individuals with disabilities and make grants to public and other nonprofit organizations for such purposes.
 
	(d)	Establish and supervise the operation of vending stands and other small businesses established pursuant to P.L.1955, c.64 (C.34:16-20 et seq.) to be conducted by individuals with severe disabilities.
 
	(e)	Make studies, investigations, demonstrations, and reports, and provide training and instruction (including the establishment and maintenance of such research fellowships and traineeships with such stipends and allowances as may be deemed necessary) in matters relating to vocational rehabilitation and independent living rehabilitation.
 
	(f)	Enter into reciprocal agreements with other states to provide for the vocational rehabilitation and independent living rehabilitation of residents of the states concerned.
 
	(g)	Accept and use gifts made, by will or otherwise, for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Gifts made under such conditions as in the judgment of the division are proper and consistent with the provisions of this chapter, may be accepted, held, invested, reinvested, or used in accordance with the conditions, if any, of the gift.
 
	(h)	Take such action as it deems necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of P.L.1955, c.64 (C.34:16-20 et seq.).
 
	L.1955, c.64, s.8; amended 1961, c.20, s.3; 1967, c.123, s.3; 1969, c.91, s.2; 2007, c.39, s.4; 2017, c.131, s.134.

34:16-28.  Director;  employees and special assistants
    The commission shall appoint a director, who shall be its executive officer  and have primary responsibility for, and shall devote his full time to the  administration of the program, and who shall employ such staff and special  assistants as may be necessary to carry out the purposes and objects of this  chapter.  The chairman of the commission shall be the individual with whom the  director shall consult when the commission is not in session. Notwithstanding  the provisions of this act or any other law to the contrary, the director and  all employees and special assistants shall be appointed pursuant to the  provisions of Title 11, Civil Service, and shall continue to be subject  thereto.

     L.1955, c. 64, p. 215, s. 9.

34:16-29.  Cooperation with other agencies;  administration;  services and facilities
    The commission is also authorized:

    (a) To co-operate with the Federal Government in carrying out the purposes of any Federal statutes pertaining to vocational rehabilitation and independent  living rehabilitation and to adopt such methods of administration as are found  by the Federal Government to further the proper and efficient operation of  agreements or plans for vocational rehabilitation and independent living  rehabilitation and to comply with such conditions as may be necessary to secure  the full benefits of such Federal statutes.

    (b) To comply with conditions specified in Federal statutes which authorize  the use of Federal funds by the commission without matching State funds,  notwithstanding other sections of this statute.

    (c)  To co-operate with and utilize the services of the State agency or agencies administering the State's Public Assistance program, the Federal Bureau of Old-Age and Survivors' Insurance (Department of Health, Education and  Welfare), and other public and private agencies providing services related to  vocational rehabilitation and independent living rehabilitation, and with the  State system of public employment offices in the State, and shall make maximum  feasible utilization of the job placement and employment counseling services  and other services and facilities of such offices.

    (d)  To co-operate with and make grants to political subdivisions, other public and nonprofit organizations and agencies, for the construction of or for  the establishment of workshops and rehabilitation facilities, and in providing  vocational rehabilitation and independent living rehabilitation services to  utilize such facilities meeting the standards established by the commission.

    (e)  Upon designation by the Governor, to perform other related functions and services for the Federal Government, including making determinations of disability under Title II of the Federal Social Security Act.

     L.1955, c. 64, p. 215, s. 10.  Amended by L.1961, c. 20, p. 104, s. 4; L.1967, c. 123, s. 4, eff. June 21, 1967.

34:16-29.1.  Division of Vocational Rehabilitation Services administrators, duties  
    32.  The director or other chief administrative officer of the Division of Vocational Rehabilitation Services in the Department of Labor shall:  

   a.   cause copies of the voter registration forms and instructions provided for in subsections e. and f. of section 16 of P.L.1974, c.30 (C.19:31-6.4) and the declination form provided for in subsection b. of section 26 of P.L.1994, c.182 (C.19:31-6.11) to be distributed at each office thereof to each person appearing in person at the office to apply for services or assistance provided by the office or to seek a recertification, renewal or change of address relative to the assistance provided at such office.  An employee of the office shall inquire of every such person whether the person, if not already registered to vote from the place of his or her present residence, wishes to be so registered and shall inform the person that whether or not the applicant chooses to register will not affect the person's eligibility for those services.  The employee shall subsequently review the forms to determine whether or not the person wishes to register to vote.  If the person does not wish to register, the employee shall provide the person with any assistance necessary to complete the declination form and then inform the person that the form will be retained by the employee.  If the person wishes to register, the employee shall provide the person with any assistance necessary in completing the voter registration form; shall inform the applicant that the applicant may leave the completed form with the employee or mail it personally to the Secretary of State; and if the applicant chooses to leave the form, shall accept the completed form, stamp or otherwise mark the lower right hand corner of the document with the date on which it was so received, and forward it to the Secretary of State.  The employee shall provide to each applicant who does not decline to register to vote the same degree of assistance with regard to the completion of the voter registration form as is provided by the office with regard to the completion of its own forms, unless the applicant refuses such assistance;  

   b.   provide for the continuous supply of the forms and instructions specified in subsection a. of this section to each such office;  

   c.   provide the forms and instructions specified in subsection a. of this section in both the English and Spanish languages in those offices which are located in any county in which bilingual sample ballots must be provided pursuant to R.S.19:14-21, R.S.19:49-4 or section 2 of P.L.1965, c.29 (C.19:23-22.4);  

   d.   provide for the collection of completed voter registration forms by any employee of the office and for the transmittal of the forms to the Secretary of State;  

   e.   provide that the forms, instructions and assistance specified in subsection a. of this section shall be provided to any person with a disability who receives assistance or services at that person's home from an employee of the office;  

   f.   inform each employee of the office who assists in registering a person to vote that that employee shall not:  

   (1)  seek to influence an applicant's political preference or party registration;  

   (2)  display any such political preference or party allegiance;

  

   (3)  make any statement to an applicant or take any action the purpose or effect of which is to discourage the applicant from registering to vote; or  

   (4)  make any statement to an applicant or take any action the purpose or effect of which is to lead the applicant to believe that a decision to register or not to register has any bearing on the availability of services or benefits; and  

   g.   make certain that no information relating to a declination to register to vote by an individual in connection with any type of application for service made by that individual at any office is used for any purpose other than voter registration.  

   L.1994,c.182,s.32.  

34:16-30.  State treasurer as custodian of funds
    The State Treasurer is hereby designated as the custodian of all funds received from the Federal Government for the purpose of carrying out any Federal statutes pertaining to vocational rehabilitation and independent living  rehabilitation or any agreement authorized by this chapter.  The State Treasurer shall make disbursements from such funds and from all State funds available for vocational rehabilitation and independent living rehabilitation purposes upon certification by the commission.

     L.1955, c. 64, p. 216, s. 11.  Amended by L.1961, c. 20, p. 104, s. 5.

34:16-31.  Hearings
    Any individual applying for or receiving vocational rehabilitation or independent living rehabilitation who is aggrieved by any action or inaction of  the commission shall be entitled in accordance with regulations to a hearing by  the commission.

     L.1955, c. 64, p. 216, s. 12.  Amended by L.1961, c. 20, p. 105, s. 6.

34:16-32.  Prohibited activities
    No officer or employee engaged in the administration of the vocational rehabilitation and independent living rehabilitation programs shall use his official authority to influence or permit the use of the vocational rehabilitation and independent living rehabilitation programs for the purpose of interfering with an election or affecting the results thereof or for any partisan political purpose.  No such officer or employee shall solicit or receive, nor shall any officer or employee be obliged to contribute or render, any service, assistance, subscription, assessment, or contribution for any political purpose.  Any officer or employee violating this provision shall be subject to discharge or suspension.

     L.1955, c. 64, p. 216, s. 13.  Amended by L.1961, c. 20, p. 105, s. 7.

34:16-33.  Confidential character of records
    All records relating to the receipt of or application for vocational rehabilitation or independent living rehabilitation services shall be confidential and shall not be published or open to public inspection.  No member, officer or employee of the commission shall, except for purposes directly connected with the administration of the vocational rehabilitation or independent living rehabilitation programs, and in accordance with regulations,  solicit, disclose, receive or make use of, or authorize, knowingly permit,  participate in, or acquiesce in the use of any list of, or names of, or any  information concerning persons applying for or receiving vocational  rehabilitation or independent living rehabilitation, directly or indirectly  derived from the records, papers, files, or communications of the State or  subdivisions or agencies thereof, or acquired in the course of the performance  of official duties.  Any such act on the part of a member, officer or employee  of the commission shall be grounds for dismissal by the Governor as to members  and as to officers and employees, in accordance with the provisions of Title  11, Civil Service, of the Revised Statutes and of rules and regulations issued  pursuant thereto.

     L.1955, c. 64, p. 217, s. 14.  Amended by L.1961, c. 20, p. 105, s. 8.

34:16-34.  Amendment or repeal of act
    The Legislature reserves the right to amend or repeal all or any part of this act at any time;  and there shall be no vested private right of any kind against such amendment or repeal.  All the rights, privileges, or immunities conferred by this act or by acts done pursuant thereto shall exist subject to the power of the Legislature to amend or repeal this act at any time.

     L.1955, c. 64, p. 217, s. 15.

34:16-35.  Severability
    If any provision of this act or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the act and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

     L.1955, c. 64, p. 217, s. 16.

34:16-36.  Liberal construction
    The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed in order that its purposes and objects may be fully effectuated.

     L.1955, c. 64, p. 217, s. 17.

34:16-37.  Repeals
    Sections 34:16-1, 34:16-2, 34:16-3, 34:16-4, 34:16-5, 34:16-6, 34:16-7, 34:16-8, 34:16-9, 34:16-10, 34:16-11, 34:16-12, 34:16-13, 34:16-14, 34:16-15, 34:16-16, 34:16-17, 34:16-18, 34:16-19, 18:17-6, 18:17-7, 18:17-8, and 18:17-9 of the Revised Statutes and  "An act authorizing the New Jersey Rehabilitation Commission to appoint therein special examiners to serve tuberculous persons," approved May 24, 1941 (P.L.1941, c. 155), and section 22 of the  "Department of  Labor and Industry Act of 1948," approved October 21, 1948 (P.L.1948, c. 446),  are repealed.

     L.1955, c. 64, p. 218, s. 18.

34:16-38.  Short title
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the  "Vocational Rehabilitation  Act of 1955."

     L.1955, c. 64, p. 218, s. 19.

34:16-39.  Short title
    This act shall be known and cited as the  "Sheltered Workshop Act of 1971."

     L.1971, c. 272, s. 1.

34:16-40  Definitions.
 	2.	As used in P.L.1971, c.272 (C.34:16-39 et seq.):

	a.	"Sheltered workshop" means an occupation oriented facility operated by a nonprofit agency, public or private, which except for its staff, employs only  persons with disabilities;
 
	b.	"Division" means the Division of Vocational Rehabilitation Services in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development;
 
	c.	"Commission" means the New Jersey Commission for the Blind and Visually Impaired in the Department of Human Services;
 
	d.	"Extended employee" means a person with a severe disability who meets the following requirements:  (1) shall have completed a prescribed workshop program; (2) shall have been found, due to the nature and severity of the person's disability to be incapable of competing in the open or customary labor market; and (3) shall have been certified as being an extended employee by the staff of the division or the commission; or (4) shall have been certified by the division or the commission as an extended employee qualified to perform industrial homework under the supervision of a sheltered workshop;
 
	e.	"Extended employment program" means a program designed for those persons with disabilities whose disabilities make sheltered employment in a sheltered workshop or in performance of industrial homework under the supervision of a sheltered workshop, after completion of a certified program of vocational evaluation and training the only suitable form of employment, or for those persons with severe disabilities who were not eligible for vocational rehabilitation services under laws and regulations in effect at the date of enactment of this act and who could benefit from the provisions of this act.
 
	L.1971, c.272, s.2; amended 1973, c.45, s.1; 1979, c.335, s.1; 2017, c.131, s.135.

34:16-41.  Programs of vocational rehabilitation or extended employment
    The division shall administer a program of vocational rehabilitation to an extended employee and shall plan, institute, support, and administer a program of extended employment in, or under the supervision of a sheltered workshop provided for in this act.

     L.1971, c. 272, s. 3.  Amended by L.1973, c. 45, s. 2, eff. Feb. 27, 1973; L.1979, c. 335, s. 2, eff. Jan. 21, 1980.

34:16-42  Contracts with approved sheltered workshops; amount payable.
	4.	The division is hereby authorized to contract with an approved sheltered workshop for the furnishing of extended employment programs to persons with severe disabilities when it shall appear to the satisfaction of the division, or upon certification to the division by the commission, that a person with a severe disability could reasonably be expected to benefit from, or reasonably requires, extended rehabilitation services.  The division is authorized to contract for the payment of a sum for each person with a severe disability not exceeding the amount appropriated for the purposes of P.L.1971, c.272 (C.34:16-39 et seq.) toward the cost of providing an extended employment program pursuant to this act.
 
	L.1971, c.272, s.4; amended 1979, c.335, s.3; 2017, c.131, s.136.

34:16-43.  Authority of division and commission.
	5.	The division and the commission are hereby vested with the authority:

	a.	to determine the eligibility of persons with severe disabilities for the extended employment program in consultation with the shaltered workshops providing the program;

	b.	to establish standards of staffing, physical plant and services required for the operation of facilities of sheltered workshops furnishing services under P.L.1971, c.272 (C.34:16-39 e seq.) by contract with the State; and

	c.	to require an appropriate progress report on each individual participating in the extended employment program.

     	L.1971, c. 272, s. 5.  Amended by L.1979, c. 335; 2017, c.131, s.137.

34:16-43.  Determination of eligibility for extended employment program; standards for operation of sheltered workshop;  progress reports
    The division and the commission are hereby vested with the authority: a. to  determine the eligibility of severely handicapped persons for the extended employment program in consultation with the sheltered workshops providing the program;  b. to establish standards of staffing, physical plant and services required for the operation of facilities of sheltered workshops furnishing services under this act by contract with the State; and c. to require an appropriate progress report on each individual participating in the extended employment program.

     L.1971, c. 272, s. 5.  Amended by L.1979, c. 335, s. 4, eff. Jan. 21, 1980.

34:16-44.  Inapplicability of requirement for employer's permit relating to  ratio of employees in home work to those in factory for extended employment  program of sheltered workshop
    The provisions of P.L.1941, c. 308 (C. 34:6-136.1 et seq.) relating to the ratio of employees engaged in home work to those employed in a factory and the requirement for an employer's permit shall not apply to an extended employment program of a sheltered workshop.

     L.1973, c. 45, s. 3, eff. Feb. 27, 1973.

34:16-45  State policy relative to persons with disabilities.
 	1.	It is the policy of the State to assist persons with disabilities and organizations established to aid persons with disabilities in the sale of goods or articles which are the product of the labor of persons with disabilities by providing a means of authenticating the source of such goods and articles and by preventing misrepresentation as to items offered for sale as the product of persons with disabilities.
 
	L.1975, c.350, s.1; amended 2017, c.131, s.138.

34:16-46  Definitions.
 	2.	As used in this act:

	a.	"Person with a disability" means any individual who is unable to engage in any substantial gainful employment by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment which is of a long-continued or indefinite duration or which can be expected to result in death.
 
	b.	"Direct labor" means all work required for the preparation, processing, and assembling of goods or articles including the packaging and packing thereof, but not including time spent in the supervision, administration, inspection, and shipping of such operations, or in the production of component materials by other than persons with disabilities.
 
	L.1975, c.350, s.2; amended 2017, c.131, s.139.

34:16-47  Registration, authorization to identify goods, articles made by persons with disabilities.
	3.	To facilitate ready and authoritative identification of goods or articles made by persons with disabilities, any person with a disability and any public or private institution or agency, firm, association, or corporation engaged in the manufacture or distribution of goods or articles made by persons with disabilities shall apply to the division for registration and authorization to use an official imprint, stamp, symbol, or label, designed or approved by the division, to identify goods and articles as made by persons with disabilities. Nothing in P.L.1975, c.350 (C.34:16-45 et seq.) shall authorize the identification of goods or articles as made by persons with disabilities when the direct labor performed by persons with disabilities in connection therewith shall consist solely of the packaging or packing thereof as distinguished from the preparation, processing, or assembling of such goods or articles. The division shall investigate each application, under rules and regulations it shall adopt for the administration of P.L.1975, c.350 (C.34:16-45 et seq.), to assure that such person or organization is actually engaged in the manufacture or distribution of goods or articles made by persons with disabilities.  The division may register without investigation nonresident individuals and out-of-state agencies, firms, associations, or corporations upon proof that they are recognized and approved by the state of their residence or organized pursuant to a law of such state imposing requirements substantially similar to those prescribed pursuant to  P.L.1975, c.350 (C.34:16-45 et seq.).
 
	No fee shall be charged for registration of an individual person with a disability who manufactures and sells products of the person's own labor.  A fee of $25 shall be charged and collected for registration of any other person, firm, or corporation.  All registrations shall be valid for one year from date of issue.
 
	L.1975, c.350, s.3; amended 1979, c.335, s.5; 2017, c.131, s.140.

34:16-48  Sale of goods by persons with disabilities; identification.
 	4.	No goods or articles made in this or any other state may be displayed, advertised, solicited for sale by telephone, mail or otherwise, offered for sale, or sold in this State upon a representation that such goods or articles are made by persons with disabilities unless they are identified as such by label, imprint, stamp, or symbol and no such goods or articles may be so identified unless at least 75 percent of the total hours of direct labor of producing such goods or articles shall have been performed by one or more persons with a disability.
 
	L.1975, c.350, s.4; amended 2017, c.131, s.141.

34:16-49  Labels or stamps; contents.
 	5.	Any worker with a disability, or any public or private institution or agency, corporation, firm, or association, registered with the division pursuant to P.L.1975, c.350 (C.34:16-45 et seq.), engaged in the manufacture or distribution of articles of merchandise, made or manufactured by a person or persons with a disability, shall imprint or stamp upon such articles of merchandise or affix thereto labels containing the words, "made by a worker with a disability," to which shall be added the name of the manufacturer, the place of manufacture, and such other information as the division may prescribe.
 
	L.1975, c.350, s.5; amended 1979, c.335, s.6; 2017, c.131, s.142.

34:16-50  Violations.
	6.	Any person, firm, corporation, institution, or association who (a) shall use or employ an imprint, stamp, or symbol or label issued or approved by the division or an imitation thereof without having registered with the division, or (b) who shall directly or indirectly by any means indicate or tend to indicate or represent that the goods or articles were made by a person or persons with a disability when in fact such goods or articles were not so made, or (c) who shall directly or indirectly by any means indicate or tend to indicate or represent that the goods or articles were sold by or for the benefit of persons with disabilities when in fact such sale was not by or of substantial benefit to a person or persons with a disability is a disorderly person.
 
	L.1975, c.350, s.6; amended 1979, c.335, s.7; 2017, c.131, s.143.

34:16-51.  Findings, declarations 
     The Legislature finds and declares that many handicapped citizens enrolled in sheltered (extended) employment programs at sheltered workshops earn subminimum wages in a noncompetitive working environment and therefore require financial assistance so that they may meet their transportation costs.

    The Legislature further finds and declares that the Department of Labor through its Division of Vocational Rehabilitation Services, in conjunction with the Division of Developmental Disabilities in the Department of Human Services and the sheltered workshops of this State, should play a major role in defraying the costs of public transportation and paratransit expenses of handicapped citizens enrolled in sheltered (extended) employment programs at sheltered workshops. 

    L. 1987, c. 455, s. 1. 

34:16-52   Definitions.
 	2. As used in this act: 

	a.	"Division" means the Division of Vocational Rehabilitation Services in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development. 
 
	b.	"Citizen with a disability" means any individual who, by reason of illness, injury, age, congenital condition, or other permanent or temporary incapacity or disability, is unable without special facilities or special planning or design to utilize mass transportation facilities and services as effectively as persons who are not so affected. 
 
	c.	"Paratransit" means and includes any service, other than motorbus regular route service and charter services, including, but not limited to, dial-a-ride, nonregular route, jitney or community minibus, and shared-ride services such as vanpools, limousines, or taxicabs which are regularly available to the public. Paratransit shall not include limousine or taxicab service reserved for the private and exclusive use of individual passengers. 
 
	d.	"Public transportation" means all rail passenger service operated by the New Jersey Transit Corporation, and all motorbus regular route service operated pursuant to P.L.1979, c.150 (C.27:25-1 et seq.) or operated pursuant to R.S.48:4-3. 
 
	e.	"Sheltered (extended) employment programs" means those programs established pursuant to regulations adopted pursuant to section 8 of P.L.1955, c.64 (C.34:16-27). 
 
	f.	"Sheltered workshop" means a facility possessing a valid certificate to vend services to the division issued by the director thereof, in compliance with the rules and regulations governing vocational rehabilitation facilities.
 
	L.1987, c.455, s.2; amended 2017, c.131, s.144.

34:16-53   Transportation expense program.
 	3.	The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development is directed to establish and implement within 120 days of the effective date of this act a program to be administered by the division to defray the public transportation or paratransit expenses of citizens with disabilities enrolled in sheltered (extended) employment programs at sheltered workshops.  The program may provide for the defraying of these expenses by the purchase of bus cards or other appropriate methods as prescribed by the commissioner. 
 
	L.1987, c.455, s.3; amended 2017, c.131, s.145.

34:16-54.  Annual survey 
     The division shall annually conduct a survey to assess the transportation needs of these sheltered workshops. 

    L. 1987, c. 455, s. 4. 

34:16-55.  Rules, regulations 
     The Commissioner of Labor shall adopt rules and regulations pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L. 1968, c. 410 (C. 52:14B-1 et seq.) to effectuate the purposes of this act. 

    L. 1987, c. 455, s. 5. 

34:17-1.  Purposes
    Any seven or more persons, residents in this state, may associate themselves  into a society for the purpose of carrying on any lawful mechanical, mining,  manufacturing or trading business, or of trading and dealing in goods, wares  and merchandise or chattels, or of buying, selling, mortgaging, settling,  owning, leasing and improving real estate and erecting buildings thereon,  within this state, upon making and filing a certificate of association in  writing, in the manner hereinafter provided.

34:17-2.  Certificate of association;  contents
    The certificate of association shall set forth:

    a.  The name assumed to designate such society and to be used in its business and dealings, which name shall have the word  "co-operative"  as a distinguishing part thereof, but shall in no respect be similar to that of any other society organized under this chapter;

    b.  The place or places in this state where the business of the society is to be conducted;  and the location of its principal office;

    c.  The objects for which the society is formed;

     d.  The total amount of capital stock of the society, the number of shares into which the same is divided, the par value of each share, the manner in which the installments on the shares shall be paid, the number of shares subscribed, and the amount actually paid in cash on account of the same;

    e.  The terms of admission of members;

     f.  The mode of application of profits;  and

     g.  The mode of altering and amending the certificate of association and the  by-laws of the society.

34:17-3.  Certificate;  signing;  acknowledging;  recording and filing
    Such certificate shall be signed by the persons originally associating themselves together, shall be proved or acknowledged by at least seven of them before an officer qualified to take acknowledgments of deeds of real estate, and after being approved by the commissioner of labor, shall be recorded in the  office of the clerk of the county where the principal office or place of business of the society shall be located and a copy thereof shall be filed in the office of the commissioner of labor. Thereupon the persons so associating shall be deemed to be a body corporate with all the powers incident thereto.

34:17-4.  First meeting
    The first meeting of such society shall be called by a notice signed by a majority of the persons named in the certificate of association, designating the time, place and purpose of the meeting, and shall be personally served on all persons signing the certificate, or by advertisement in a newspaper published in the county where the society shall have been incorporated, if such  personal service cannot be made.

    At such meeting or at any adjourned meeting thereof, a majority of the persons so signing shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and may elect the directors and other officers as hereafter provided, and may adopt by-laws, rules and regulations for the government of the society.

34:17-5.  Board of directors;  officers and agents
    The business of every such society shall be managed and conducted by a board  of not less than five directors, who shall be members in the society, and shall  be annually elected at such time and place as shall be provided in the by-laws  thereof.  One of the directors shall be chosen president and one treasurer, and  such directors and officers shall hold their respective offices until their  successors are duly qualified.  The society shall also have a secretary and  such other officers, agents and factors as may be necessary to carry on its  business, and shall choose them in the manner prescribed in the by-laws  thereof.

34:17-6.  By-laws
    The by-laws of such society shall provide:

    a.  For an annual meeting of the members thereof and such other regular and  special meetings as may be deemed desirable, the number of members necessary to  constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and the right of voting  thereat;

    b.  For the election of directors and other officers, agents and factors, and their respective powers and duties;

    c.  For the limitation of the amount of such real and personal estate as the  purposes of the society shall require;

    d.  Whether the shares, or any number of them, shall be transferable, and if  it is determined that they shall be transferable, provision for their transfer  and registration, and the consent of the board of directors to the same, and if  it is determined that the shares shall not be transferable, provision for  paying to members the balance due to them on withdrawal, or of paying nominees  in cases hereinafter mentioned;

    e.  How members may withdraw from the society;

     f.  Whether and by what authority any part of the capital may be invested in  or on security of another society through which its products are disposed of or  its supplies secured;

    g.  Whether and to what extent credit in its business transactions may be given or taken;

    h.  In what sum and with what sureties the treasurer and other fiduciary officers and agents shall give bonds for the faithful performance of their respective duties;

    i.  For the audit of accounts;

     j.  For the distribution of the net profits;  and

     k.  For the custody, use and device of the seal, which shall bear the corporate name of the society.

34:17-7.  Name affixed on outside of place of business
    Every such society shall paint or affix, and shall keep painted or affixed,  its name on the outside of every office or place in which the business of the  association is carried on, in a conspicuous position in letters easily  legible.

34:17-8.  Registered office;  change
    Every such society shall have a registered office to which all communications and notices may be addressed.  Notices in writing of the location of such office, and of any change therein, shall be filed with the commissioner of labor, and in the office of the clerk of the county where the office of the society is located.

34:17-9.  Capital stock
    The capital stock of such society shall be divided into shares the par value  of which shall not be more than fifty dollars, and no share shall be issued for  less than its par value.  No certificate of shares shall be issued to any  member until his shares are fully paid up.

34:17-10.  Member entitled to one vote
    No member of such society shall be entitled to more than one vote upon any subject, which vote must be cast in person.  The board of directors may, unless  otherwise provided in the by-laws, fix and regulate the number of shares to be  held by any one member.

34:17-11.  Holding interest in other society
    Any society incorporated under this chapter may hold in its corporate name any amount of interest in any other society through which its products are disposed of or its supplies secured, but not in excess of one-third in value of  the paid-up capital of the society holding such interest.

34:17-12.  Annual report
    The board of directors of every society incorporated under this chapter shall annually make a statement in writing of the condition of such society, setting forth:

    a.  The amount of capital stock and the number and par value of shares issued;

    b.  The number of stockholders and the number of shares held by each; and

     c.  The amount and character of the property of the society and of its debts  and liabilities.

     Such statement shall be signed and sworn to by a majority of directors, including the treasurer, and filed in the office of the clerk of the county where the principal office of the society is located, and immediately thereafter a copy of such statement shall be forwarded to the commissioner of labor.  If the commissioner of labor shall have reason to doubt the correctness  of the statement, or upon the written request of five members of the society,  he shall cause an examination of the books and affairs of the society to be  made and shall render a correct statement to the members thereof.  Every member  or creditor thereof shall be entitled to receive from the secretary of the  society a copy of the annual statement, and every director or other officer  refusing to comply with the requirements of this section, or making and signing  a false annual statement of the condition of the society, shall forfeit for  each offense the sum of one hundred dollars, to be recovered in an action at  law in any court of competent jurisdiction in this state by any member or  creditor of the society who shall sue for the same.

34:17-13.  Inspection of books
    Any member or other person having an interest in the fund of any such society may inspect its books, at all reasonable hours, at its office.

34:17-14.  Distribution of profits;  sinking fund
    There shall be such distribution of the profits of such society among the workmen, purchasers and members as shall be prescribed in the certificate of association, at such times as therein prescribed, as often at least as once in twelve months, but no such distribution shall be made until a sum equal to five  per cent of the net profits shall have been appropriated for a contingent or  sinking fund and such appropriation shall continue to be made until there shall  be accumulated a sum equal to thirty per cent of the capital stock of such  society.

34:17-15.  Transfer of shares
    Any member of such society, by a writing under his hand, delivered at the office of the society, may nominate any person, being the husband, wife, father, mother, child, brother, sister, nephew or niece or other relative of such member, to whom his shares of the capital stock of the society shall be transferred at his decease, and from time to time may revoke or vary such nomination by a writing similarly delivered.

    The society shall keep a book, wherein the names of all persons so nominated, and the number of shares to be transferred shall be recorded, but in  lieu of making such transfer, the society may provide for the payment to all  such nominees of the full value of shares intended to be transferred.

    If by the by-laws of the society the shares are transferable, this section shall not be construed to forbid the transfer of such shares by sale or will or  otherwise, subject to the consent of the board of directors.

34:17-16.  Contribution by stockholder
    When the whole capital of such society has not been paid in, and its assets  are insufficient for the payment of its debts, liabilities and obligations,  each stockholder shall be bound to pay on each share held by him the sum  necessary to complete the amount of such share, as fixed in the certificate of  association, or such proportion as shall be required to satisfy such debts,  liabilities and obligations.

    No such contribution shall be required from any person after the expiration  of one year from the time he has ceased to be a member, or for any debt,  liability or obligation contracted after he has ceased to be a member of such  society.

34:17-17.  Reincorporation under chapter
    Any association incorporated under an act entitled  "An act to encourage the  organization and regulate co-operative associations of workmen," approved March twenty-second, one thousand eight hundred and eighty-one (L.1881, c. 139,  p. 163), may come under and be subject to the provisions and liabilities of  this chapter, in the same manner as if formed under the same, if such association makes and files the certificate required by section 34:17-2 of this  title.

34:17-18.  Dissolution
    Any society formed pursuant to this chapter may be dissolved in the manner provided by section 14:13-1 of the title Corporations, General.

34:18-1.  Fidelity deposits by employees as trust funds
    Any and all sums of money taken or received by any employer from any employee as deposit or security for the faithful performance by such employee of his duties shall be deemed to be trust funds held in trust by such employer for and on behalf of such employee, to be repaid upon the termination of employment or the balance thereof in accordance with the provisions of any contract of employment.  Such employer shall not be required to segregate such moneys nor deposit such moneys in separate accounts;  provided, however, that such employer shall at all times have available in cash, on deposit or in readily negotiable securities a sum not less than the aggregate amount of such trust funds.

     L.1939, c. 117, p. 424, s. 1.

34:18-2.  Failure to segregate security moneys;  bankruptcy; insolvency
    The failure of any employer to segregate such moneys or to deposit such moneys in separate accounts shall not be deemed or taken to constitute a discontinuance of such relationship of trust, and the inability to trace any such trust funds shall not be deemed or taken as a discontinuance of such relationship of trust.  Upon the bankruptcy or insolvency of any such employer who shall not have segregated such moneys or deposited such moneys in separate accounts, the first moneys realized from the assets of any such employer shall be taken and set aside in an amount equal to the sums of money taken or received by said employer as deposit or security aforesaid, and dealt with as if such moneys had been segregated by said employer or deposited in separate accounts and the trust aforesaid shall be impressed thereon.

     L.1939, c. 117, p. 425, s. 2.

34:18-3.  Failure to repay security moneys;  punishment
    Any employer who shall fail to pay back to an employee such deposit or security moneys or so much thereof as may be due upon the termination of employment, or in accordance with the provisions of the contract of employment shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year, or both.

     L.1939, c. 117, p. 425, s. 3.

34:18-4.  Contracts waiving statutory provisions void
    Any contract or agreement between any employer and employee whereby the provisions of section one (1) and two (2) hereof are waived or whereby said employee may agree that any or all sums of money paid by him to his employer as  deposit or security for the faithful performance of his duties shall not constitute a trust fund in accordance with the provisions of section one (1) and two (2) shall be void.

     L.1939, c. 117, p. 425, s. 4.

34:18-5.   "Employer"  defined
    The term employer shall include any individual, or members of firms or partnerships, and all officers of corporations having to do with the management  of such corporations or the financial affairs thereof.

     L.1939, c. 117, p. 426, s. 5.

34:19-1.   Short title 
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Conscientious Employee Protection Act." 

	L. 1986, c. 105, s. 1, eff. Sept. 5, 1986. 

34:19-2.   Definitions

	2.  As used in this act:

	a.  "Employer" means any individual, partnership, association, corporation or any person or group of persons acting directly or indirectly on behalf of or in the interest of an employer with the employer's consent and shall include all branches of State Government, or the several counties and municipalities thereof, or any other political subdivision of the State, or a school district, or any special district, or any authority, commission, or board or any other agency or instrumentality thereof.

	b.  "Employee" means any individual who performs services for and under the control and direction of an employer for wages or other remuneration.

	c.  "Public body" means:

	(1)  the United States Congress, and State legislature, or any popularly-elected local governmental body, or any member or employee thereof;

	(2)  any federal, State, or local judiciary, or any member or employee thereof, or any grand or petit jury;

	(3)  any federal, State, or local regulatory, administrative, or public agency or authority, or instrumentality thereof;

	(4)  any federal, State, or local law enforcement agency, prosecutorial office, or police or peace officer;

	(5)  any federal, State or local department of an executive branch of government; or

	(6)  any division, board, bureau, office, committee or commission of any of the public bodies described in the above paragraphs of this subsection.

	d.  "Supervisor" means any individual with an employer's organization who has the authority to direct and control the work performance of the affected employee, who has authority to take corrective action regarding the violation of the law, rule or regulation of which the employee complains, or who has been designated by the employer on the notice required under section 7 of this act.

	e.  "Retaliatory action" means the discharge, suspension or demotion of an employee, or other adverse employment action taken against an employee in the terms and conditions of employment.

	f.  "Improper quality of patient care" means, with respect to patient care, any practice, procedure, action or failure to act of an employer that is a health care provider which violates any law or any rule, regulation or declaratory ruling adopted pursuant to law, or any professional code of ethics.

	L.1986,c.105,s.2; amended 1997, c.98, s.1.

34:19-3    Retaliatory action prohibited.

	3.	An employer shall not take any retaliatory action against an employee because the employee does any of the following:

	a.	Discloses, or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public body an activity, policy or practice of the employer, or another employer, with whom there is a business relationship, that the employee reasonably believes:

	(1)	is in violation of a law, or a rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to law, including any violation involving deception of, or misrepresentation to, any shareholder, investor, client, patient, customer, employee, former employee, retiree or pensioner of the employer or any governmental entity, or, in the case of an employee who is a licensed or certified health care professional, reasonably believes constitutes improper quality of patient care; or

	(2)	is fraudulent or criminal, including any activity, policy or practice of deception or misrepresentation which the employee reasonably believes may defraud any shareholder, investor, client, patient, customer, employee, former employee, retiree or pensioner of the employer or any governmental entity;

	b.	Provides information to, or testifies before, any public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation of law, or a rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to law by the employer, or another employer, with whom there is a business relationship, including any violation involving deception of, or misrepresentation to, any shareholder, investor, client, patient, customer, employee, former employee, retiree or pensioner of the employer or any governmental entity, or, in the case of an employee who is a licensed or certified health care professional, provides information to, or testifies before, any public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into the quality of patient care; or

	c.	Objects to, or refuses to participate in any activity, policy or practice which the employee reasonably believes:

	(1)	is in violation of a law, or a rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to law, including any violation involving deception of, or misrepresentation to, any shareholder, investor, client, patient, customer, employee, former employee, retiree or pensioner of the employer or any governmental entity, or, if the employee is a licensed or certified health care professional, constitutes improper quality of patient care;

	(2)	is fraudulent or criminal, including any activity, policy or practice of deception or misrepresentation which the employee reasonably believes may defraud any shareholder, investor, client, patient, customer, employee, former employee, retiree or pensioner of the employer or any governmental entity; or

	(3)	is incompatible with a clear mandate of public policy concerning the public health, safety or welfare or protection of the environment.

	L.1986,c.105,s.3; amended 1989, c.220; 1997, c.98, s.2; 2005, c.329, s.1.

34:19-4.   Written notice required 
    The protection against retaliatory action provided by this act pertaining to disclosure to a public body shall not apply to an employee who makes a disclosure to a public body unless the employee has brought the activity, policy or practice in violation of a law, or a rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to law to the attention of a supervisor of the employee by written notice and has afforded the employer a reasonable opportunity to correct the activity, policy or practice.  Disclosure shall not be required where the employee is reasonably certain that the activity, policy or practice is known to one or more supervisors of the employer or where the employee reasonably fears physical harm as a result of the disclosure provided, however, that the situation is emergency in nature. 

   L. 1986, c. 105, s. 4, eff. Sept. 5, 1986. 

34:19-5    Civil action, jury trial; remedies.

	5.	Upon a violation of any of the provisions of this act, an aggrieved employee or former employee may, within one year, institute a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction.  Upon the application of any party, a jury trial shall be directed to try the validity of any claim under this act specified in the suit.  All remedies available in common law tort actions shall be available to prevailing plaintiffs. These remedies are in addition to any legal or equitable relief provided by this act or any other statute.  The court shall also order, where appropriate and to the fullest extent possible:

	a.	An injunction to restrain any violation of this act which is continuing at the time that the court issues its order;

	b.	The reinstatement of the employee to the same position held before the retaliatory action, or to an equivalent position;

	c.	The reinstatement of full fringe benefits and seniority rights;

	d.	The compensation for all lost wages, benefits and other remuneration; and

	e.	The payment by the employer of reasonable costs, and attorney's fees.

	In addition, the court or jury may order: the assessment of a civil fine of not more than $10,000 for the first violation of the act and not more than $20,000 for each subsequent violation, which shall be paid to the State Treasurer for deposit in the General Fund; punitive damages; or both a civil fine and punitive damages.  In determining the amount of punitive damages, the court or jury shall consider not only the amount of compensatory damages awarded to the employee, but also the amount of all damages caused to shareholders, investors, clients, patients, customers, employees, former employees, retirees or pensioners of the employer, or to the public or any governmental entity, by the activities, policies or practices of the employer which the employee disclosed, threatened to disclose, provided testimony regarding, objected to, or refused to participate in.

	L.1986,c.105,s.5; amended 1990, c.12, s.4; 2005, c.329, s.2.

34:19-6.   Fees, costs to employer 
    A court, upon notice of motion in accordance with the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey, may also order that reasonable attorneys' fees and court costs be awarded to an employer if the court determines that an action brought by an employee under this act was without basis in law or in fact.  However, an employee shall not be assessed attorneys' fees under this section if, after exercising reasonable and diligent efforts after filing a suit, the employee files a voluntary dismissal concerning the employer, within a reasonable time after determining that the employer would not be found to be liable for damages. 

   L. 1986, c. 105, s. 6, eff. Sept. 5, 1986. 

34:19-7    Posting of notices.

	7.	An employer shall conspicuously display, and annually distribute to all employees, written or electronic notices of its employees' protections, obligations, rights and procedures under this act, and use other appropriate means to keep its employees so informed.  Each notice posted or distributed pursuant to this section shall be in English, Spanish and at the employer's discretion, any other language spoken by the majority of the employer's employees.  The notice shall include the name of the person or persons the employer has designated to receive written notifications pursuant to section 4 of this act.  The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development shall make available to employers a text of a notice fulfilling the requirements of this section and provide copies of the notice suitable for display and distribution to any employers who request the copies, charging them as much as is needed to pay the costs of the department. The commissioner shall also provide notices printed in a language other than English and Spanish, at the request of the employer.

	The requirement that an employer annually distribute to all employees written notices of the protections, obligations, rights and procedures provided to the employees by the provisions of P.L.1986, c.105 (C.34:19-1 et seq.) shall not apply to any employer who has less than 10 employees.

	L.1986,c.105,s.7; amended 2004, c.148.

34:19-8.   Other rights, remedies unaffected 
    Nothing in this act shall be deemed to diminish the rights, privileges, or remedies of any employee under any other federal or State law or regulation or under any collective bargaining agreement or employment contract; except that the institution of an action in accordance with this act shall be deemed a waiver of the rights and remedies available under any other contract, collective bargaining agreement, State law, rule or regulation or under the common law. 

    L. 1986, c. 105, s. 8, eff. Sept. 5, 1986. 

34:19-9  Definitions relative to employer communications on religious, political matters to employees.
	1.	For the purposes of P.L.2006, c.53 (C.34:19-9 et seq.):
 
	"Employer" means a person engaged in business who has employees, including the State and any political subdivision or other instrumentality of the State.
 
	"Employee" means any person engaged in service to an employer for wages, salary, or other compensation.
 
	"Political matters" means matters which relate to an electioneering communication as defined in section 3 of P.L.1973, c.83 (C.19:44A-3) and the employee’s decision to join or support any political party or political, civic, community, fraternal, or labor organization or association. 
 
	L.2006, c.53, s.1; amended 2025, c.138, s.2.

34:19-9.1  Findings, declarations.
	1.	The Legislature finds and declares that freedom of speech is a foundational ideal that is core to this nation's identity.  While an employer is free to exercise a right to speech, the law needs to ensure current protections of the right of the workforce to perform the duties of their jobs instead of listening to an employer's speech on political matters.  
 
L.2025, c.138, s.1.

34:19-10  Required participation by employee in meetings, communications prohibited; exception.
	2. a. No employer or employer's agent, representative, or designee may, except as provided in subsection b. of this section or section 3 of P.L.2006, c.53 (C.34:19-11), require its employees to attend an employer-sponsored meeting or participate in any communications with the employer or its agents or representatives, the purpose of which is to communicate the employer's opinion about religious or political matters.
 
	b.	Nothing in P.L.2006, c.53 (C.34:19-9 et seq.):
 
	(1) prohibits an employer from permitting its employees to voluntarily attend employer-sponsored meetings or providing other communications to the employees, if the employer notifies the employees that they may refuse to attend the meetings or accept the communications without penalty;
 
	(2) prohibits communications of information that the employer is required by law to communicate;
 
	(3) limits the rights of an employer or its agent, representative, or designee from communicating to its employees any information that is necessary for the employees to perform their required job duties, including by requiring employees to attend a meeting or participate in communications;
 
	(4) prohibits an employer or its agent or representative, or designee from requiring its employees to attend any training to reduce or prevent unlawful workplace harassment or discrimination;
 
	(5) prohibits an institution of higher education, or any agent, representative, or designee of the institution, from conducting mandatory meetings or participating in any communications with its employees concerning any coursework, symposia, research, publication, or an academic program at the institution;
 
	(6) prohibits, where lawful, a candidate, candidate committee, joint candidates committee, political committee, continuing political committee, independent expenditure committee, political party committee or legislative leadership committee, lobbyist as defined in section 3 of P.L.1971, c.183 (C.52:13C-20), or a not-for-profit organization that is exempt from taxation under section 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), 501(c)(5), or 501(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3) to 501(c)(6)), from requiring its staff or employees to attend an employer-sponsored meeting or participate in any communication with the employer or the employer's agent, representative, or designee for the purpose of communicating electioneering matters;
 
	(7) prohibits the State and any political subdivision or other instrumentality of the State from requiring their employees to attend an employer-sponsored meeting or participate in any communication with the employer or the employer's agent, representative, or designee for the purpose of communicating the employer's proposals to change legislation, proposals to change regulations, or proposals to change public policy; or
 
	(8) prohibits a religious organization from requiring its employees to attend an employer-sponsored meeting or participate in any communication with the employer or the employer's agent, representative, or designee for the purpose of communicating the employer's religious beliefs, practices, or tenets.
 
	L.2006, c.53, s.2; amended 2025, c.138, s.3.

34:19-11  Permitted communication about religious, political matters.
  
	3. a. An employer or its agent, representative or designee may communicate to employees information about religious or political matters that the employer is required by law to communicate, but only to the extent required by law.
 
	b.	Nothing in this act shall prohibit:
 
	(1)	A religious organization from requiring its employees to attend an employer-sponsored meeting or to participate in any communications with the employer or its agents or representatives, the purpose of which is to communicate the employer's religious beliefs, practices or tenets;
 
	(2)	A political organization or party from requiring its employees to attend an employer-sponsored meeting or to participate in any communications with the employer or its agents or representatives, the purpose of which is to communicate the employer's political tenets or purposes; or
 
	(3)	An educational institution from requiring a student or instructor to attend lectures on political or religious matters that are part of the regular course work at the institution.
 
	L.2006, c.53, s.3.

34:19-12  Retaliation against complaining employee prohibited.
	4.	No employer or employer's agent, representative, or designee shall discharge, discipline or otherwise penalize or threaten to discharge, discipline, or otherwise penalize any employee because:
 
	a.	the employee, or a person acting on behalf of the employee, makes a good faith report, verbally or in writing, of a violation or suspected violation of P.L.2006, c.53 (C.34:19-9 et seq.); or
 
	b.	the employee, pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection a. of section 2 of P.L.2006, c.53 (C.34:19-10), refused to participate in a meeting or accept a communication.
 
	L.2006, c.53, s.4; amended 2025, c.138, s.4.

34:19-13  Civil action by aggrieved employee.
	5.	Any aggrieved employee may enforce the provisions of P.L.2006, c.53 (C.34:19-9 et seq.) by means of a civil action brought no later than ninety days after the date of the alleged violation in Superior Court.  The court shall award a prevailing employee all appropriate relief, including any of the following which are applicable to the violation:
 
	a.	Injunctive relief, including, but not limited to, a restraining order against any continuing violation;
 
	b.	The reinstatement of the employee to the employee's former position or an equivalent position and the reestablishment of any employee benefits and seniority rights;
 
	c.	The payment of any lost wages, benefits, or other remuneration; 
 
	d.	The payment of reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of the action; and
 
	e.	Other appropriate relief as considered necessary by the court.
 
	In addition, the court may award the prevailing employee punitive damages not greater than treble damages or an assessment of a civil fine of not more than $1,000 for a first violation of P.L.2006, c.53 (C.34:19-9 et seq.) and not more than $5,000 for each subsequent violation, which shall be paid to the State Treasurer for deposit in the General Fund.
 
	L.2006, c.53, s.5; amended 2025, c.138, s.5.

34:19-14  Construction of act.
 
 	6.	Nothing in this act shall be construed to limit an employee's right to bring a common law cause of action against an employer for wrongful termination or to diminish or impair the rights of a person under any collective bargaining agreement.
 
	L.2006, c.53, s.6.

34:19-15  Notice of employee rights.
	6.	An employer subject to P.L.2006, c.53 (C.34:19-9 et seq.) shall post a notice of employee rights under P.L.2006, c.53 (C.34:19-9 et seq.) in a conspicuous place reserved for employment-related notices and in a place commonly frequented by employees. 
 
L.2025, c.138, s.6.

34:19-16  Severability.
	7.	The provisions of P.L.2006, c.53 (C.34:19-9 et seq.) are severable.  If any provision of P.L.2006, c.53 (C.34:19-9 et seq.) or its application is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.
 
L.2025, c.138, s.7.

34:20-1  Short title.
  
	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Construction Industry Independent Contractor Act."
 
	L.2007, c.114, s.1.

34:20-2  Findings, declarations relative to classification of construction employees.
 
 	2.	The Legislature finds that employers in the construction industry who improperly classify employees as independent contractors deprive these workers of proper Social Security benefits and other benefits, while reducing the employers' State and federal tax withholdings and related obligations.  Moreover, this practice puts businesses that bear higher costs for complying with the law at a competitive disadvantage.
 
	L.2007, c.114, s.2.

34:20-3  Definitions relative to classification of construction employees.
 
 	3.	For purposes of this act:

	"Employer" means a partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or other legal business entity or successor thereof who is primarily engaged in the business of, or enters into a contract for, making improvements to real property and includes any subcontractor or lower tier contractor.
 
	"Public body" means the State of New Jersey, any of its political subdivisions, any authority created by the Legislature of the State of New Jersey and any instrumentality or agency of the State of New Jersey or of any of its political subdivisions.
 
	"Public work" means construction, reconstruction, demolition, alteration, custom fabrication, or repair work, or maintenance work, including painting and decorating, done under contract and paid for in whole or in part out of the funds of a public body, except work performed under a rehabilitation program.  "Public work" shall also mean construction, reconstruction, demolition, alteration, custom fabrication, or repair work, done on any property or premises, whether or not the work is paid for from public funds, if, at the time of the entering into of the contract:
 
	(a)	Not less than 55% of the property or premises is leased by a public body, or is subject to an agreement to be subsequently leased by the public body; and
 
	(b)	The portion of the property or premises that is leased or subject to an agreement to be subsequently leased by the public body measures more than 20,000 square feet.
 
	L.2007, c.114, s.3.

34:20-4  Certain services deemed employment; exceptions.
 
 	4.	For purposes of the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.), the "unemployment compensation law," R.S.43:21-1 et seq., the "Temporary Disability Benefits Law," P.L.1948, c.110 (C.43:21-25 et seq.), the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq., or other applicable State tax laws, P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.1 et seq.) and the "New Jersey State Wage and Hour Law," P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a et seq.), services performed in the making of improvements to real property by an individual for remuneration paid by an employer shall be deemed to be employment unless and until it is shown to the satisfaction of the Department of Labor and Workforce Development that:
 
	a.	the individual has been and will continue to be free from control or direction over the performance of that service, both under his contract of service and in fact; and
 
	b.	the service is either outside the usual course of the business for which the service is performed, or the service is performed outside of all the places of business of the employer for which the service is performed; and
 
	c.	the individual is customarily engaged in an independently established trade, occupation, profession or business.
 
	The failure to withhold federal or State income taxes or to pay unemployment compensation contributions or workers' compensation premiums with respect to an individual's wages shall not be considered in making a determination under this section.
 
	L.2007, c.114, s.4.

34:20-5  Improper classification of construction employees, degree of offense, crime; penalties.
 
 	5. a. An employer, or any officer, agent, superintendent, foreman, or employee of the employer who fails to properly classify an individual as an employee in accordance with section 4 of this act, for purposes of the "New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act," P.L.1963, c.150 (C.34:11-56.25 et seq.), the "unemployment compensation law," R.S.43:21-1 et seq., the "Temporary Disability Benefits Law," P.L.1948, c.110 (C.43:21-25 et seq.), the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq., P.L.1965, c.173 (C.34:11-4.1 et seq.) or other applicable State tax laws, and the "New Jersey State Wage and Hour Law," P.L.1966, c.113 (C.34:11-56a et seq.), and fails to pay wages, benefits, taxes or other contributions required by any of those acts, shall be:
 
	(1)	Guilty of a disorderly persons offense and shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 or be imprisoned for not less than 10 nor more than 90 days, or both.  Each week, in any day of which an employee is misclassified and each employee so misclassified, shall constitute a separate offense.
 
	(2)	If the failure is done knowingly, guilty of a crime of the second degree if the contract amount is for $75,000 or above; guilty of a crime of the third degree if the contract amount exceeds $2,500, but is less than $75,000; and guilty of a crime of the fourth degree if the contract amount is for $2,500 or less.  In addition, the violator shall be deemed to have caused loss to the employees in any amount by which the employees were underpaid in connection with the misclassification and shall be subject to the provisions of N.J.S.2C:43-3 regarding fines and restitution to victims and be subject to other pertinent provisions of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes, including, but not limited to, N.J.S.2C:43-4, 2C:43-6 and 2C:44-1.
 
	b.	As an alternative to or in addition to any other sanctions provided by law for violations of any provision of this act, when the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development finds that an employer has violated this act, the commissioner is authorized to assess and collect administrative penalties, up to a maximum of $2,500 for a first violation and up to a maximum of $5,000 for each subsequent violation, specified in a schedule of penalties to be promulgated by regulation by the commissioner in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.). When determining the amount of the penalty imposed because of a violation, the commissioner shall consider factors which include the history of previous violations by the employer, the seriousness of the violation, the good faith of the employer and the size of the employer's business.  No administrative penalty shall be levied pursuant to this section unless the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development provides the alleged violator with notification of the violation and of the amount of the penalty by certified mail and an opportunity to request a hearing before the commissioner or his designee within 15 days following the receipt of the notice.  If a hearing is requested, the commissioner shall issue a final order upon that hearing and a finding that a violation has occurred.  If no hearing is requested, the notice shall become a final order upon expiration of the 15-day period.  Payment of the penalty is due when a final order is issued or when the notice becomes a final order. Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be recovered with costs in a summary proceeding commenced by the commissioner pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.). 
 
	c.	Any sum collected as a penalty pursuant to this section shall be applied toward enforcement and administration costs of the Division of Workplace Standards in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	d.	When the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development finds that the employer has violated provisions of this act, the commissioner may refer the matter to the Attorney General or his designee for investigation and prosecution.  Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to limit the authority of the Attorney General to investigate and prosecute violations of the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice, nor to limit the commissioner's ability to refer any matter for criminal investigation or prosecution.
 
	e.	A complaint or indictment under the provisions of subsection a. or subsection d. of this section may be brought in Superior Court in accordance with the Rules of Court of the State of New Jersey.
 
	L.2007, c.114, s.5.

34:20-6  Penalty for knowingly improperly classifying construction employee; debarment.
 
 	6.	If the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development determines, after investigation, that an employer or any officer, agent, superintendent, foreman, or employee of the employer has knowingly failed to properly classify an individual as an employee in accordance with section 4 of this act and failed to pay required wages, benefits, taxes or other contributions, or if a final conviction and disposition of a violation of this act is made pursuant to section 5 of this act in which the violator is found to be guilty of a crime of the second, third or fourth degree, then the commissioner shall place the employer on a list of employers who are prohibited from contracting, directly or indirectly, with any public body for the construction of any public building or other public work projects, or from performing any work on the same, for a period of three years.  The commissioner shall give notice by mail of that list to any public body who shall request the commissioner so to do.
 
	In the case of a determination by the commissioner, if the person responsible denies that a failure to properly classify an employee has occurred, he shall have the right to apply to the commissioner for a hearing in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), which shall be afforded and a decision shall be rendered within 48 hours of the request for a hearing.  The commissioner may bring an action in Superior Court to enjoin or invalidate any contract award made in violation of this section.  
 
	L.2007, c.114, s.6.

34:20-7  Suspension of contractor's registration; notification, hearing, appeal; stop-work order, civil penalty for continued violation.
 
 	7. a. If the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development determines, after investigation, that an employer failed to properly classify an individual as an employee in accordance with section 4 of this act, the commissioner may order the immediate suspension of a contractor's registration issued pursuant to section 7 of P.L.1999, c.238 (C.34:11-56.54), if the commissioner also determines that ordering an immediate suspension is in the public interest, and provided that the contractor is afforded an opportunity to contest the immediate suspension in the following manner:
 
	(1)	The commissioner shall notify the contractor in writing of the immediate revocation and the contractor's rights under this subsection.
 
	(2)	The contractor may notify the commissioner of its request for an opportunity to be heard and contest the immediate suspension in writing within 72 hours of its receipt of immediate suspension notification.
 
	(3)	Within seven business days of receipt of the notification from the contractor pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection, the commissioner shall grant the contractor a hearing to contest the immediate suspension.  The commissioner shall permit the contractor to present evidence at the hearing.
 
	(4)	The commissioner shall issue a written decision within five business days of the hearing either upholding or reversing the contractor's immediate suspension.  The decision shall include the grounds for upholding or reversing the contractor's immediate suspension.
 
	(5)	If the contractor disagrees with the written decision, the contractor may appeal the decision to the commissioner, in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	b.	If the commissioner orders the immediate suspension of a contractor's registration pursuant to subsection a. of this section, the violation shall have no effect on the registration of any contractor or subcontractor, regardless of tier, in the contractual chain with the suspended contractor.
 
	c.	For a second violation of the provisions of this act, the commissioner shall issue a stop-work order requiring the cessation of all business operations at every site at which the violation occurred within 72 hours of that determination.  The order shall take effect when served upon the employer, or, for a particular employer worksite, when served at that worksite.  The order shall remain in effect until the commissioner issues an order releasing the stop-work order upon finding that the employer has properly classified the individual as an employee and has paid any penalty assessed under this section.  As a condition of release from a stop-work order, the commissioner may require an employer who is found to have failed to properly classify an individual as an employee to file with the department periodic reports for a probationary period that shall not exceed two years that demonstrate the employer's continued compliance with this section.  The department shall promulgate rules and regulations to determine filing times and report requirements.
 
	d.	For a third or any subsequent violation of the provisions of this act, the commissioner shall issue a stop-work order requiring the cessation of all business operations of the violator within 72 hours of that determination.  The order shall take effect when served upon the employer.  The order shall remain in effect until the commissioner issues an order releasing the stop-work order upon finding that the employer has properly classified the individual as an employee and has paid any penalty assessed under this section.  As a condition of release from a stop-work order, the commissioner may require an employer who is found to have failed to properly classify an individual as an employee, to file with the department periodic reports for a probationary period that shall not exceed two years that demonstrate the employer's continued compliance with this section.  The department shall promulgate rules and regulations to determine filing times and report requirements.
 
	e.	Stop-work orders and penalty assessment orders issued pursuant to this section against an employer shall be in effect against any successor corporation or business entity that has one or more of the same principals or officers as the employer against whom the stop-work order was issued and which is engaged in the same or equivalent trade or activity.
 
	f.	The commissioner may assess a civil penalty of $5,000 per day against an employer for each day that it conducts business operations that are in violation of a stop-work order issued pursuant to this section.
 
	g.	In addition to any other penalties provided for in this section, the commissioner may assess against an employer a civil penalty of $5,000 for each individual who the employer failed to properly classify as an employee.
 
	h.	If the employer denies that a failure to properly classify an employee has occurred, the employer shall have the right to apply to the commissioner to request a hearing, which shall be afforded and a decision rendered within 48 hours of the request for the hearing.
 
	i.	The penalty shall be collected by the commissioner in a summary proceeding in accordance with the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.).
 
	L.2007, c.114, s.7.

34:20-7.1  Determination of compliance; subpoena; stop-work order.
	2. a. The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development and any agent of the commissioner, upon receipt of a complaint or through a routine investigation for a violation of any State wage, benefit and tax law, as defined in section 1 of P.L.2009, c.194 (C.34:1A-1.11), including but not limited to a violation of R.S.34:15-79, or a failure to meet obligations as provided in R.S.43:21-7 and R.S.43:21-14, or for a violation of any provision of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.) or P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-1 et al.), is authorized to enter, during usual business hours, the place of business or employment of any employer of the individual to determine compliance with the wage and hour laws, R.S.34:15-79, R.S.43:21-7, or R.S.43:21-14, and for that purpose may examine payroll and other records and interview employees, call hearings, administer oaths, take testimony under oath and take interrogatories and oral depositions.
 
	b.	The commissioner may issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and records.  Any entity that fails to furnish information required by the commissioner or agent of the commissioner upon request, or who refuses to admit the commissioner or agent to the place of employment of the employer, or who hinders or delays the commissioner or agent in the performance of duties in the enforcement of this section, may be fined not less than $1,000 and shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense.  Each day of the failure to furnish the time and wage records to the commissioner or agent shall constitute a separate offense, and each day of refusal to admit, of hindering, or of delaying the commissioner or agent shall constitute a separate offense.
 
	In addition to the foregoing fines, and in addition to or as an alternative to any criminal proceedings, if an entity fails to comply with any lawfully issued subpoena, or upon the refusal of any witness to testify to any matter regarding which the witness may be lawfully interrogated, the commissioner or the commissioner's designee may apply to the Superior Court to compel obedience by proceedings for contempt, in the same manner as in a failure to comply with the requirements of a subpoena issued from the court or a refusal to testify in the court.
 
	c. (1) If the commissioner determines, after either an initial determination as a result of an audit of a business or an investigation pursuant to subsection a. of this section, that an employer is in violation of any State wage, benefit and tax law, as defined in section 1 of P.L.2009, c.194 (C.34:1A-1.11), including but not limited to a violation of R.S.34:15-79, or has failed to meet obligations as provided in R.S.43:21-7 or R.S.43:21-14, or for a violation of any provision of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.) or P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-1 et al.), the commissioner may issue a stop-work order against the employer requiring cessation of all business operations of the employer at one or more worksites or across all of the employer's worksites and places of business.  The stop-work order may be issued only against the employer found to be in violation or non-compliance. If a stop-work order has been issued against a subcontractor pursuant to this subsection, the general contractor shall retain the right to terminate the subcontractor from the project. The order shall be effective when served upon the employer at the place of business or, for a particular employer worksite, when served at that worksite. The order shall remain in effect until the commissioner issues an order releasing the stop-work order upon finding that the employer has come into compliance and has paid any penalty deemed to be satisfactory to the commissioner, or after the commissioner determines, in a hearing held pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection, that the employer did not commit the act on which the order was based.  The stop-work order shall be effective against any successor entity engaged in the same or equivalent trade or activity that has one or more of the same principals or officers as the corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or sole proprietorship against which the stop-work order was issued. 
 
	(2)	An employer who is subject to a stop-work order shall have the right to appeal to the commissioner.  The contractor may notify the Director of the Division of Wage and Hour Compliance of its request for an opportunity to be heard and contest the stop-work order in writing within 72 hours of its receipt of the notification.  A request for hearing shall not automatically stay the effect of the order.
 
	Within seven business days of receipt of the notification from the contractor, the director shall hold a hearing to allow the contractor to contest the issuance of a stop-work order. The director shall permit the contractor to present evidence at the hearing.  If the director fails to hold a hearing within seven business days of receipt of the notification from the contractor, an administrative law judge shall have the authority to release the stop-work order.
 
	The director shall issue a written decision within five business days of the hearing either upholding or reversing the contractor's stop-work order.  The decision shall include the grounds for upholding or reversing the contractor's stop-work order.
 
	If the contractor disagrees with the written decision, the contractor may appeal the decision to the commissioner, in accordance with the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
 
	If the employer does not request an appeal to the commissioner in writing, the stop-work order shall become a final order after the expiration of the 72-hour period.  The authority to assess a civil penalty under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be in addition to any misclassification penalty assessed under this subsection and all other enforcement provisions or assessments issued for the employer's violation of any State wage, benefit and tax law, including but not limited to a violation of R.S.34:15-79, or a failure to meet obligations required by R.S.43:21-7 or R.S.43:21-14, or for a violation of any provision of P.L.1940, c.153 (C.34:2-21.1 et seq.) or P.L.1989, c.293 (C.34:15C-1 et al.).  The commission may compromise any civil penalty assessed under this section in an amount the commissioner determines to be appropriate.
 
	Once the stop-work order becomes final, any employee affected by a stop-work order issued pursuant to this section shall be entitled to pay from the employer for the first ten days of work lost because of the stop-work order.  Upon request of any employee not paid wages, the commissioner may take assignment of the claim and bring any legal action necessary to collect all that is due.
 
	(3)	As an alternative to issuing a stop-work order in accordance with paragraph (1) of this subsection, if the commissioner determines, after an investigation pursuant to subsection a. of this section, that an employer is in violation of R.S.34:15-79, the commissioner may provide and transfer all details and materials related to the investigation under this section to the Director of the Division of Workers' Compensation for any enforcement of penalties or stop-work orders the director determines are appropriate.
 
	L.2019, c.158, s.2; amended 2021, c.165, s.4.

34:20-8  Improper classification of construction worker, civil action by employee.
 
 	8. a. No employer shall require or request that any individual enter into an agreement or sign a document which results in the misclassification of the individual as an independent contractor or otherwise does not accurately reflect the employment relationship with the employer. 
 
	b.	An individual employed as a construction worker who has not been properly classified as an employee may bring a civil action for damages against the employer or any other employer who was in contract with the employee, for failing to properly classify the employee if the employer had knowledge of the misclassification.  An individual representative, including a labor organization, may bring the action on behalf of the individual or as a class action.  The court may award attorneys fees and other costs of the action in addition to damages to an individual or class of individuals who have not been properly classified as employees in accordance with section 4 of this act.
 
	L.2007, c.114, s.8.

34:20-9  Discrimination, retaliation prohibited.
 
	9.	It shall be unlawful for an employer or any other party to discriminate in any manner or take adverse action against any person in retaliation for exercising rights protected under this act.  Rights protected under this act include, but are not limited to: the right to file a complaint or inform any person about an employer's noncompliance with this act; the right to inform any person of his potential rights and to assist him in asserting those rights. Any person who in good faith alleges noncompliance with this act shall be afforded the rights provided by this act, notwithstanding his failure on the merits. Taking adverse action against a person within 90 days of the person's exercise of rights protected under this act shall raise a rebuttable presumption of having done so in retaliation for the exercise of those rights.
 
	L.2007, c.114, s.9.

34:20-10  Severability.
 
 	10.	The provisions of this act shall be deemed to be severable and if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or other part of this act is declared to be unconstitutional, or the applicability thereof to any person is held invalid, the remainder of this act shall not thereby be deemed to be unconstitutional or invalid.
 
	L.2007, c.114, s.10.

34:20-11  Rules, regulations.
	11.	The commissioner shall, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), make and promulgate rules and regulations necessary to implement the purposes of this act.
 
	L.2007, c.114, s.11.

34:21-1  Definitions relative to prenotification of certain plant closings, transfers and mass layoffs.
  	1.	As used in P.L.2007, c.212 (C.34:21-1 et seq.):

	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	"Department" means the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	"Employer" means an individual or private business entity which employs the workforce at an establishment.
 
	"Establishment" means a place of employment which has been operated by an employer for a period longer than three years, but shall not include a temporary construction site.  "Establishment" may be a single location or a group of locations, including any facilities located in this State.
 
	"Facility" means a building.
 
	"Mass layoff" means a reduction in force which is not the result of a transfer or termination of operations and which results in the termination of employment at an establishment during any 30-day period for 50 or more of the employees at or reporting to the establishment, except that "mass layoff" shall not include a mass layoff made necessary because of a fire, flood, natural disaster, national emergency, act of war, civil disorder or industrial sabotage, decertification from participation in the Medicare and Medicaid programs as provided under Titles XVIII and XIX of the federal "Social Security Act," Pub.L. 74-271 (42 U.S.C. s.1395 et seq.) or license revocation pursuant to P.L.1971, c.136 (C.26:2H-1 et al.).
 
	"Operating unit" means an organizationally distinct product, operation, or specific work function within or across facilities at a single establishment.
 
	"Response team" means the plant closing response team established pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2007, c.212 (C.34:21-5).
 
	"Termination of employment" means the layoff of an employee without a commitment to reinstate the employee to his previous employment within six months of the layoff, except that "termination of employment" shall not mean a voluntary departure or retirement or a discharge or suspension for misconduct of the employee connected with the employment or any layoff of a seasonal employee or refer to any situation in which an employer offers to an employee, at a location inside the State and not more than 50 miles from the previous place of employment, the same employment or a position with equivalent status, benefits, pay and other terms and conditions of employment, and, except that a layoff of more than six months which, at its outset, was announced to be a layoff of six months or less, shall not be treated as a termination of employment under P.L.2007, c.212 (C.34:21-1 et seq.) if the extension beyond six months is caused by business circumstances not reasonably foreseeable at the time of the initial layoff, and notice is given at the time it becomes reasonably foreseeable that the extension beyond six months will be required.
 
	"Termination of operations" means the permanent or temporary shutdown of a single establishment, or of one or more facilities or operating units within a single establishment, except that "termination of operations" shall not include a termination of operations made necessary because of a fire, flood, natural disaster, national emergency, act of war, civil disorder or industrial sabotage, decertification from participation in the Medicare and Medicaid programs as provided under Titles XVIII and XIX of the federal "Social Security Act," Pub.L. 74-271 (42 U.S.C. s.1395 et seq.) or license revocation pursuant to P.L.1971, c.136 (C.26:2H-1 et al.).
 
	"Transfer of operations" means the permanent or temporary transfer of a single establishment, or one or more facilities or operating units within a single establishment, to another location, inside or outside of this State.
 
	L.2007, c.212, s.1; amended 2019, c.423, s.1; 2020, c.22.

34:21-2  Requirements for establishments subject to transfer, termination of operations, mass layoffs.
	2.	If an establishment is subject to a transfer of operations or a termination of operations which results, during any continuous period of not more than 30 days, in the termination of employment of 50 or more employees, or if an employer conducts a mass layoff, the employer who operates the establishment or conducts the mass layoff shall:
 
	a.	Provide, in the case of an employer who employs 100 or more employees, not less than 90 days, or the period of time required pursuant to the federal "Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act," 29 U.S.C. s.2101 et seq., or any amendments thereto, whichever is longer, before the first termination of employment occurs in connection with the termination or transfer of operations, or mass layoff, notification of the termination or transfer of operations or mass layoff to the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development, the chief elected official of the municipality where the establishment is located, each employee whose employment is to be terminated and any collective bargaining units of employees at the establishment;
 
	b.	Provide to each employee whose employment is terminated severance pay equal to one week of pay for each full year of employment. If the employer provides any employee with less than the number of days of notification required pursuant to subsection a. of this section, the employer shall provide that employee with an additional four weeks of pay.  The rate of severance pay provided by the employer pursuant to this subsection b. shall be the average regular rate of compensation received during the employee's last three years of employment with the employer or the final regular rate of compensation paid to the employee, whichever rate is higher.  Severance under this subsection shall be regarded as compensation due to an employee for back pay and losses associated with the termination of the employment relationship, and earned in full upon the termination of the employment relationship, notwithstanding the calculation of the amount of the payment with reference to the employee's length of service. An employer shall provide an employee the severance pay required pursuant to this subsection b. or any severance pay provided by the employer pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement or for any other reason, whichever is greater.  Any back pay provided by the employer to the employee pursuant to section 5 of the "Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act," Pub.L.100-379 (29 U.S.C. s.2104), because of a violation of section 3 of that act (29 U.S.C. s. 2102) shall be credited toward meeting the severance pay requirements of this subsection b.; and
 
	c.	Provide the response team with the amount of on-site work-time access to the employees of the establishment that the response team determines is necessary for the response team to carry out its responsibilities pursuant to section 5 of P.L.2007, c.212 (C.34:21-5).
 
	In determining whether a termination or transfer of operations or a mass layoff is subject to the notification requirements of this section, any terminations of employment for two or more groups at a single establishment occurring within any 90-day period, when each group has less than the number of terminations which would trigger the notification requirements of this section but the aggregate for all of the groups exceeds that number, shall be regarded as subject to the notification requirements unless the employer demonstrates that the cause of the terminations for each group is separate and distinct from the causes of the terminations for the other group or groups.
 
	d.	For purposes of this section, "employer" includes any individual, partnership, association, corporation, or any person or group of persons acting directly or indirectly in the interest of an employer in relation to an employee, and includes any person who, directly or indirectly, owns and operates the nominal employer, or owns a corporate subsidiary that, directly or indirectly, owns and operates the nominal employer or makes the decision responsible for the employment action that gives rise to a mass layoff subject to notification.
 
	e.	No waiver of the right to severance provided pursuant to this section shall be effective without approval of the waiver by the commissioner or a court of competent jurisdiction.
 
	L.2007, s.212, s.2; amended 2019, c.423, s.2.

34:21-3  Contents of required notification.
 
 	3.	The notification provided pursuant to subsection a. of section 2 of this act shall include:
 
	a.	A statement of the number of employees whose employment will be terminated in connection with the mass layoff or transfer or termination of operations of the establishment, the date or dates on which the mass layoff or transfer or termination of operations and each termination of employment will occur;
 
	b.	A statement of the reasons for the mass layoff or transfer or termination of operations;
 
	c.	A statement of any employment available to employees at any other establishment operated by the employer, and information regarding the benefits, pay and other terms and conditions of that employment and the location of the other establishment;
 
	d.	A statement of any employee rights with respect to wages, severance pay, benefits, pension or other terms of employment as they relate to the termination, including, but not limited to, any rights based on a collective bargaining agreement or other existing employer policy;
 
	e.	A disclosure of the amount of the severance pay which is payable pursuant to the provisions of subsection b. of section 2 of this act; and
 
	f.	A statement of the employees' right to receive from the response team, pursuant to subsection c. of section 2 and subsection a. of section 5 of this act, information, referral and counseling regarding: public programs which may make it possible to delay or prevent the transfer or termination of operations or mass layoff; public programs and benefits to assist the employees; and employee rights based on law.
 
	The notification shall be in writing and, after the commissioner has made a form for the notification available to employers, provided on that form.  The commissioner shall make the form available to employers not more than 90 days following the effective date of this act.
 
	L.2007, c.212, s.3.

34:21-4  Construction of act relative to collective bargaining agreements.
  
	4.	This act shall not be construed as limiting or modifying any provision of a collective bargaining agreement which requires notification, severance payment or other benefits on terms which are more favorable to employees than those required by this act.
 
	L.2007, c.212, s.4.

34:21-5  Establishment of response team.
 
	5. a. There is established, in the Department of Labor and Workforce Development, a response team.  The purpose of the response team is to provide appropriate information, referral and counseling, as rapidly as possible, to workers who are, or may be, subject to plant closings or mass layoffs, and the management of establishments where those workers are or were employed.
 
	b.	In the case of each transfer or termination of the operations in an establishment which results in the termination of 50 or more employees, the response team shall:
 
	(1)	Offer to meet with the representatives of the management of the establishment to discuss available public programs which may make it possible to delay or prevent the transfer or termination of operations, including economic development incentive and workforce development programs, shared work unemployment compensation benefit programs, and coordinated utilization of any of those programs which are applicable;
 
	(2)	Meet on site with workers and provide information, referral and counseling regarding:
 
	(a)	Available public programs which may make it possible to delay or prevent the transfer or termination of operations, including economic development incentive and workforce development programs, shared work unemployment compensation benefit programs, and coordinated utilization of any of those programs which are applicable;
 
	(b)	Public programs or benefits which may be available to assist the employees, including, but not limited to, unemployment compensation benefits, job training or retraining programs, and job search assistance; and
 
	(c)	Employee rights based on this act or any other law which applies to the employees with respect to wages, severance pay, benefits, pensions or other terms of employment as they relate to the termination of employment; and
 
	(3)	Seek to facilitate cooperation between representatives of the management and employees at the establishment to most effectively utilize available public programs which may make it possible to delay or prevent the transfer or termination of operations or to assist employees if it is not possible to prevent the termination.
 
	L.2007, c.212, s.5; amended 2011, c.154, s.10.

34:21-6  Initiation of suit by aggrieved employee, former employee.
  
	6.	An aggrieved employee or former employee or his authorized representative may initiate suit in Superior Court under this act either individually or on behalf of employees or former employees affected by a violation of the provisions of this act.  If an action is undertaken on behalf of affected employees or former employees, the party initiating the action shall inform the department, which shall notify each affected employee or former employee.  If the court finds the employer has violated the provisions of this act, it shall award to the aggrieved present or former employees: costs of the action, including reasonable attorneys' fees; and compensatory damages, including lost wages, benefits and other remuneration. Any award of compensatory damages for lost wages shall be limited to the amount of severance pay required pursuant to subsection b. of section 2 of this act.
 
	L.2007, c.212, s.6.

34:21-7  Short title.
 
 	7.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Millville Dallas Airmotive Plant Job Loss Notification Act."
 
	L.2007, c.212, s.7.

34:21-8  Short title.
  	1.	This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New Jersey Call Center Jobs Act."
 
	L.2019, c.470, s.1.

34:21-9  Definitions relative to relocation of call centers.
  	2.	For the purposes of this act:

	"Call center" means a facility or other operation whereby workers receive telephone calls or emails or other electronic communication for the purpose of providing customer assistance or other service.
 
	"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	"Employer" means any business entity that employs 50 or more full-time workers or 50 or more workers that in the aggregate work at least 1,500 hours per week, excluding overtime hours, for the purpose of staffing a call center.
 
	L.2019, c.470, s.2.

34:21-10  Maintenance of staffing level of call center.
 	3. a. Any employer with a call center within the State of New Jersey shall maintain a staffing level capable of handling no less than  65 percent of customer volume of telephone calls, emails, or other electronic communications, when measured against the previous six-month average volume of those operations, originating in the State of New Jersey or an account with a service address within the State of New Jersey.  If the staffing level of a call center falls below the amount required pursuant to this subsection, the employer shall notify the commissioner immediately.
 
	b.	Any employer that relocates a call center, or transfers one or more facilities or operating units comprising at least 20 percent of a call center's total operating volume of telephone calls, emails, or other electronic communications when measured against the previous 12-month average volume of those operations, from the State of New Jersey to one or more foreign countries shall notify the commissioner at least 90 days prior to the relocation or transfer of operations.
 
	c.	Any employer that violates the notification requirement pursuant to this section shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $7,500 for each day the employer fails to provide the notification, collectible by the commissioner in a summary proceeding pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c.274 (C.2A:58-10 et seq.). The commissioner shall have the authority to waive this penalty.
 
	L.2019, c.470, s.3.

34:21-11  List of employers providing notification.
  	4.	The commissioner shall compile and maintain a list of all employers that provide notification pursuant to section 3 of this act.  The commissioner shall update the list on a monthly basis and an employer shall remain on the list for a period not to exceed 36 months after each instance of notification pursuant to section 3 of this act.  The commissioner shall make the list of employers available to the public and prominently display a link to the list on the Internet website of the Department of Labor and Workforce Development.
 
	L.2019, c.470, s.4.

34:21-12  Ineligibility for certain employers to receive certain financial benefits.
 	5.	 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule, or regulation to the contrary, an employer that is added to the list compiled and maintained by the commissioner pursuant to section 4 of this act shall be ineligible to receive any direct or indirect State grant, guaranteed loan, tax benefit, and any other financial support for the 36 months following the date upon which the employer is added to the list, except that the employer's inclusion on the list shall not prevent the employer from receiving any grant to provide training or other employment assistance to individuals who are members of specific groups selected as being in particular need of training or other employment assistance, including, but not limited to, employees of the employer whose employment is being affected due to the transfer or relocation of the employer's facility or operating unit, veterans, minority groups and women.
 
	As used in this section, "tax benefit" means a tax advantage awarded by a State governmental entity that has the effect of reducing a taxpayer's liability under the "New Jersey Gross Income Tax Act," N.J.S.54A:1-1 et seq., or section 5 of P.L.1945, c.162 (C.54:10A-5).
 
	L.2019, c.470, s.5.

34:21-13  Preference for making, awarding contract.
 	6.	Notwithstanding any provision of law, rule, or regulation to the contrary, a State department or agency, in making or awarding a contract for call center services, shall grant a preference for such contract to qualified businesses located in the State and employing residents of the State, up to the limits set forth under rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to section 8 of this act.
 
	L.2019, c.470, s.6.

34:21-14  Construction of act.
 	7.	Nothing in this act shall be construed to permit the withholding or denial of payments, compensation, or benefits under any State law, including unemployment benefits, disability benefits, or worker retraining or readjustment benefits to workers employed by employers that relocate a call center or transfer one or more facilities or operating units of a call center to a foreign country.
 
	L.2019, c.470, s.7.

34:21-15  Rules, regulations.
 	8.	The commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations, pursuant to the "Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.) to identify qualified businesses under section 6 of this act. The rules and regulations shall also set forth limits on the amount of preference that may be given to a qualified business located in the State employing residents of the State.
 
	L.2019, c.470, s.8.

34:21-16  Definitions.
	1.	As used in this act:
 
	"Awarding authority" means any person that awards or enters into a service contract or subcontract, except that the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey shall not be an awarding authority.
 
	"Contractor" means any person, including a subcontractor, who enters into a service contract or subcontract to be performed, provided the contractor employs more than four service employees anywhere in the United States.
 
	"Covered location" means one of the following locations, whether publicly or privately owned:
 
	(1) multi-family residential building with more than 50 units;
 
	(2) commercial center or complex or an office building or complex occupying more than 100,000 square feet;
 
	(3) primary and secondary school, or tertiary educational institution;
 
	(4) cultural center or complex, such as a museum, convention center, arena or performance hall;
 
	(5) industrial site or pharmaceutical lab;
 
	(6) airport and train station;
 
	(7) hospital, nursing care facility, senior care centers or other health care provider location, except that the provisions of P.L.2023, c.128 (C.34:21-16 et seq.) shall not apply to any change in control of a "health care entity," as defined in section 1 of P.L.2022, c.101 (C.34:11-4.15), which change in control falls within the scope of P.L.2022, c.101 (C.34:11-4.15 et seq.);
 
	(8) State courts; or
 
	(9) warehouse or distribution center or other facility whose primary purpose is the storage or distribution of general merchandise, refrigerated goods, or other products.
 
	"Employer" means any person who employs service employees at a covered location.
 
	"Person" means any individual, proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, trust, association, or other entity that may employ persons or enter into a service contract.
 
	"Service contract" means a contract between an awarding authority and a contractor to provide services performed by a service employee at a covered location.
 
	"Service employee" means an individual employed or assigned to a covered location on a full- or part-time basis for at least 60 days and who is not a managerial or professional employee or regularly scheduled to work less than 16 hours per week in:
 
	(1) connection with the care or maintenance of a building or property, and includes but is not limited to work performed by a security guard; a front desk worker; a janitor; a maintenance employee; building superintendent; grounds maintenance worker; a stationary fireman; elevator operator and starter; or window cleaner;
 
	(2) passenger-related security services, cargo-related and ramp services, in-terminal and passenger handling and cleaning services at an airport; or
 
	(3) food preparation services at a primary or secondary school, or a tertiary educational institution.
 
	"Service employee" does not include any individual who performs work on any building, structural, electric, HVAC, or plumbing project, if the work requires a permit to be issued by a municipal building or construction department.
 
	"Successor employer" means an employer that:
 
	(1) is awarded a service contract to provide, in whole or in part, services that are substantially similar to those provided at any time during the previous 90 days;
 
	(2) has purchased or acquired control of a property where service employees were employed at any time during the previous 90 days; or
 
	(3) terminates a service contract and hires service employees as its direct employees to perform services that are substantially similar within 90 days after a service contract is terminated or cancelled.
 
L.2023, c.128, s.1.

34:21-17  Actions required by awarding authority prior to terminating service contract, contracting out services previously performed by covered entity, selling, transferring property, timeline.
	2. a. Not less than 15 days before terminating any service contract or contracting out services previously performed by the covered entity, or selling or transferring any property where service employees are employed, an awarding authority shall:
 
	(1) request the terminated contractor to give the successor employer a list containing the name, date of hire, and job classification of each service employee working on the service contract and name and contact information of the employee's collective bargaining representative, if any;
 
	(2) give the successor employer a list containing the name, date of hire, job classification of each service employee currently performing the work to be performed pursuant to the service contract and name and contact information of the employee's collective bargaining representative, if any;
 
	(3) provide written notice to any collective bargaining representative of the affected service employees of the decision to terminate the service contract, enter into a new service contract, or sell or transfer the property;
 
	(4) ensure that a written notice to all affected service employees describing the pending termination of the service contract, entrance into a service contract, or sale or transfer of the property, including the name and address of the awardee, purchaser, or transferee, and the employees' rights provided by this section, are conspicuously posted at any affected work site; and
 
	(5) provide the affected service employees and their collective bargaining representative with the name and address of any successor employer or the purchaser or transferee of the property.
 
	b.	A successor employer shall take reasonable steps to ascertain the identity of the affected service employee.
 
	c.	Subject to subsection e. of this section, a successor employer shall retain an affected service employee at a covered location for 60 days or until its service contract is terminated, whichever is earlier.  No successor employer shall reduce any affected service employee's work hours in order to circumvent the protections provided by P.L.2023, c.128 (C.34:21-16 et seq.).  No successor employer shall be required to retain any employee based upon the provisions of P.L.2023, c.128 (C.34:21-16 et seq.) beyond 60 days.
 
	d.	A successor employer shall give an affected service employee a written offer of employment and send a copy to the employee's collective bargaining representative, if any.  The offer shall state the date by which the service employee is required to accept the offer, and the date shall be at least 10 days after the notice is delivered.  An offer shall state the name, address, and telephone number of the successor employer and the name of the individual who is authorized by the successor employer to make the employment offer.  The written offer required by this section shall be substantially in the form set forth in section 4 of P.L.2023, c.128 (C.34:21-19) in a language in which at least 10 percent of the employees are fluent.  The department shall provide translations in the five most common languages spoken in New Jersey apart from English.  A written offer may be sent via electronic mail.
 
	e.	A successor employer may retain less than all of the affected service employees during the 60-day transition period only if the successor employer:
 
	(1) finds that fewer service employees are required to perform the work than the predecessor employer had employed;
 
	(2) retains service employees by seniority within each job classification;
 
	(3) maintains a preferential hiring list of those employees not retained; and
 
	(4) hires any additional service employees from the list, in order of seniority, until all affected service employees have been offered employment.
 
	f.	Except as provided in subsection e. of this section, a successor employer shall not discharge a service employee retained pursuant to this section without just cause during the 60-daytransition period.
 
	g.	The provisions of this section shall not apply if any successor employer, on or before the termination of the service contract, agrees to assume, and to be bound by, the collective bargaining agreement of the awarding authority or contractor, provided that the collective bargaining agreement provides terms and conditions for the discharge or laying off of employees.
 
	h.	Any agreement that restricts or hinders the ability of a successor employer to fulfill its obligations pursuant to this section is hereby declared to be contrary to public policy and void.
 
L.2023, c.128, s.2.

34:21-18  Discharged service employee, bring action in court, successor employer, awarding authority, violations,
	3. a. A service employee who has been discharged or otherwise not retained in violation of P.L.2023, c.128 (C.34:21-16 et seq.) may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction against a successor employer for any violation of section 2 of P.L.2023, c.128 (C.34:21-17), and against an awarding authority for any violation of subsection a. of section 2 of P.L.2023, c.128 (C.34:21-17).
 
	b.	The court may impose, for a first violation of P.L.2023, c.128 (C.34:21-16 et seq.), a fine not exceeding $2,500, and, for a second and each subsequent violation, a fine not exceeding $5,000.  Each week, in any day of which a violation occurs, shall constitute a separate offense.
 
	(1) The court may award the employee reasonable attorney's fees and costs.
 
	(2) The court may require the violator to pay restitution to an employee deprived of wages or benefits due to the violation of P.L.2023, c.128 (C.34:21-16 et seq.).
 
	(3) The court may require the violator to pay consequential damages arising due to the violation of P.L.2023, c.128 (C.34:21-16 et seq.).
 
	(4) The court may issue injunctive relief requiring a successor employer to employ employees in compliance with P.L.2023, c.128 (C.34:21-16 et seq.) and for the provision of any information required pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2023, c.128 (C.34:21-17).
 
L.2023, c.128, s.3.

34:21-19  Offer of employment, form.
	4.	The offer of employment required to be provided to an incumbent worker by of section 2 of P.L.2023, c.128 (C.34:21-17) shall be substantially in the form below:
 
DATE:
 
TO: (name of employee)
 
IMPORTANT INFORMATION REGARDING YOUR EMPLOYMENT
 
We have received information that you are employed by (name of predecessor contractor or employer) and are currently performing work at (address of worksite).  (name of predecessor contractor) has lost its contract with the owners of (address of worksite) and will no longer be providing (type of service or employment) as of (last day of predecessor contract).
 

 
We are (name of successor contractor) and have been hired by the owners of (address of worksite) to provide the same (or janitorial, building maintenance) service.  We are offering you a job with us for a 60-day probationary period starting (first day of successor contract) to perform the same type of work that you have already been doing for (name of predecessor contractor) under the following terms:
 

 
Pay rate (per hour): $
 
Hours per shift:
 
Total Hours Per Week: __
 
Benefits:
 

 
You must respond to this offer within the next ten (10) days.  If you want to continue working at (address of worksite), you must let us know by (mm/dd/yyyy - no later than five days prior to the expiration of the predecessor contract or 10 days after the date of this letter if the predecessor contract has already expired).  If we do not receive your response by the end of business that day, we will not hire you and you will lose your job.  We can be reached at (successor contractor phone number).
 

 
The Service Worker Retention Law, of the Laws of New Jersey gives you the following rights: 
 
1.	You have the right, with certain exceptions, to be hired by our company for the first ninety days that we begin to provide services at (address of worksite).
 
2.	During this 60-day period, you cannot be fired without just cause.
 
3.	If you believe that you have been fired or laid off in violation of the Service Worker Retention Law, you have the right to institute legal action, and if successful may be awarded back pay, reinstatement, liquidated damages, attorney's fees and court costs.
 

 
FROM: (Name of successor contractor) (Name of authorized representative) (Address of successor contractor)
 
(Telephone # of successor contractor)

L.2023, c.128, s.4.

34:21-20  Supersede, preempt, rules, regulations, codes, ordinances, worker retention, service employees.
	5.	P.L.2023, c.128 (C.34:21-16 et seq.) shall supersede and preempt all rules, regulations, codes, or ordinances of any county or municipality with regard to worker retention for service employees, but shall not preempt any county or municipality from regulating worker retention for non-service employees.
 
L.2023, c.128, s.5.

